%%%INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|PEACEBUILDING|SUBSIDIARY BODIES|DOCUMENTATION|WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS|

United Nations Report of the Security Council 1 August 2008-31 July 2009 General Assembly Official Records Sixty-fourth Session Supplement No. 2 United Nations * New York, 2009 ISSN 0082-8238 Note Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements to the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given. The resolutions of the Security Council are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council. Contents Chapter Page Introduction Part I Activities relating to all questions considered by the Security Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security Resolutions adopted by the Security Council during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Statements made and/or issued by the President of the Security Council during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Official communiqués issued by the Security Council during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Meetings of the Security Council held during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Meetings of the Security Council and troop-contributing countries held during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Meetings of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council held during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Annual reports of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council Annual reports of committees Annual reports of working groups Reports of panels and monitoring mechanisms Reports of Security Council missions Peacekeeping operations established, functioning or terminated, 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Assistance missions and offices established, functioning or terminated, 1 August 2008 to Reports of the Secretary-General issued during the period from 1 August 2008 to Summary statements by the Secretary-General on matters of which the Security Council was seized during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Notes by the President of the Security Council issued during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Monthly assessments by former Presidents of the work of the Security Council for the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Part II Questions considered by the Security Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security Items relating to the situation in the Middle East The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question The situation in the Middle East United Nations Disengagement Observer Force United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and Security Council resolution Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) Security Council resolution 1595 (2005) The situation in Cyprus The situation concerning Western Sahara The situation in Timor-Leste United Nations peacekeeping operations The situation in Liberia The situation in Somalia Items relating to the situation in the former Yugoslavia The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999) International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994 International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 The situation in Georgia The question concerning Haiti The situation in Burundi The situation in Afghanistan The situation in Sierra Leone The situation in the Great Lakes region The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo The situation in the Central African Republic Children and armed conflict The situation in Guinea-Bissau Protection of civilians in armed conflict Women and peace and security Briefing by the President of the International Court of Justice Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Meeting of the Security Council with the troop-contributing countries pursuant to resolution 1353 (2001), annex II, sections A and B United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia/The situation in Georgia United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo United Nations Mission in Liberia United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti United Nations Mission in the Sudan United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council The situation in Côte d'Ivoire Security Council mission Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan Post-conflict peacebuilding The situation concerning Iraq Non-proliferation The situation in Chad and the Sudan Peace consolidation in West Africa The situation in Myanmar Non-proliferation/Democratic People's Republic of Korea Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council Maintenance of international peace and security Mediation and settlement of disputes Strengthening collective security through general regulation and reduction of armaments Respect for international humanitarian law The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion Peace and security in Africa General issues Djibouti and Eritrea Zimbabwe Mauritania Part III Other matters considered by the Security Council Items relating to Security Council documentation and working methods and procedure Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) General matters Annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly Election of five members of the International Court of Justice Part IV Military Staff Committee Work of the Military Staff Committee Part V Matters brought to the attention of the Security Council but not discussed at meetings of the Council during the period covered Communications concerning the India-Pakistan question Communications concerning the question of the Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa islands Communications concerning the situation between Iraq and Kuwait Communications concerning the situation relating to Nagorny Karabakh and relations between Armenia and Azerbaijan Communications concerning the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Communications concerning the situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia Communications concerning relations between Cameroon and Nigeria Communications concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction Request of Pakistan for the establishment of a commission of inquiry in connection with the assassination of the former Prime Minister, Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto Communications concerning the reform of the United Nations, including the Security Council Communication concerning the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa Communication concerning the Caribbean Community Communications concerning the Collective Security Treaty Organization Communications concerning the League of Arab States Communications concerning the Non-Aligned Movement Communications concerning the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Communication concerning Nelson Mandela International Day Communications from Kazakhstan Communications concerning relations between Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan Communications concerning relations between Cambodia and Thailand Communications concerning relations between Cuba and the United States of America Communication concerning relations between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United States of America Communications concerning relations between the Islamic Republic of Iran and Israel Communications concerning relations between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the United States of America Communications concerning relations between the Syrian Arab Republic and the United States of America Communications concerning Guinea Communications concerning Honduras Communication concerning Madagascar Part VI Work of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1636 (2005) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions Informal Working Group on International Tribunals Appendices Membership of the Security Council during the years 2008 and 2009 Representatives and deputy, alternate and acting representatives accredited to the Security Council Presidents of the Security Council Communications from the President of the Security Council or the Secretary-General during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 During the year of the reporting period, characterized by extensive work and an increase in the holding of open debates and open briefings, the Security Council discharged its responsibility for international peace and security. During the period under review, the Council addressed a wide range of regional, thematic and general issues. It held 228 formal meetings, of which 205 were public, in addition to 18 meetings with troop-contributing countries. The Council also held 141 consultations of the whole. During the reporting period, the Council adopted 53 resolutions and 43 presidential statements, and issued 35 press statements. The Council also undertook three missions to the field, to Afghanistan from 21 to 28 November 2008; to Haiti from 11 to 14 March 2009; and to Africa from 14 to 21 May 2009. The Council was regularly briefed and took appropriate actions on developments in conflict situations in Africa, including Chad, the Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, the Great Lakes region, Djibouti/Eritrea, Somalia and the Sudan. Peacebuilding efforts in Burundi, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone were reviewed on a regular basis. In March 2009, the Council also held a high-level debate on peace and security in Africa, during which it welcomed the efforts of the panel led by Romano Prodi in preparing a report containing recommendations on strengthening African Union-United Nations cooperation. In May 2009, the Council undertook a mission to Africa which included visits to Ethiopia and the African Union Commission in Addis Ababa, to Rwanda, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to Liberia. The Council also adjusted peacekeeping mandates and amended some sanctions regimes to make them more appropriate to the respective situations. The Council also adopted a resolution on fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia. It noted that piracy in Somalia was a symptom of the anarchy that had persisted in the country for more than 17 years, and stressed the need for a comprehensive approach in the fight against piracy. The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, received close attention by the Council. The Council remained engaged with the situation, holding urgent meetings, particularly with regard to the situation in Gaza in the latter part of 2008 and early 2009, debates and open debates. In May 2009, an open debate on the Middle East at the level of Ministers for Foreign Affairs was held, after which the Council, in a statement by its President, reiterated its call for a just, comprehensive and lasting solution, and expressed its support to the initiative of the Quartet and other stakeholders to convene a meeting of the parties in Moscow in the course of the year. The Council intensified its engagement on situations in the Asian region, including Iraq, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Myanmar and Timor-Leste. In November 2008, the members of the Council undertook a mission to Afghanistan to get a first-hand assessment of the situation in that country. During the visit, members had the opportunity to meet with the leaders and various actors in Afghanistan. In March 2009, the members of the Council undertook a mission to Haiti to assess the implementation of the Council's resolutions, particularly resolution 1840 (2008). Terrorism remained a top concern for the Council. The Council was quick to react to terrorist acts wherever they occurred, including Mumbai (India), Afghanistan, Lebanon and Pakistan. The work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) was considered extensively by the Council. The Council devoted significant time and close attention to the consideration of thematic, general and other issues, including peacekeeping, peacebuilding, mediation and settlement of conflicts, the protection of civilians in armed conflict, children and armed conflict, and women and peace and security. The issue of non-proliferation also received close attention by the Council, particularly in response to a series of actions by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea which were in violation of relevant Security Council resolutions. The work of the International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda was discussed by the Council on several occasions, particularly in relation to their completion strategies. Africa Burundi * Press releases are available from www.un.org, in English and French only. On 26 August 2008, the Council was briefed on the situation in Burundi by Ulla Ström, on behalf of the Chairperson of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and representative of Sweden. She informed the Council that the biannual review of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding held on 23 June had resulted in concrete recommendations concerning the implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement between the Government and Palipehutu-FNL, security, justice and the promotion of the rule of law, land reform, socio-economic recovery and the gender dimensions of peacebuilding. She stated that Burundi had established a permanent national independent electoral commission to prepare for the 2010 elections. The representative of Burundi informed the Council that much had been accomplished in terms of good governance. He stressed that Burundi still needed the support of the international community, especially in the strengthening of the capacities of the justice system, the creation of an independent human rights commission, and the launching of the truth and reconciliation commission. The Council meeting was followed by consultations of the whole. The members of the Council agreed on a statement to the press by the President (SC/9434).* On 11 December, the Council was briefed by the Facilitator of the Burundi peace process and Minister for Defence of South Africa, Charles Nqakula. He reported that significant progress had been made in resolving differences between the Government of Burundi and Palipehutu-FNL with respect to the implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement. The Chairman of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and representative of Sweden, Anders Lidén, also briefed the Council. He emphasized that the sustained support of the international community and its involvement, in particular through the African Union and the Regional Initiative, as well as the close collaboration between the Council and the Commission, were essential in support of the consolidation of peace in Burundi. In the consultations of the whole that followed, Council members exchanged views on the situation in Burundi, as well as on the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) (S/2008/745). On 22 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1858 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of BINUB until 31 December 2009. On 9 June 2009, the Council heard briefings on the situation in Burundi by the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of BINUB, Yousef Mahmoud; Ambassador Per Örnéus of Sweden on behalf of the Chairperson of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission; and the Director-General at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Burundi, Adolphe Nahayo. The briefings were followed by closed consultations among the members of the Council, at the end of which the President read a statement to the press (SC/9676). The Council commended the progress in the Burundi peace process, and urged all the Burundian parties, with the support of regional and international partners, to pursue their efforts to address the remaining challenges, in particular the completion of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. It also encouraged all stakeholders to prepare for peaceful, free and fair elections in 2010. Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion On 19 September 2008, the Council held a private meeting with the countries contributing troops to the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT). The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MINURCAT, Victor Da Silva Angelo, updated the Council on the situation in the two countries, in particular on the activities of MINURCAT, the deployment of the Détachement intégré de sécurité and cooperation with the European Union Force (EUFOR). On 24 September, the Council adopted resolution 1834 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of MINURCAT for six months. The Council was also briefed by the High Representative of the European Union, Javier Solana, on the activities of EUFOR in Chad and the Central African Republic and on its mandate, which was due to end on 15 March 2009. On 3 December, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes, on the humanitarian situation in Chad and the Sudan. Council members stressed the need for a negotiated settlement to the conflict and deplored the threat posed to humanitarian workers by criminal activities. On 12 December, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MINURCAT, who reported on the progress regarding preparations for the transfer of authority from EUFOR to MINURCAT. The meeting was followed by consultations of the whole. Council members commended the cooperation between EUFOR, the United Nations country team and the humanitarian community in preparation for the 15 March 2009 deadline for transfer of authority. On 14 January 2009, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1861 (2009), by which it authorized the deployment of a military component of MINURCAT to follow up the European Union operation in those countries at the end of its mandate on 15 March 2009. The Council also extended the multidimensional presence in eastern Chad and the military presence in the north-eastern Central African Republic for 12 months, until 15 March 2010. The Council called for an expeditious completion of the selection, deployment and training of the Chadian police and gendarmerie officers of the Détachement intégré de sécurité, set out benchmarks for the exit strategy of MINURCAT, and requested the Secretary-General to develop indicative timelines with a view to meeting them by 15 March 2011. The Council also encouraged the authorities and political stakeholders in Chad and the Central African Republic to pursue their efforts of national dialogue. On 13 February, in consultations of the whole, the Council received a briefing from the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, on the status of preparations for the takeover by a military component of MINURCAT from EUFOR. The members of the Council welcomed the memorandum of understanding signed by MINURCAT and the Government of Chad on arrangements for the transfer to MINURCAT of infrastructures currently used by EUFOR. On 10 March, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA), François Lonseny Fall; the Chairperson of the Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and representative of Belgium, Jan Grauls; and the representative of the Central African Republic, who emphasized the urgent need for an integrated United Nations office in his country. On 17 March, the Council held consultations of the whole to consider the situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion. The Council heard a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, who updated the Council on the implementation of resolution 1861 (2009), and the transfer of authority, on 15 March, from EUFOR to MINURCAT. The Council President delivered a statement to the press (SC/9614) welcoming the transfer of authority, taking note of the completion of the deployment of the Détachement intégré de sécurité and encouraging national dialogue in the framework of the N'Djamena agreement of 2007 and of the conclusions of the inclusive political dialogue held in Bangui in 2008. On 7 April, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/5) welcoming the recommendation of the Secretary-General, in his letter dated 3 March 2009 (S/2009/128), to establish a United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) to succeed the current peacebuilding support office (BONUCA). In the statement, the Council outlined the mandate for the new Office and also encouraged it to closely coordinate with and support the work of the Peacebuilding Commission. On 24 April, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, who presented the Secretary-General's report on MINURCAT (S/2009/199). The Assistant Secretary-General highlighted the lack of progress in procuring the required equipment for MINURCAT, the political developments in Chad and the status of relations between Chad and the Sudan. The Council exchanged views on the situation in informal consultations, and welcomed the transfer of authority from EUFOR to MINURCAT. It stressed the need for improved relations between Chad and the Sudan as crucial for the stabilization of the region and the full deployment of MINURCAT. On 8 May, the Council held a meeting at the request of the Permanent Mission of Chad to the United Nations (S/2009/232) to discuss the situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion. The Officer-in-Charge of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Dmitry Titov, briefed the Council on the deteriorating security situation in eastern Chad that had prompted the United Nations to suspend all its activities in the Salamat and Guéra regions. In the consultations that followed, Council members agreed on a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/13) condemning the military incursions in eastern Chad by Chadian armed groups and calling on the Sudan and Chad to respect and fully implement their mutual commitments and normalize their relations. On 22 June, the Council heard briefings on the situation in the Central African Republic by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe; the Chairperson of the Central African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission; and the representative of the Central African Republic. The Under-Secretary-General stated that the best way to address the multifaceted problems besetting the Central African Republic was through the implementation of the recently adopted Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding. He further stressed that, while there were important efforts to implement recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue of 2008, activities of violent rebels were undermining the peacebuilding framework and bringing about increased insecurity. He introduced the newly appointed Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of BONUCA, Sahle-Work Zewde, to the Council. During the closed consultations that followed, the Council members spoke in support of the transformation of BONUCA into an integrated peacebuilding office. On 28 July, the Council held an open meeting to consider the Secretary-General's report on MINURCAT (S/2009/359). The Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MINURCAT on the current developments in the two countries, MINURCAT operations and the deployment of the Mission. In the discussions that followed, Council members commended MINURCAT for the contribution it is making in the affected areas of Chad and the Central African Republic and called for accelerated deployment of the Mission to enable it to better fulfil its mandate, which includes protecting civilians and humanitarian personnel. In view of the interrelatedness of the conflicts in Chad, the Central African Republic and the Sudan, members of the Council reiterated the need for normalization of relations between the Sudan and Chad for a comprehensive and lasting peace in the two countries and the whole region. Council members called upon the two countries to use the existing bilateral arrangements agreed upon in the past, including the Dakar Contact Group, to normalize their bilateral relations. Members of the Council welcomed progress achieved in the implementation of the agreement of 13 August 2007 and preparations for the upcoming elections. Council members also welcomed the recent agreement between the Government of Chad and several rebel groups and encouraged the Government to continue efforts to promote a comprehensive and inclusive political process. Following the interventions of Council members, the representatives of Chad and the Central African Republic made statements. On 27 October 2008, at an open meeting, the Council heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Côte d'Ivoire and Head of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI), Choi Young-Jin, on the latest developments in the peace process in Côte d'Ivoire. During the consultations of the whole that followed, members were briefed by Ambassador Olivier Belle of Belgium on behalf of the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004), on the work of the Committee. The Council members called on all parties concerned to fully implement the Ouagadougou Peace Agreement and appealed to the international community to continue to support Côte d'Ivoire. On 29 October, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1842 (2008), by which it renewed the sanctions measures and the mandate of the Group of Experts until 31 October 2009. On 7 November, the Council adopted a presidential statement on Côte d'Ivoire (S/PRST/2008/42), by which it expressed its deep concern about the possible delay of the elections in Côte d'Ivoire for the third time since the signing of the Ouagadougou Agreement. The Council members urged the parties in Côte d'Ivoire to find an agreement on a new and credible electoral time frame, with the understanding that the presidential elections would be organized before the end of spring 2009, and to take immediate and concrete steps to complete the operations of identification and registration of voters. On 21 January 2009, the Council held a private meeting with the countries contributing troops to UNOCI, during which it was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOCI. The briefing was followed by an exchange of views. On the same day, at a public meeting, the Council was briefed on the situation in Côte d'Ivoire by the Special Representative, who presented the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/21). The briefing was followed by consultations of the whole. On 27 January, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1865 (2009), by which it renewed the mandate of UNOCI and the authorization of the French forces which support it for six months, reduced the authorized level of troops of UNOCI as recommended by the Secretary-General, welcomed the progress of the operations of identification and registration of voters, and urged the Ivorian political actors to find an agreement without delay on a credible, new and realistic electoral time frame. The Council also expressed its intention to examine as soon as possible that time frame, which would bind the Ivorian political actors and reflect their level of political commitment towards free, open, fair and transparent elections. On 28 April, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOCI, who presented the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/196). He stressed that UNOCI was focusing on advancing the electoral process and that, while the date for holding the presidential elections had not yet been fixed, the voter registration exercise was progressing well. He noted that the political leaders needed to commit themselves to holding elections before the end of 2009. The Council later held informal consultations, during which a brief report on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) was presented by the representative of Mexico, Claude Heller, in his capacity as Chairman of that Committee, followed by an exchange of views among the Council members. On 29 May, at an open meeting, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/16) in which it welcomed the endorsement by all the main Ivorian political actors of a new time frame for holding the presidential elections in Côte d'Ivoire on 29 November 2009, which will give a new impetus to the implementation of the Ouagadougou Political Agreement. On 25 June, the Council held consultations and was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, on the situation in Côte d'Ivoire, following his visit to the country. He reported that he had been reassured by the President, Laurent Gbagbo, that the presidential elections would be held as scheduled on 29 November 2009. Council members expressed their hope that the elections would proceed, but were concerned at the possibility of any further delay. On 23 July, the Council held an open meeting on the report of the Secretary-General on UNOCI (S/2009/344) and was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOCI. He informed the Council of the significant progress in the implementation of the Ouagadougou Political Agreement and its supplementary agreements. He outlined the main achievements, including the end of hostilities between the Forces nouvelles and the national defence and security forces; the removal of the zone of confidence that had physically divided the country; restoration of free movement of people and goods throughout the country; successful conduct of a credible process to identify the population and register voters; the overall improvement in the human rights situation throughout the country; sustained dialogue among the main political leaders; and the revival of the economy. The Special Representative further informed the Council that, on 14 May, the Government of Côte d'Ivoire had announced that the first round of the presidential elections would be held on 29 November. The Council also heard a statement from the representative of Côte d'Ivoire, who reiterated the commitment of the Government to hold elections as scheduled on 29 November 2009. The meeting was preceded by a private meeting with the countries contributing troops to UNOCI, during which participants were briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. In the consultations that followed, members of the Council noted the assurances by the Government, as well as other political actors, that they were still committed to holding presidential elections on 29 November 2009, and stressed the need to adhere to that timeline. They called upon the Independent Electoral Commission to urgently issue a timetable with dates for the remaining processes leading to the presidential elections. On 30 July, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1880 (2009), by which it renewed the mandate of UNOCI until 31 January 2010, in particular to support the organization in Côte d'Ivoire of free, open, fair and transparent elections, within the electoral time frame. The Council also requested UNOCI to actively support the parties in the implementation of the remaining tasks under the Ouagadougou Political Agreement and its supplementary agreements. Democratic Republic of the Congo On 12 September 2008, following the resumption of fighting in the North and South Kivu Provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Council held a meeting to receive an update from the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, on the situation on the ground. The Council issued a statement to the press on the issue after the consultations (SC/9445). On 3 October, in consultations of the whole, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), Alan Doss, briefed the Council on the latest developments in the Goma and Nairobi peace processes in that country. He called for a ceasefire between the Congrès national pour la défense du peuple (CNDP) and the Government forces and an implementation of the disengagement plan by the parties concerned. On 21 October, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/38), in which the Council members urged all the parties to the Goma and Nairobi processes to abide by the agreements, and strongly supported the work of MONUC. On 28 October, in consultations of the whole, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, briefed the Council on the security situation in North Kivu. The Council members expressed their serious concern about the recent fighting in the region and its humanitarian consequences. On 29 October, in consultations of the whole, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations briefed the Council on the escalation of hostilities in North Kivu. The Council then adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/40), in which the Council members urged all signatories to the Goma and Nairobi processes to implement their commitments effectively and in good faith, and expressed their full support for MONUC. On 11 November, in consultations of the whole, owing to the fragile situation in the country, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He requested the Council to authorize additional forces to enable the Mission to fulfil its mandate. On 20 November, the Council held a public meeting on the situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, having before it a letter dated 31 October 2008 from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/703). The Council unanimously adopted resolution 1843 (2008), by which it authorized a temporary increase in the military strength of MONUC of up to 2,785 military personnel, and the strength of its police unit of up to 300 personnel. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and as recommended by the Secretary-General in his letter of 31 October, the Council authorized the immediate deployment of those additional capacities until 31 December 2008. It expressed its intention to extend that authorization on the occasion of the renewal of the MONUC mandate, underlining that the duration of the stay of the additional forces would depend on the security situation in the Kivus. On 25 November, the Permanent Missions of Belgium and France chaired an Arria-formula meeting on the situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The meeting was chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Karel de Gucht. On 26 November, the Council held a private meeting with the countries contributing troops to MONUC. At the meeting, the Council and troop-contributing countries heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUC. Also on 26 November, at a public meeting, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUC. He informed the Council that the recent fighting in the Democratic Republic of the Congo had displaced another 250,000 people, some of them for the second or third time, in the eastern part of the country. He welcomed the recent intense regional and bilateral efforts to resolve the crisis. He recalled that a ceasefire had been established, and several armed groups had pulled back to create a zone of separation between the various forces in the southern part of North Kivu. He informed the Council that the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, Olusegun Obasanjo, would return to the region to address the continuing presence of the armed groups there and follow up on the Nairobi communiqué. At the briefing, the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo made a statement. After the public meeting, the Council held consultations of the whole. On 15 December, the Council heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and discussed the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the upcoming renewal of the MONUC mandate. On 17 December, in consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing by the representative of Indonesia, R. M. Marty M. Natalegawa, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on the final report of the Group of Experts and on deliberations among Committee members on that report at the Committee's informal consultations on 10 December. On 22 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1856 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of MONUC until 31 December 2009, while reinforcing the strength of the Mission and refocusing its mandate more clearly on the protection of civilians. The Council also unanimously adopted resolution 1857 (2008), by which it renewed the sanctions regime relating to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and extended the mandate of the Group of Experts until 30 November 2009. Sanctions were expanded to target individuals impeding the distribution of humanitarian assistance or supporting armed groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo through the illicit trade in natural resources. On 15 January 2009, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region briefed the Council on the progress of the negotiations between the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and CNDP through the Nairobi dialogue. Council members reiterated their full support to the mediation led by the former Presidents of Nigeria and the United Republic of Tanzania, Olusegun Obasanjo and Benjamin Mkapa, and exchanged views about the security and humanitarian consequences of the military operation against the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in Orientale Province, the split within CNDP and the joint Rwandan-Congolese operation against the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR). On 27 January, the Council held an informal meeting with the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, Francis Deng, who briefed the Council about his visit in November 2008 to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Council members underlined the need to find ways to improve the protection of civilians in the eastern part of that country. On 28 January, during consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing from the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the recent developments in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Council members expressed satisfaction at the increased level of cooperation between the Congolese and the Rwandan authorities and underlined the importance of the activities of MONUC continuing to be closely coordinated with those of the countries in the context of the operations against armed groups. They reiterated that the protection of civilians should be considered the highest priority. On 17 February, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes, briefed the Council at a public meeting on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, illustrating both the potential hope for the country and the continuing dire humanitarian situation, especially in the eastern part. Following the briefing, the Council held consultations of the whole, during which members expressed serious concern about the humanitarian situation and condemned the brutal attacks against civilians by LRA and FDLR. Council members called upon all parties to ensure the protection of civilians as a top priority and to fully respect international humanitarian and human rights law. The members also encouraged the Governments of the region to cooperate with MONUC in the planning and conduct of joint operations, and underlined the importance of accelerating the deployment of additional troops as approved by the Council in resolution 1843 (2008). On 9 April, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUC on the report of the Secretary-General on MONUC (S/2009/160). He noted that there had been a significant improvement in the situation, especially following the signature on 23 March of an agreement between the Government and CNDP. He stated that MONUC needed more troops and equipment in order to carry out its mandate pursuant to resolution 1856 (2008), and reported on the progress made in operations against FDLR, which had carried out attacks against the civilian population, as had LRA. The Council then held informal consultations in which members exchanged views, and approved a statement to the press (SC/9633), welcoming the agreement reached between the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and CNDP and giving support to operations jointly planned and conducted by the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUC against FDLR, LRA and other armed groups, while noting also that those operations must be in accordance with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, and should include appropriate measures to protect civilians. The members also expressed concern about continued violations of human rights in the country, and stressed the importance of reforming the security sector. On 28 May, during informal consultations, the Council was briefed by the representative of Turkey, Baki İlkin, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), on the midterm report of the Group of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1857 (2008), and its recommendations. On 10 July, at a formal meeting, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUC on the report of the Secretary-General on MONUC (S/2009/335). He noted that action against foreign armed groups operating in the eastern part of the country had led to population displacements and serious human rights violations by FDLR and LRA, as well as undisciplined soldiers of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the informal consultations that followed, Council members exchanged views and adopted a statement to the press (SC/9703), expressing their support for MONUC and encouraging MONUC, in collaboration with national authorities, to continue monitoring the performance and conduct of units of the Armed Forces involved in joint operations against armed groups. Members of the Council also called for the urgent and full implementation of the agreement of 23 March. They also welcomed and encouraged further regional cooperation, in particular between the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, and commended the role played by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region and his co-Facilitator. The Council members also expressed their grave concern over the renewed activity of illegal armed groups, and condemned the targeted attacks against the civilian population by FDLR and LRA. They further expressed concern about the continuing reports of massive human rights violations, widespread sexual violence, and continued recruitment and use of children in armed conflict. Members of the Council encouraged the Congolese authorities to continue taking further steps to fight impunity within the national security forces. (Lord's Resistance Army-affected areas) On 17 December 2008, in consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Lord's Resistance Army-affected areas, the former President of Mozambique, Joaquim Chissano. Council members reiterated their full support for the efforts of the Special Envoy and called for the continuation of his work. On 22 December, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/48) strongly condemning the recent attacks by the Lord's Resistance Army and the repeated failure of the LRA leadership to sign the Final Peace Agreement. It commended the States in the region for their increased cooperation in addressing the security threat posed by LRA, while also calling upon those States to ensure that all actions are carried out in accordance with international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and to take appropriate measures to protect civilians. The Council also recalled the International Criminal Court arrest warrants for certain LRA leaders. On 16 January 2009, in consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes, on the humanitarian consequences of the joint operation by Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan against the Lord's Resistance Army. Council members commended the States in the region for their increased cooperation to address the threat posed by LRA. They insisted on the necessity of taking all necessary measures to protect civilians. Following the consultations, the Council issued a statement to the press (SC/9576), strongly condemning the recent LRA attacks and demanding that LRA cease those attacks immediately. On 15 July, in consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, who gave his assessment of the Juba peace talks and the outcome of his mandate as Special Envoy. His briefing came against the background of a letter dated 26 May 2009 from the Secretary-General informing the Council of his intention to suspend President Chissano's assignment as Special Envoy as from 30 June (S/2009/281). In remarks to the press by the President of the Council, members commended the Special Envoy for his significant contribution to the peace process, called on LRA to sign the Final Peace Agreement and also expressed appreciation for the readiness of President Chissano to be available should LRA finally be ready to sign the Final Peace Agreement. Guinea-Bissau On 7 October 2008, the Council held a debate and was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, and the representative of Brazil, Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, in her capacity as Chairperson of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, in particular on preparations for the legislative elections to be held in November 2008 and the continued growth in drug trafficking as well as organized crime. The representative of Guinea-Bissau also delivered a statement. Members of the Council encouraged all parties concerned to maintain the dialogue and cooperation and to ensure a stable environment for a free and fair legislative election. On 15 October, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/37), in which it called on donors to continue to provide resources for the legislative elections to be held on 16 November, and called upon the international community to support Guinea-Bissau in its efforts to combat drug trafficking as well as organized crime. On 20 November, the President of the Security Council read out a statement to the press (SC/9506) on behalf of the Council members, by which they welcomed the holding of the legislative elections in Guinea-Bissau of 16 November 2008, as scheduled, in an orderly and peaceful manner. On 25 November, the President of the Council, on behalf of the members of the Council, read out a statement to the press (SC/9510), condemning in the strongest terms the violent attack on the residence of the President of Guinea-Bissau, João Bernardo Vieira, on 23 November, by military elements. The members of the Council regretted that such a serious incident had occurred after the peaceful and orderly elections of 16 November. On 11 December, the Council held consultations on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS). The Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOGBIS, Shola Omoregie, presented the report of the Secretary-General. He highlighted the elections and the attempted coup in November 2008, as well as security sector reform and the fight against illegal narcotics. Council members agreed on a statement to the press (SC/9530) in which they welcomed the successful organization of legislative elections on 16 November 2008, reiterated their deep concern about the security situation, welcomed the Ministerial Conference on Drug Trafficking as a Security Threat to West Africa of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and requested the Secretary-General to elaborate recommendations on transforming UNOGBIS into an integrated office. On 3 March 2009, the Council held consultations of the whole to consider the situation in Guinea-Bissau. The Deputy Director of the Africa II Division of the Department of Political Affairs, Sam Ibok, briefed the Council on the killing of the President of Guinea-Bissau on 2 March and the Chief of the General Staff on 1 March 2009. The President of the Council made a statement on behalf of the Council members (S/PRST/2009/2), strongly condemning the assassinations and calling for those responsible to be brought to justice. The Council also urged all parties in Guinea-Bissau to exercise restraint, maintain stability, and respect the rule of law and the democratic process. It called on the international community to assist in preserving the constitutional order of Guinea-Bissau and in supporting peacebuilding efforts. On 8 April, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOGBIS, Joseph Mutaboba, who presented the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/169). He informed the Council that the Government authorities had established a commission of inquiry into the assassination of the President of the Republic and the Chief of the General Staff. He noted that respect for the constitutional order was critical to the advancement of the democratic process. Council members exchanged views during consultations held thereafter. On 9 April, the President read out a statement on behalf of the Council (S/PRST/2009/6). The Council welcomed the scheduling of presidential elections for 28 June 2009 and called for the conduct of free, fair and credible elections. The Council also took note of the recommendation by ECOWAS on the need to deploy military and police contingents to ensure the protection of the national institutions, the authorities and the electoral process, and invited ECOWAS to work in coordination with the Government of Guinea-Bissau. On 9 June, following the assassination of Baciro Dabo, one of the candidates in the upcoming presidential elections in Guinea-Bissau, and Hélder Proença, a former Minister of Defence, the Council issued a statement to the press (SC/9677) condemning the killings, expressing deep concern over the resurgence of political violence and calling on the Government of Guinea-Bissau to bring to justice those responsible for those violent acts. On 23 June, the Council heard briefings from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOGBIS, and the representative of Brazil, in her capacity as Chairperson of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, on the developments in that country. The Special Representative emphasized that the challenges in Guinea-Bissau were enormous, and stated that, although the Government and the people of the country had the primary responsibility to address those challenges, the international community should also stay engaged and provide the much-needed support for critical reforms in the justice, public administration, defence and security sectors and, most urgently, for the conduct of peaceful presidential elections. Following the briefings, Council members exchanged views on this issue in closed consultations. On 26 June, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1876 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of UNOGBIS until 31 December 2009 and requested the Secretary-General to establish a United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to succeed UNOGBIS, for an initial period of 12 months, beginning on 1 January 2010. Liberia On 9 September 2008, the Council held a private meeting with the countries contributing troops to the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), followed by consultations. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Liberia, Ellen Margrethe Løj, briefed the Council on the situation on the ground and the proposal made by the Secretary-General in his latest report to reduce the UNMIL military component and to increase the police component. On 29 September, the Council adopted resolution 1836 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of UNMIL for one more year. On 17 December, during consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Giadalla A. Ettalhi, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003), on the implementation of sanctions concerning Liberia and the report of the Panel of Experts. On 19 December, the Council adopted resolution 1854 (2008), by which it decided to renew the arms embargo and travel ban sanctions regime concerning Liberia for another period of 12 months. On 19 March 2009, the Council held informal consultations, and was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the work of UNMIL. She highlighted the achievements in meeting the key security benchmarks in spite of significant challenges, including the fragile security situation and weak national institutions. On 25 June, the Council held consultations of the whole, and the representative of Uganda, Ruhakana Rugunda, in his capacity as Acting Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003), made a statement on the work of the Committee focusing on the report of the Panel of Experts (S/2009/290). He reported that, during its informal consultations on 16 June, the Committee had considered the recommendations by the Panel on the arms embargo, assets freeze and natural resources, and decided to dispatch letters to the representative of Liberia to the United Nations and to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, drawing their attention to relevant recommendations contained in the Panel's report. The Council was also briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, on the special report of the Secretary-General on UNMIL (S/2009/299). Council members stressed the need to ensure that the capacities of Liberian national institutions, especially the army, justice sector and police, were urgently strengthened so that they could effectively take over responsibilities after the departure of UNMIL. Sierra Leone On 4 August 2008, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1829 (2008), establishing a peacebuilding office in Sierra Leone for a period of 12 months, beginning on 1 October 2008, following the completion of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone on 30 September 2008. The new office would be formally known as the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), and would focus on supporting government efforts in consolidating peace; monitoring and promoting human rights, democratic institutions and the rule of law; consolidating good governance reforms; supporting decentralization; and reviewing the 1991 Constitution. On 9 February 2009, the Council held a debate and was briefed by the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General in Sierra Leone and Head of UNIPSIL, Michael von der Schulenburg, who presented the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/59), and by the representative of the Netherlands, Frank Majoor, in his capacity as Chairperson of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. The Executive Representative informed the Council of the steady progress in key areas of peacebuilding and a new, stronger integrated approach by the United Nations. Ambassador Majoor updated the Council on a review of the implementation of the Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework, conducted on 15 December 2008. The representative of Sierra Leone took part in the discussion, urging international partners to rally support behind the Agenda for Change and the United Nations Joint Vision. The members of the Council expressed support for those initiatives as well as the work of the Peacebuilding Commission. On 8 June, the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNIPSIL briefed the Council on developments in Sierra Leone and the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/267). The Executive Representative, while noting that the democratic gains in Sierra Leone remained fragile, praised the political leadership of Sierra Leone for the joint communiqué signed on 2 April 2009 that he said had kept recent political violence from spiralling out of control. He also called for international support for the United Nations integrated post-conflict strategy in the country. The Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission's Sierra Leone configuration, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone, Zainab Hawa Bangura, also addressed the Council. Following the briefings, Council members made statements noting the progress achieved and made proposals on the way forward. On 16 July, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, Justice Renate Winter, and the Prosecutor, Stephen Rapp, on the work of the Special Court. The Council also heard a statement by the representative of Sierra Leone. The Council members commended the Special Court on its achievements in ensuring that those responsible for heinous crimes are brought to justice as part of the fight against impunity. They also welcomed the Special Court's completion strategy and its work on residual issues. Somalia During the period under review, the Council continued to be seized with the efforts to stabilize the situation in Somalia. On 19 August 2008, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1831 (2008), by which it authorized the extension of the mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for six more months. It also authorized AMISOM to take all necessary measures to carry out its mandate, as set out in resolution 1772 (2007). On 26 August, during consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, on the peace process in Somalia, including the signing of the Djibouti Agreement, which calls, inter alia, for the cessation of armed confrontation and full humanitarian access. The briefing was followed by a presentation by the Chief of Staff in the Office of the Military Adviser, Ian Sinclair, on the security situation in Somalia, including an evaluation of the capacities necessary for an international stabilization force and the possible risks for a force that would not have the necessary capacities at its disposal. On the basis of that security briefing, the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, then made recommendations to the Council with regard to the possible deployment of an international stabilization force, as requested by the Somali parties in the Djibouti Agreement. On 4 September, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/33) welcoming the signing of a peace and reconciliation agreement (the Djibouti Agreement) between the Transitional Federal Government and the Alliance for the Reliberation of Somalia in Djibouti on 19 August 2008, and took note of the parties' request in the Djibouti Agreement that the United Nations, within a period of 120 days, authorize and deploy an international stabilization force. The Council requested the Secretary-General to elaborate on his contingency plans and provide, in consultation with the parties and other relevant stakeholders, a detailed and consolidated description of a feasible multinational force, its mandate and derived tasks, to include, inter alia, the size and geographical scope of that force, progressively deployed, and further provide a detailed concept of operations for a feasible United Nations peacekeeping operation. On 7 October, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1838 (2008), by which it called upon States interested in the security of maritime activities to actively take part in the fight against piracy on the high seas off the coast of Somalia, in particular by deploying naval vessels and military aircraft, in accordance with international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982. It also urged States and regional organizations, in conformity with the provisions of resolution 1814 (2008), to continue to take action to protect the maritime convoys of the World Food Programme. On 9 October, during consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the representative of South Africa, Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), on the work of the Monitoring Group on Somalia, in accordance with paragraph 3 (h) of its resolution 1811 (2008). On 30 October, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/41), in which it condemned in the strongest terms the terrorist suicide attacks that occurred in the towns of Hargeysa and Boosasso in Somalia on 29 October. On 20 November, the Council held a public meeting on the situation in Somalia, at which it unanimously adopted resolution 1844 (2008), intended to strengthen the arms embargo on Somalia by specifying sanctions on violators and expanding the mandate of the Committee that oversees the ban. Acting under Chapter VII of the Charter, the Council decided that travel restrictions and freezing of assets would be applied to individuals and entities that engaged in activities that threatened the peace or the political process and obstructed the delivery of humanitarian assistance, in addition to those that breached the weapons ban, which was put in place by resolution 733 (1992) and amended by subsequent resolutions. After the meeting, the President of the Council read a statement to the press (SC/9508), in which members of the Council encouraged all parties in Somalia to fully implement the Djibouti Agreement, and stressed the need for all those that are not yet parties to that agreement to become part of it as a matter of urgency. The Council members also expressed their concern about the worsening security and humanitarian situation and the fragility of the political process, and reiterated their commitment to consider further steps to move the process forward. Members of the Council also expressed their concern about the number of incidents of piracy off the Somali coast. Also on 20 November, the Council held a debate to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2008/709), including on the fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia. The Council was briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Haile Menkerios, the Director of the Africa II Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Raisedon Zenenga, and the Secretary-General of the International Maritime Organization, Efthimios Mitropoulos. The Council then held consultations of the whole. On 2 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1846 (2008), by which it decided that, for a period of 12 months from its adoption, States and regional organizations cooperating with the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia may enter the territorial waters of Somalia and use all necessary means to repress acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, in accordance with relevant international law. On 11 December, during consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing by the representative of South Africa in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), on the final report of the Monitoring Group. On 16 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1851 (2008) by which it authorized, for a period of 12 months from the date of its adoption, States and regional organizations cooperating with the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia to take all necessary measures that are appropriate in Somalia, for the purpose of suppressing acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, provided such measures were consistent with applicable international humanitarian and human rights law. The Council also invited States and regional organizations to conclude special agreements or arrangements with countries willing to take custody of pirates in order to embark law enforcement officials ("shipriders") from the latter countries, to facilitate the investigation and prosecution of persons detained as a result of operations conducted under the resolution. Following the adoption of resolution 1851 (2008), the Council, presided over by the Prime Minister of Croatia, Ivo Sanader, was briefed by the Secretary-General on the political and security situation in Somalia, including efforts to fight piracy off the coast of Somalia in a comprehensive approach that also addressed the causes of piracy inside Somalia. Other high-level participants included the Secretary of State of the United States of America, Condoleezza Rice; the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, David Miliband; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Sergey V. Lavrov; the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, He Yafei; and the Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan, Yasutoshi Nishimura. Also participating at the meeting were the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, Ali Ahmed Jama Jengeli; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Jonas Gahr Støre; and the observer for the League of Arab States, Yahya Mahmassani. On 19 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1853 (2008), by which it authorized the re-establishment of the Monitoring Group for a period of 12 months and added a fifth expert to handle the additional tasks it had assigned to the Group under an expanded mandate. On 16 January 2009, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1863 (2009), in which it expressed its intent to establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia as a follow-on force to AMISOM, subject to a further decision by 1 June 2009. The Council requested the Secretary-General to submit a report by 15 April 2009 on developments in the situation in Somalia, including progress towards the full deployment of AMISOM, with a view to transitioning to a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The Council also requested the Secretary-General to provide a United Nations logistical support package to AMISOM, and to establish a trust fund to provide financial support to AMISOM and to assist in the re-establishment, training and retention of all-inclusive Somali security forces. On 3 February, following consultations of the whole, the President of the Council read a statement to the press (SC/9588) in which the Council members welcomed the election by the Transitional Parliament of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed as President of Somalia, and expressed their strong support for the peace process and for this important step towards a political settlement in Somalia. They also commended AMISOM for its important work, while expressing concern regarding the humanitarian situation in Somalia. On 12 February, in consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, who gave an update regarding the political process in Somalia, and by the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, Susana Malcorra, on the United Nations logistical support package for AMISOM, on the basis of a letter from the Secretary-General (S/2009/60). The members of the Council welcomed the recent political developments, and urged opposition groups which had not participated in the Djibouti peace process to cooperate with the new President. The members of the Council appreciated the preparation of the logistical support package, while pointing out the need to ensure transparency and accountability in its implementation. On 25 February, the President of the Council read a statement to the press (SC/9600) in which the Council members condemned in the strongest terms the attacks on the AMISOM base in Mogadishu on 22 February and the further reported attacks on 24 February. They also reiterated the Council's commitment to support a strengthened AMISOM, and commended the Governments of Uganda and Burundi for their contributions, while further welcoming the ongoing political process in Somalia. On 20 March, at an open meeting, the Council considered the situation in Somalia. The Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who updated the Council on the implementation of the Djibouti Agreement, and emphasized the need for a new paradigm, based on the linkage between governance, security and development. While endorsing the international naval presence as a show of solidarity, the Special Representative defined piracy as a "business", linked to the State's failure on land, and to criminal activities. The Council also heard a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar. The Minister informed the Council of the recent progress made in the political process, although some actors still refused dialogue, affirmed that the defeat of piracy required the restoration of the rule of law, and welcomed the pledging conference to be held on 22 April as crucial for providing resources. The Council was also briefed by the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union, Ramtane Lamamra, who reaffirmed the close working relationship between AMISOM and the Government, and welcomed the Council's intention to consider a United Nations operation as a follow-on to AMISOM. In a statement to the press (SC/9621), delivered by the President thereafter, Council members welcomed the Djibouti process, commended AMISOM for its contribution, condemned attacks against it, and called upon the international community to provide additional resources to AMISOM. On 9 April, during informal consultations, the Council was briefed by the representative of Mexico, Claude Heller, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), on the Committee's work in accordance with resolution 1844 (2008), by which the Committee was requested to report at least every 120 days to the Security Council on its work. On 13 May, at an open meeting, the Council considered a report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2009/210), which was presented by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, and the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia made a statement. In the consultations that followed, the members of the Council expressed support for the political process in Somalia as well as for AMISOM. The members expressed serious concern at continuing attempts by extremist forces, including Al-Shabaab fighters, to destabilize the situation in Mogadishu and other parts of the country. The members of the Council expressed support for the Secretary-General's recommendations on prerequisites for the possible deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia. On 15 May, the Council held informal consultations to consider the rapid deterioration of the situation in Somalia following an escalation in fighting by insurgent groups in Mogadishu and other parts of the country. Immediately following the consultations of the whole, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/15), in which it expressed concern at the renewed fighting and called upon the Monitoring Group to investigate allegations of support to the insurgents. On 26 May, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1872 (2009), by which it extended the authorization for the African Union to maintain AMISOM until 31 January 2010, and requested the Secretary-General to continue to provide a logistical support package for AMISOM as described in his letter (S/2009/60), and to carry out the phased approach to possible deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, subject to the conditions set out in his report (S/2009/210). On 19 June, the Council issued a statement to the press (SC/9685) strongly condemning the suicide bomb attack in Beledweyne on 18 June, which killed the Somali Minister of Security, Omar Hashi Aden, along with community leaders and other innocent Somalis. The members of the Council also reiterated their continued and full support to the Transitional Federal Government, the Djibouti process and AMISOM. On 9 July, the Council held a debate on the situation in Somalia and was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs on the current political and security situation in Somalia, and by the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support on the support package for AMISOM. The Council also heard statements by the representative of Somalia, the observer of the African Union and the representative of Sweden on behalf of the European Union presidency. In the debate that followed, Council members reiterated their support for the Djibouti Agreement as a basis for the political process and for the Transitional Federal Government as the legitimate authority in Somalia. Council members condemned the recent escalation of attacks by armed groups and foreign elements against the Transitional Federal Government, the civilian population and AMISOM, and demanded an end to the attacks. Council members commended the contribution of AMISOM to lasting peace and stability in Somalia and welcomed the decision adopted by the Assembly of the African Union at its twelfth ordinary session, held at Sirte, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, from 1 to 3 July, to strengthen AMISOM. Council members also took note of the African Union decision at the same session requesting the Council to impose sanctions against all those, including Eritrea, providing support to the armed groups engaged in undermining peace and reconciliation efforts in Somalia and regional stability. Council members also agreed to expeditiously consider the course of action against those undermining the Djibouti peace process. At the end of the debate, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/19). On 29 July, the Council held an open meeting to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/373). The Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on developments in the political, security and humanitarian situation, and heard an update on AMISOM, piracy, and the role of the international community in Somalia. The Council also heard statements from the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia. They informed the Council about the fragile situation in Somalia, especially after the recent escalation in fighting following attacks on the Transitional Federal Government by armed insurgents and foreign fighters. They pointed out however that there were some positive changes, namely, that the Transitional Federal Government was getting more organized, reasserting itself and increasingly gaining the support and confidence of the Somali people. They therefore called for increased and expedited support from the international community for the Transitional Federal Government, especially in helping to rebuild Somali security forces and State institutions. In the discussions that followed, members of the Council reiterated their support for the Djibouti peace process, and for the Transitional Federal Government as the legitimate and internationally recognized authority. They called upon those still outside the Djibouti peace process to respond to calls for reconciliation by the Government, and to embrace peaceful means of resolving the Somali conflict. The Council members welcomed the launching on 25 July of the Joint Security Committee and the initiation of the deployment of the AMISOM police component. They condemned attacks on the Transitional Federal Government, humanitarian personnel, the civilian population and AMISOM by insurgent groups and foreign elements. The Council later held private consultations at which it received the 120-day report from the representative of Mexico, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992); he updated the Council on the work of the Committee and the draft list of entities and individuals proposed by the Monitoring Group for consideration by members of the Council. He also informed Council members about the Group's work in the region and the repeated postponement by the Eritrean authorities of the visit by the Group to the country. Members of the Council commended the Committee and the Monitoring Group for their work and contribution to the search for peace in Somalia and the whole region. Members of the Council, while calling upon all those supporting armed groups and sabotaging the Djibouti peace process to stop doing so, reiterated their readiness to start the process of triggering action against those who meet the designation criteria in resolution 1844 (2008), namely, undermining stability, impeding the delivery of humanitarian assistance or violating the arms embargo. Sudan On 18 August 2008, at a formal meeting, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, briefed the Council on the Secretary-General's most recent report on the Sudan (S/2008/485). He informed the Council that the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, although behind schedule, remained on track, and that the cooperation between the two partners in the Agreement had shown signs of improvement. The Special Representative, however, also indicated to the Council that the foundation for a durable peace remained fragile. The briefing was followed by consultations of the whole. On 26 August, in consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, on the attack by Sudanese security forces on an internally displaced persons camp at Kalma, Southern Darfur. He informed the Council that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) had been trying to gain complete access to the Kalma camp to help to evacuate the wounded. At the time of the briefing, UNAMID had not yet obtained full access, as Sudanese forces continued to surround the camp. The Assistant Secretary-General described these events as deeply disturbing, and reminded the Council that attacks against such camps were unacceptable, as would be the presence of arms inside the camps. On 11 September, during consultations of the whole, the representative of Italy, Giulio Terzi di Sant' Agata, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, briefed the Council. He informed the members that a written report to be submitted to the Council was being finalized and would probably include the results of the inquiry into the attack on the UNAMID convoy. On 3 October, in consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the crash of an Mi-8 helicopter hired by UNAMID in Southern Darfur on 29 September, which was still under investigation. On 15 October, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1841 (2008), by which it extended until 15 October 2009 the mandate of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). On 28 October, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, and the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, Susana Malcorra, briefed the Council at an open meeting on the current security, political and humanitarian situation in Darfur as well as the deployment of UNAMID. During the consultations of the whole that followed, the Council members expressed their strong support for the acceleration of the deployment of UNAMID and the promotion of the political process in Darfur. On 5 November, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the latest report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2008/662), on the activities of UNMIS until 4 October, and on the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Southern Sudan and how it had contributed to the normalization of the area and hence facilitated the return of displaced persons. He pointed out, however, that the parties, with the assistance of the international community, had much work to do to ensure lasting stability. The briefing was followed by consultations of the whole. On 3 December, the Council held a debate and was briefed by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Luis Moreno Ocampo, who presented his eighth report pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), describing the extent of cooperation, as well as the investigative and monitoring activities undertaken in three cases relating to Darfur, namely the prosecutorial cases against Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb, against the President of the Sudan, Omar al-Bashir, and against the rebel commanders for the Haskanita attack. Members of the Council expressed concern over the violence in Darfur, which targeted innocent civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. The question of cooperation with the Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur was also raised, as well as the need for a comprehensive settlement to the conflict. On 10 December, the Council, in consultations of the whole, was briefed by the representative of Italy, Giulio Terzi di Sant'Agata, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). He presented the 90-day report on the implementation of the mandate of the Committee specified in resolution 1591 (2005). On 19 December, at a formal meeting, the Council was briefed on the situation in Darfur by the Under-Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support. The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations regretted that the progress in Darfur was much too slow in providing real benefits to ordinary citizens and inadequate in resolving the Darfur crisis, while the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support assured members of the Council that, despite the volatile security environment, the full deployment of UNAMID remained a top priority for her team. The meeting was followed by consultations of the whole on the issue. On 28 January 2009, in consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the recent upsurge of fighting and violence in Darfur. Council members called on all parties to cease hostilities, respect their obligations under international humanitarian law and cooperate with the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator, Djibril Bassolé, in efforts to bring about a political solution to the conflict. They expressed their full support for the Joint Mediator and for the action of UNAMID to protect civilians at risk. They noted that the situation in Darfur was particularly volatile and that the Council should continue to monitor it closely. On 3 February, during consultations of the whole, the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations briefed the Council on the recent upsurge of violence in the Muhajryia area of Southern Darfur. The members of the Council expressed their concern about the worsening security situation there and affirmed their full support for UNAMID, the importance of ensuring the protection of civilians and the necessity for all parties to refrain from taking any action which could aggravate the situation. On 5 February, at an open meeting, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNMIS briefed the Council on the latest report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the overall situation in the country (S/2009/61). He offered the assessment that the overall security situation, while relatively stable, remained fragile. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement, he stressed, had reached a critical juncture with just over two years of the interim period remaining, and the parties' strong political will, determination and decisive action would be required to consolidate achievements made since 2005. Meeting afterwards in consultations of the whole, Council members affirmed the centrality of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement for peace in the entire Sudan and the importance of full commitment by all parties to implement the Agreement in the remaining interim period. They also conveyed their concerns about the security situation in some parts of southern Sudan, emphasizing the role of UNMIS in addressing this situation. On 10 and 12 February, during consultations of the whole, the Council considered a draft presidential statement on the situation in Southern Darfur introduced by the delegation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Council members had differing views on the situation, and the Council took no action on the matter. On 12 February, the Council also held an informal interactive discussion with a joint delegation from the African Union and the League of Arab States, on the possible decision by the International Criminal Court against the President of the Sudan, Omar al-Bashir. Members of the Council expressed their support for the ongoing peace process in Doha and the efforts undertaken, to that end, by Qatar and the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator, as well as their hope that this process would lead to a comprehensive cessation of hostilities. Acknowledging the sensitivity of the issue, members affirmed that peace and justice should go hand in hand in Darfur. On 17 February, in consultations of the whole, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations presented the latest progress report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of UNAMID (S/2009/83). The members of the Council, welcoming the Agreement of Goodwill and Confidence-Building for the Settlement of the Problem in Darfur, which had been signed by the Government of the Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement in Doha the same day, stressed the importance of making the political process more substantive and inclusive. In addition, Council members stressed their support for efforts to expeditiously deploy UNAMID, in particular through the tripartite mechanism, and the need for more support from Member States. Expressing their concern about the dire humanitarian situation, the members of the Council also insisted on better access to internally displaced persons. On 6 March, the Council held informal consultations on the situation in the Sudan. The President briefed the Council members on the letter he had received that day from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and representative of the Chairman of the African Union (S/2009/144). The letter transmitted for circulation a communiqué, adopted on 5 March 2009 by the African Union Peace and Security Council, which appealed to the Council to assume its responsibilities and defer the International Criminal Court case against the President of the Sudan. The Council was also briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Catherine Bragg, on the humanitarian developments in Darfur following the expulsion of relief groups, and urged the Government to reverse its decision. On 10 March, the Council, in consultations of the whole, was briefed by the representative of Austria, Thomas Mayr-Harting, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), who presented the 90-day report on the implementation of the Committee's mandate. On 20 March, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the Director of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Rashid Khalikov, who expressed concern over the plight of civilians in Darfur, and urged the Government of the Sudan to reverse its decision to expel a number of humanitarian organizations and to respect its commitments. The Council also heard a statement by the representative of the Sudan, who stated that the Sudan's "legitimate, sovereign decision" would not be reversed. On 26 March, the Council held consultations of the whole, and was briefed by the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator, Djibril Bassolé, who updated Council members on the Darfur political process. The Council was also briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes, who reported on his recent visit to Darfur and the work of the United Nations-Government of the Sudan assessment mission. The President of the Council later spoke to the press and stressed the importance Council members attached to having humanitarian assistance available to all those in need in Darfur, and also urged the Government of the Sudan to continue to cooperate with the United Nations and humanitarian organizations, and appealed to it to reconsider the decision to suspend the activities of some non-governmental organizations in the Sudan. On 23 April, the Council held a closed meeting with the countries contributing troops to UNMIS, during which the participants heard a briefing from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNMIS. He also presented the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan (S/2009/211) to the Council in the informal consultations that followed. On 27 April, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the Joint African Union-United Nations Special Representative for Darfur and Head of UNAMID, Rodolphe Adada, who presented the report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of UNAMID and the security situation in Darfur. The briefing was followed by informal consultations, during which the members of the Council exchanged views. On 30 April, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1870 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of UNMIS for a period of one year. On 5 June, the Council received its biennial briefing from the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, on the basis of resolution 1593 (2005). The Prosecutor provided information to the Council on the activities of his office with regard to Darfur and summarized his planned activities for the next six months. He emphasized that all States parties to the Rome Statute have a responsibility to arrest and surrender any indictee travelling in their territory, noting also that, while non-signatories to the Statute have no such legal obligation, the Council in resolution 1593 (2005) urged them to cooperate fully with the Court. The Prosecutor further informed the Council that, in the coming six months, the Office of the Prosecutor would continue monitoring ongoing crimes, galvanizing efforts to arrest fugitives and building cooperation with regional organizations. The briefing was followed by private consultations during which Council members expressed their positions on this issue. On 11 June, at a formal meeting, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator on his recent trip to the Sudan. He described the expulsion of humanitarian aid workers from the Sudan on 4 March as unjustified, and explained that through the efforts of the humanitarian community, working together with the Government of the Sudan, the most critical lifesaving gaps had significantly narrowed and further worsening of humanitarian crisis and deaths had been prevented. He stated that the Government had subsequently taken some important steps to rebuild cooperation with the humanitarian community and had also reaffirmed existing agreements. The Under-Secretary-General also emphasized that, in order to meet the requirements of the new situation throughout the Sudan, the financing needs for humanitarian assistance must be reworked. He called on both the Government and the donor community for accelerated help. He also mentioned the situation in the south of the Sudan as a source of major concern. The briefing was followed by informal consultations on the issue. On 19 June, during consultations of the whole, the representative of Austria, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), presented to Council members the 90-day report on the work of the Committee. On 17 July, the Council held informal consultations and considered the Secretary-General's report on UNMIS (S/2009/357). The Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, who reported on the current political and security situation in the Sudan following his field trip to the country. He highlighted some of the challenges that were facing the Sudan in the process of implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the decision of the Permanent Court of Arbitration on Abyei that was expected on 22 July 2009, and the support extended by UNMIS in facilitating the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Members of the Council commended UNMIS for the support it had provided in implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and for the contingency plans it was making to protect the civilian population, particularly in the Abyei area. Council members also commended the parties for the aspects of the Agreement that had so far been implemented. They expressed concern over those that had not yet been implemented fully, particularly the delays in preparations for general elections, which had been postponed to April 2010. On 24 July, following a closed meeting with the countries contributing troops to UNAMID, the Council held an open meeting to consider the Secretary-General's reports on UNAMID (S/2009/297 and S/2009/352). The Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the developments on the political, security and humanitarian situation, and UNAMID operations and deployment. He pointed out that while the situation on the ground had improved somewhat, the situation for millions of people who were displaced in Darfur and unable to return home remained of serious concern. The Under-Secretary-General stressed the need for implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. He welcomed the commitment of the parties to the Agreement to respect and peacefully implement the decision of the Permanent Court of Arbitration on the Abyei dispute. The Special Representative of the President of the Russian Federation, Mikhail Margelov, and the representative of the Sudan also participated in the meeting. Council members commended UNAMID for its work and welcomed the progress in the deployment of UNAMID operations. Council members welcomed the efforts by the Joint Mediation and the Government of Qatar to achieve an agreement between the Government of the Sudan and the armed opposition groups including the Justice and Equality Movement. They further reiterated the urgent need to reach a political settlement of the Darfur conflict and called upon the parties to return to the negotiations. On 30 July, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1881 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of UNAMID until 31 July 2010. Western Sahara On 22 April 2009, the Council held a closed meeting with the countries contributing troops to the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), and was briefed by the Director of the Asia and Middle East Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Wolfgang Weisbrod-Weber. The Council, in the consultations that followed, heard reports from the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Christopher Ross, based on the report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara (S/2009/200). On 30 April, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1871 (2009), extending the mandate of MINURSO for one year. The resolution included new elements related to the human dimension of the conflict, and the Council welcomed efforts to prepare for a fifth round of negotiations. United Nations Office for West Africa On 21 January 2009, at an open meeting, the Council heard a briefing from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), Said Djinnit, who presented the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/39). The briefing was followed by informal consultations, during which views were exchanged on the challenges facing the subregion, including the impact of drug trafficking and the challenges posed to governance, and on the role of UNOWA in contributing to address these issues with the Economic Community of West African States and the other United Nations operations, offices and agencies concerned, such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. On 7 July, at an open meeting, the Council considered the report of the Secretary-General on UNOWA (S/2009/332), which was presented by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOWA. The Council was also briefed on the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by the Executive Director, Antonio Maria Costa. In the informal consultations that followed, Council members commended UNOWA for its role in promoting and strengthening a regional and integrated approach to cross-border issues. They also commended the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for its initiatives in combating drug trafficking and crime in the West African region. On 10 July, at an open meeting under the item entitled "Peace consolidation in West Africa", the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/20), in which it noted with satisfaction the continued progress in the overall peace and security situation in West Africa and welcomed the positive developments in the areas of post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding, as well as improvements in governance and the rule of law. The Council expressed its concern over emerging threats to security in West Africa, notably terrorist activities in the Sahel band, maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, and illicit drug trafficking. The Council commended UNOWA and requested the Secretary-General, through his Special Representative, to continue to develop further the active cooperation existing between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations. Security Council mission to Africa On 28 May 2009, the Council was briefed by the heads of its mission to Africa of 14 to 20 May, which had included a stop in Addis Ababa, where Council members met with senior African Union officials, as well as stops in Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Liberia. The representative of Uganda, Ruhakana Rugunda, joint leader of the Ethiopia leg of the mission, highlighted meetings with the African Union, at which the situations in the Sudan and Somalia, as well as the financing of peacekeeping operations in Africa and the issue of unconstitutional changes of government on the continent, were reviewed. He said the talks had been useful in strengthening cooperation, particularly in the areas of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, among other areas of mutual interest. The representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, John Sawers, joint leader of the Ethiopia leg of the mission, said the African Union and the United Nations were working together to address the well-known difficulties facing UNAMID, as well as considering ways to strengthen action on the ground in support of the African Union Mission in Somalia. On Rwanda, he highlighted the fact that conflict had escalated in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, leading to cooperation between the Governments of Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to address the shared problem of armed groups operating in the region, and that the decision of the two countries had helped to reshape the regional political landscape. The representative of France, Jean-Maurice Ripert, who led the Democratic Republic of the Congo leg of the mission, briefed the Council on the activities of the mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He said that, from all their meetings in the region, the members of the mission had learned that the situation in the Great Lakes region had improved, particularly as a result of the rapprochement between the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, and that MONUC remained indispensable. Stressing the need to urgently and comprehensively deal with the widespread nature of sexual violence, he noted that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo had taken measures to address such violence, including the enactment of a law against rape and other gender-based crimes. He also noted that, during the mission, on behalf of the Council, he gave the highest authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo an initial list of the names of five leaders of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo who had been convicted of sexual violence and asked the President and the Prime Minister, with the support of MONUC, to arrest those five officers and bring them to trial publicly so as to begin restoring the confidence of the civilian population. The representative of the United States of America, Susan Rice, who led the Liberia leg of the mission, reported that the purpose of the visit to Liberia had been to reaffirm the Council's support for the Liberian people and Government, as well as for the United Nations Mission in Liberia. It had also been meant to examine such pressing issues as violence against women. On 17 September 2008, during informal consultations, the Council heard a briefing on the United Nations fact-finding mission to Djibouti and Eritrea that had been requested by the Council. The Council noted that the mission had gone to Djibouti, but had not been granted visas to visit Eritrea. On 23 October, at the request of the Government of Djibouti, the Council convened an open meeting to hear a briefing from the President of Djibouti, Ismail Omar Guelleh, on the situation between Djibouti and Eritrea. The representative of Eritrea also participated in the meeting and delivered a statement. Council members expressed their concern over the situation between Djibouti and Eritrea and committed themselves to assisting the parties concerned in finding a sustainable solution through peaceful means. They also supported the Secretary-General, the African Union and the League of Arab States in continuing to use their good offices to promote a peaceful solution and encouraged both parties to cooperate. On 14 January 2009, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1862 (2009), by which it expressed its deep concern about the continuing tense border dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea, urged them to resolve it peacefully, and made some specific demands on Eritrea, including the withdrawal of its forces and equipment to the position of the status quo ante, no later than five weeks after the adoption of the resolution. The Council requested the Secretary-General to provide it with a report on the evolution of the situation. It also decided to review the situation six weeks after the adoption of the resolution on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General. On 7 April, in consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, on the implementation of resolution 1862 (2009) regarding the Djibouti-Eritrea border situation. He reported that Eritrea had categorically rejected the resolution and refused to recognize the existence of the border dispute. Council members expressed deep concern over the regrettable conduct of Eritrea regarding its response to resolution 1862 (2009) and its unwillingness to establish dialogue or accept the good offices of the Secretary-General. They requested the Secretary-General to continue his mediation efforts and keep the Council informed of developments in the situation. Council members also requested the President to meet the representative of Eritrea to express their concern over the conduct of Eritrea and to call upon that State to be more cooperative with the international community in the search for a solution to the border problem between itself and Djibouti. On 16 April, during informal consultations, the President of the Security Council reported to the members of the Council on the meeting he had held with the representatives of Eritrea and Djibouti. The Council members agreed to remain seized of the matter and to convene a briefing in the near future to review the situation further. On 21 July, the Council held informal consultations under the item entitled "Peace and security in Africa" to discuss the Djibouti-Eritrea border dispute. The Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, who gave an update on the implementation of resolution 1862 (2009). He informed Council members that, since his last briefing, the situation had not changed: Eritrea was still maintaining that it had not occupied any part of Djibouti territory and continued to defy the Security Council resolution that called upon the two countries to withdraw their forces to the status quo ante. He further informed the Council that Eritrea had so far refused to engage in any diplomatic efforts to resolve the dispute peacefully despite various attempts by the Secretary-General. In the discussions that followed, Council members expressed their regret and deep concern at the continued intransigence of Eritrea, and its refusal to recognize and resolve its border dispute with Djibouti while at the same time refusing to allow a United Nations team to visit the country and verify the situation on the ground. Council members also expressed their deep concern with Eritrea's policies in the whole Horn of Africa region, noting that its conduct was leading to escalation of conflict and undermining stability in the region and hence threatening international peace and security, and that this should not be allowed to continue indefinitely. In view of the impasse and the volatility of the Horn of Africa region, Council members reiterated the need to keep all options for resolving the conflict open, including exploring punitive measures to put pressure on Eritrea while at the same time continuing to pursue diplomatic efforts. In this regard Council members encouraged and requested the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to engage Eritrea, in order to resolve the border dispute with Djibouti peacefully. Madagascar On 7 April 2009, during informal consultations, the Council was briefed on the situation in Madagascar by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs. He informed the members that the political and security situation in the country was tense following the ousting of the President, Marc Ravalomanana, and the violent protests. The Council members supported the efforts of the Secretary-General and the African Union aimed at resolving the crisis and appealed for constitutional order to be restored at the earliest possible time. On 19 August 2008, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/30), in which it condemned the overthrow, on 6 August, of the democratically elected Government of Mauritania by the military. It welcomed the statements condemning the coup by the African Union, the European Union and other members of the international community. The Council demanded the immediate release of the President, Sidi Mohamed Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, and the restoration of the legitimate constitutional, democratic institutions immediately. The Council decided to monitor further developments. On 19 September 2008, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Haile Menkerios, briefed the Council on the situation in Zimbabwe, after the signing of the framework agreement on power-sharing between the main political parties. Members of the Council welcomed the agreement and commended the President of South Africa, Thabo Mbeki, for his efforts in this regard. On 15 December, the Council held a private meeting to consider the situation in Zimbabwe. The meeting was chaired by the Prime Minister of Croatia, Ivo Sanader. The Secretary-General made an introductory briefing, which was followed by an exchange of views on the prevailing political and socio-economic situation in the country and its effects on the subregion. The high-level meeting was attended by the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, David Miliband, and the Secretary of State of the United States of America, Condoleezza Rice. Report of the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities for support to African Union peacekeeping operations On 18 March 2009, the Council considered the report of the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities for support to African Union peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813). The President of the Council, the Secretary-General, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, Nkosazana C. Dlamini Zuma, made statements. The Chairman of the panel, Romano Prodi, presented the report. He stressed the responsibility of regional actors to address issues of peace and security in their own regions, and emphasized that peace in Africa could not be achieved through military force alone, and that all Member States must be committed to the process. He underlined the need for a "shared vision", based on long-term partnerships underpinned by credible institutional capabilities requiring resources and contributions, while ownership must belong to Africa. The Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union, Ramtane Lamamra, also briefed the Council. He stressed that peacekeeping in Africa is a shared responsibility requiring boldness, a heightened level of realization, harmonization of efforts and cohesiveness. The Council also heard statements by the Chairperson of the African Union Peace and Security Council, Édouard Aho-Glélé. In a statement read out by the President (S/PRST/2009/3), Council members noted with interest the report of the African Union-United Nations panel, and requested the Secretary-General to submit, no later than 18 September 2009, a report including, inter alia, ways to provide support for the African Union in operations authorized by the United Nations, and an assessment of the panel's recommendations, in particular those on financing and on the establishment of a joint African Union-United Nations team to examine how to implement those recommendations. Furthermore, the Council emphasized the need to improve the capacity of the African Union, to develop strategic United Nations partnerships, and to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing of the regional organizations. Resurgence of unconstitutional changes of government in Africa On 5 May 2009, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/11) in which it expressed its deep concern over the resurgence of unconstitutional changes of government in a few African countries, and stressed the importance of expeditiously restoring constitutional order, including through open and transparent elections. The Council also welcomed the decision of the Assembly of the African Union at its twelfth ordinary session, held from 1 to 3 February 2009, which expressed the African Union's concern and condemnation of the resurgence of coups d'état, which, it concluded, not only constituted a dangerous political downturn and serious setback to the democratic processes, but could also pose a threat to the peace, security and stability of the continent. Americas Haiti On 12 September 2008, in consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing from the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, on the situation in Haiti, after the cyclones and hurricanes that seriously affected the country. The members of the Council expressed their deep condolences and sympathy to the people and Government of Haiti and invited the international community to provide aid to the country. They also welcomed the appointment of Michèle Duvivier Pierre-Louis as Prime Minister of Haiti. On 8 October, the Council held a private meeting with the countries contributing troops to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). Subsequently, the Council heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of MINUSTAH, Hédi Annabi, on the situation in Haiti and the work done by MINUSTAH. Following the briefing, members of the Council held consultations of the whole and discussed issues raised in the Secretary-General's report (S/2008/586). Council members expressed their concern over the severe damage caused by hurricanes in Haiti and the consequences for the stabilization process. Council members acknowledged the crucial role of MINUSTAH and expressed support for the Mission. On 14 October, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1840 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of MINUSTAH until 15 October 2009. From 11 to 14 March 2009, the members of the Council undertook a mission to Haiti. On 19 March, the Council heard a briefing by the head of the mission, the representative of Costa Rica, Jorge Urbina, on the activities of the mission to assess the implementation of the Council's resolutions, particularly resolution 1840 (2008). He stressed that the mission assessed the country's situation at first hand at a time when there appeared to be an opportunity to ensure stability and sustainable development. He observed that Haiti continued to grapple with food insecurity and a fragile humanitarian situation and observed that the authorities must promote a national consensus to ensure a firm foundation for socio-economic development. In his statement, the representative of Haiti expressed his Government's gratitude to the Council for the mission. He stressed that since 2005 the security situation had improved, although the economic and social situation remained fragile, particularly as a consequence of the four hurricanes in 2008. He reiterated Haiti's commitment to economic development and stressed the importance of the upcoming pledging conference in Washington. On 6 April, the Council held an open debate on Haiti and the report of the Secretary-General on MINUSTAH (S/2009/129). The Council heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH. Following the briefing and the Council debate, the Council heard statements by the President of the Economic and Social Council and representatives of the Organization of American States, the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the World Food Programme and the United Nations Development Programme. The Council also heard statements by the representative of Uruguay, on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti and 13 other delegations, followed by the representative of Haiti, who thanked Mexico for having convened an open debate on the question concerning Haiti. At the end of the meeting, the President read out a statement (S/PRST/2009/4), in which the Council welcomed the progress achieved in the five critical areas for the consolidation of Haiti's stability. It also noted with concern the challenges in the area of social and economic development, reiterated the need for security to be accompanied by social and economic development as a way for Haiti to achieve lasting stability, and its strong support for MINUSTAH and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in their efforts to improve stability and governance in Haiti. Asia Afghanistan On 26 August 2008, during consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, on an incident that occurred in Azizabad, Herat Province, Afghanistan, on 22 August 2008, which reportedly caused civilian casualties. The information provided, based on reports from the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), was still incomplete. The Assistant Secretary-General emphasized the importance of considering the safety and welfare of civilians during the planning and conduct of military operations. On 22 September, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1833 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) for a period of 12 months beyond 13 October 2008. On 14 October, the Council held an open meeting to hear a briefing from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of UNAMA, Kai Eide, on the latest situation in Afghanistan and the work of the Mission. The Council also heard a statement by the representative of Afghanistan. While expressing concern over the security and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, members of the Council welcomed the progress made by the Government, with support from the international community. They stressed the need for more defined priorities, and supported a holistic approach to the existing challenges in Afghanistan. From 21 to 28 November, the members of the Council undertook a mission to Afghanistan. On 4 December, at a formal meeting, the Council heard a briefing by the head of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan, the representative of Italy, Giulio Terzi di Sant'Agata, in which he reported that the main goal of the mission was to develop a first-hand assessment of the situation in that country. During the visit, members had the opportunity to meet with various actors in Afghanistan, including the President, Hamid Karzai, the Speakers of the Upper and Lower Houses of Parliament, the Chairmen of the parliamentary committees and other Members of Parliament, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, the Independent Electoral Commission, the Secretary-General of NATO, representatives of ISAF, members of the diplomatic community, civil society, international and national non-governmental organizations, UNAMA senior staff and the United Nations country team. The mission visited the Province of Herat and met there with the UNAMA regional representative, the provincial governor and other officials, as well as with representatives of a Provincial Reconstruction Team, who all underlined the importance of quick-impact assistance projects implemented by the Herat Provincial Reconstruction Team. On 11 February 2009, the President read a statement to the press (SC/9593) condemning in the strongest terms the terrorist attacks that occurred in Kabul on the same day. On 19 March, at a formal meeting, the Council considered the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security (S/2009/135). The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMA briefed the Council, and reported that the security situation had continued to deteriorate and that the results of Government and international aid efforts had fallen short of popular expectations as Afghans suffered the effects of drought and a global rise in food prices. He urged the international community to support efforts to bolster the national police, promote agriculture, and support the private sector to combat corruption, the funding of insurgents and food insecurity, among other long-standing problems. The representative of Afghanistan made a statement. On 23 March, the Council again had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2009/135). The Council unanimously adopted resolution 1868 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of UNAMA by one year, and condemned attacks on civilians and international forces, and the use by the Taliban and other extremist groups of civilians as human shields and of children as soldiers. On 30 June, at an open meeting, the Council heard a briefing by the Secretary-General's Special Representative on the situation in Afghanistan. Stressing the crucial importance of the upcoming presidential and provincial council elections in August, he said that, if managed well, the elections could become a turning point in efforts to end the conflict in Afghanistan. While underlining the emergence of some positive elements such as increased emphasis on civilian efforts, a focus on subnational governance and the better alignment of international efforts, he also said that daunting challenges remain to be tackled and that the ongoing violence in particular seriously undermines the prospects for progress. The members of the Council stressed the importance of the upcoming elections in achieving security and stability in the country and pledged to work closely with the United Nations and the Government of Afghanistan. The representatives of Afghanistan and a number of Member States also participated in the debate. On 15 July, the Council unanimously adopted a statement by the President of the Council on the situation in Afghanistan (S/PRST/2009/21), in which it welcomed the Afghan-led preparations for the upcoming presidential and provincial council elections scheduled for 20 August 2009, and stressed that the elections should be free, fair, transparent, credible, secure and inclusive. The Council also welcomed the progress achieved by the Government on implementing the Afghanistan Compact and the Afghanistan National Development Strategy, encouraged the Government to undertake enhanced efforts in addressing issues in the areas of security, governance, the rule of law and human rights, including gender equality, and economic and social development, as well as the cross-cutting issue of counter-narcotics, and called upon the international community to continue supporting the Government's efforts. Fiji On 20 April 2009, in informal consultations under the agenda item "Other matters", the Council heard a briefing on the situation in Fiji by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe. He highlighted the constitutional crisis that had arisen following the interim Government's declaration of a state of emergency on 10 April, the suspension of the Constitution, the postponement of the parliamentary elections until 2014, and the dissolution of the courts. Following the meeting, the President of the Council made remarks to the press expressing the Council's concern at the suspension of the Constitution, called for the restoration of democracy, and reiterated the Council's support for the Secretary-General's efforts to resolve the situation. Iraq On 6 August 2008, at an open meeting, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, and the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United States of America, Alejandro Wolff, briefed the Council on the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the multinational force, respectively. The Council considered the report of the Secretary-General on UNAMI (S/2008/495). The Under-Secretary-General outlined recent developments, warned all actors against complacency, and stressed the need to focus on building trust and confidence across community lines to improve the quality of life for all Iraqis. He informed the Council that UNAMI continued to focus on advancing political dialogue and national reconciliation, resolving disputed internal boundaries, preparing for provincial elections, supporting the reconstruction and development of Iraq, and alleviating the suffering of Iraqi refugees, internally displaced persons and other vulnerable groups. On 7 August, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1830 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of UNAMI for another period of 12 months, in accordance with the request of the Government of Iraq and with reference to resolution 1770 (2007). The Council called on the Government of Iraq and other Member States to continue to provide security and logistical support to the United Nations presence in the country. The Council requested the Secretary-General to report quarterly on progress made towards the fulfilment of all the Mission's responsibilities. On 19 August, the President of the Council began the first meeting of the day with a statement commemorating the fifth anniversary of the attack in Baghdad against UNAMI, then headed by the late Sergio Vieira de Mello. On 14 November, the Council held a debate, and was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of UNAMI, Staffan de Mistura, who introduced the Secretary-General's report (S/2008/688). He informed the Council that, following a significant reduction in violence in 2008, Iraqis must continue to seize the momentum to build long-term stability and that the Government of Iraq should be commended for the progress achieved. He noted that Iraq would now be called upon to deliver services, security guarantees, conditions for free and fair elections, and credible and independent institutions, and to resolve tensions among its various communities. The Special Representative informed the Council that UNAMI had focused, in recent months, on supporting electoral preparations, laying the foundation for a resolution to the problem of disputed internal boundaries, supporting national development strategies and facilitating Iraq's partnership with the international community and its neighbours. The Council also heard statements by the representative of the United States of America, on behalf of the multinational force, and the representative of Iraq. On 22 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1859 (2008), extending the arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq and the arrangements for the monitoring by the International Advisory and Monitoring Board, and decided that they could be reviewed at the request of the Government of Iraq or no later than 15 June 2009. The Council also decided to review resolutions pertaining specifically to Iraq, beginning with resolution 661 (1990). The Council welcomed the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Hoshyar Zebari, who gave an update on the political, security and economic situation in Iraq. A number of Council members welcomed the adoption of the resolution as a clear expression of the progress achieved by Iraq, and reiterated the importance of continued international support to Iraq in addressing the remaining challenges. On 3 February 2009, after consultations of the whole, the President of the Council read a statement to the press (SC/9587) welcoming the holding of provincial elections in Iraq on 31 January. On 26 February, the Council held a debate to hear a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMI, who presented the report of the Secretary-General on UNAMI (S/2009/102). The Special Representative informed the Council that Iraq had taken a significant step forward with the provincial elections held on 31 January. He also highlighted the increasing capability of the Iraqi security forces over recent months and the improvement of the security situation in general. The representative of Iraq then presented the views of the Government of Iraq on the report. The members of the Council welcomed the positive developments in recent months and expressed support for UNAMI in their statements. On 16 April, the Council held informal consultations on the Development Fund for Iraq and the activities of the International Advisory and Monitoring Board. The United Nations Controller, Jun Yamazaki, gave a briefing on the matter. On 25 April, the President read out a statement to the press (SC/9643), in which the Council members condemned in the strongest terms the terrorist attacks in Baghdad and Diyala on 23 and 24 April. The Council members reaffirmed their support for the Government of Iraq and their determination to combat all forms of terrorism. On 18 June, at a public meeting chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, Ahmet Davutoğlu, the Council considered the situation in Iraq and reviewed the activities of UNAMI on the basis of the Secretary-General's quarterly report. The Minister welcomed the progress made by the Iraqis in several key areas, acknowledged the remaining challenges and the need to tackle them with a sense of purpose and determination, and reiterated the commitment of the Council to support Iraq's quest for peace, security and prosperity. In his last briefing to the Council as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, Staffan de Mistura gave a detailed account of the recent developments in the country, stressing the improvements in the security situation, as well as the continued need to work towards national reconciliation. He also recounted the activities of UNAMI in various fields, with a particular emphasis on its study regarding the disputed internal administrative boundaries and its continued assistance to the Iraqi people and Government in preparation for the upcoming elections. The Council members all spoke in support of the activities of UNAMI in Iraq in line with its mandate. While welcoming the security improvements, they urged Iraq to expeditiously take the necessary steps to make the positive trend irreversible, through an inclusive dialogue and cooperation leading to national reconciliation. In particular, they underlined the need to find a consensual solution to the issue of disputed internal administrative boundaries, including the status of Kirkuk, to create an environment conducive to the sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons, to reach agreement on some key pieces of legislation, including the hydro-carbon resources and income-sharing laws, and to continue fighting against extremism and terrorism. At the end of the meeting, in which the representative of Iraq also participated, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/17), reaffirming its commitment to Iraq's independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity; emphasizing the importance of the stability and security of Iraq for its people, the region, and the international community; commending the important efforts made by the Government of Iraq to strengthen democracy; and reiterating its full support for UNAMI in advising, supporting and assisting the Iraqi people and Government to strengthen democratic institutions, to advance inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation and, among other tasks, to facilitate regional dialogue. Iraq/Kuwait On 10 December 2008, during consultations of the whole, the High-level Coordinator for missing Kuwaitis and third-country citizens and missing Kuwaiti property, Gennady P. Tarasov, briefed the Council in consultations of the whole, presenting the Secretary-General's report on the issue (S/2008/761). Following the consultations, the President of the Council read a statement to the press (SC/9529), noting a lack of progress on exhumation activities and on clarifying the fate of the Kuwaiti national archives, expressing appreciation for the support offered by UNAMI and noting the good intentions of the Governments of both Iraq and Kuwait to cooperate on these issues. The members of the Council undertook to continue to monitor progress and looked forward to a comprehensive report by the Secretary-General in April 2009. On 16 April 2009, the Council held informal consultations to consider the issue of Kuwaiti and other nationals and Kuwaiti property missing since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, pursuant to Council resolutions 1284 (1999) and 1859 (2008). The High-level Coordinator introduced the quarterly report of the Secretary-General on the item. The President of the Security Council delivered a statement to the press (SC/9637) stressing the need for all parties to speed up progress in resolving outstanding issues, which would further strengthen relations between Iraq and Kuwait. Myanmar On 11 September 2008, during consultations of the whole, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Myanmar, Ibrahim Gambari, briefed the Council on his most recent visit to that country, including areas affected by Cyclone Nargis, where he met with government officials. On 20 February 2009, in consultations of the whole, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General briefed the Council on the results of his latest visit to Myanmar. Members of the Council then exchanged views on the way forward regarding the situation in Myanmar. On 22 May, the Council held consultations on the situation in Myanmar under the agenda item "Other matters". The President of the Council issued a statement to the press (SC/9662), in which members reiterated the need to release all political prisoners. On 13 July, the Council held an open meeting and was briefed by the Secretary-General on the situation in Myanmar, following his visit to the country on 3 and 4 July. He informed the Council that he had made proposals focused on three outstanding concerns: the release of all political prisoners, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi; the resumption of substantive dialogue; and the creation of conditions conducive to the holding of credible elections in 2010. He proposed that the senior leadership of Myanmar should enhance its cooperation with the United Nations to address the country's pressing development needs through a broad-based process involving all sectors of society. He further informed the Council that he had made clear that the international community expects the Government to deliver on the promise to make the 2010 elections inclusive, free and fair and to take the necessary steps on his proposal in the near future. The Council also heard a statement by the representative of Myanmar, who communicated his Government's priorities, which included handing over State power to a civilian government after the 2010 elections, as well as laying a good foundation for future social and economic development. The Council members expressed support for the role of the United Nations through the Secretary-General's good offices. Nepal On 7 November 2008, the Council held a debate, followed by consultations, to consider the report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations assistance in support of its peace progress (S/2008/670). In the report, the parties in Nepal were commended for their commitment to consolidating democracy, but it was also stated that "understandable" delays in forming the Government had not led to the "hoped-for progress" that would allow the United Nations special political mission in the country, known as the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), to wind down by the end of its mandate, in January 2009, as previously called for by the Council. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal and Head of UNMIN, Ian Martin, briefed the Council on what he called the remarkable progress made by the people of Nepal towards peace and democracy, the extended assistance of UNMIN and the sustained support needed from the international community. He also said that the Mission might need an extension beyond 23 January 2009. On 16 January 2009, the Council received a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The briefing was followed by consultations of the whole on the issue. On 23 January, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1864 (2009), by which it renewed the mandate of UNMIN for six months. On 5 May, the Council held an open meeting on the situation in Nepal, and was briefed by the Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal and Head of UNMIN, Karin Landgren. She informed the Council about the developments in the country, including the political standoff that had led to the resignation of the Prime Minister, Kumal Prachanda, on 4 May 2009. Council members called for calm among all parties and urged renewed commitment to the peace process, with a view to forming a new government. The representative of Nepal also addressed the Council. The President made a statement on behalf of the Council (S/PRST/2009/12), in which the Council expressed concern about the political crisis in Nepal and underlined the urgent need for the Government of Nepal and all political parties to work together in a spirit of compromise. On 20 July, the Council held informal consultations on the situation in Nepal, including the work of UNMIN. The Representative of the Secretary-General briefed the Council on the status of the peace process since the resignation of the Prime Minister. The members of the Council exchanged views on the peace process and reiterated the need for all parties to work together in a spirit of cooperation to take the peace process forward. On 23 July, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1879 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of UNMIN for a further six months, until 23 January 2010. Sri Lanka On 27 February 2009, in consultations of the whole, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes, briefed the Council on his recent visit to Sri Lanka and provided an update on the humanitarian situation in the country. The members of the Council expressed concern about the humanitarian situation, including the plight of large numbers of internally displaced persons, and urged the Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General, and his representatives on the ground to continue their engagement. On 26 March, the Council held an informal dialogue with the representative of Sri Lanka, in order to have a preliminary exchange of views on the humanitarian and security situation in that country. The Council heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator on the humanitarian situation following the reported escalation in the conflict between Government forces and Tamil rebels in northern Sri Lanka. The representative of Sri Lanka detailed the efforts carried out by his Government in dealing with the precarious situation. On 22 April, the Council held an informal interactive dialogue to consider the humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka, with the participation of the representative of Sri Lanka. The Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Vijay Nambiar, briefed the Council on the progress achieved during his visit to Sri Lanka. He stressed that the purpose of his mission was to propose to the Government that personnel from the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross be sent to Sri Lanka to help to provide humanitarian assistance to the victims of the conflict and internally displaced persons. Following the meeting, the President made some remarks to the press, expressing the concern of Council members at the situation in Sri Lanka. On 24 April, in informal consultations, the Council, under "Other matters", considered the humanitarian situation in Sri Lanka, following which the President of the Council made some informal remarks to the press on the issue. On 30 April, the Council held another informal interactive dialogue, at which the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator briefed the Council regarding his visit to Sri Lanka from 25 to 27 April. The representative of Sri Lanka also participated in the dialogue. Following the meeting, the President made remarks to the press outlining the position of the Council members. The Council members expressed concern at the humanitarian situation in north-eastern Sri Lanka; condemned the use by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) of civilians as human shields; called on LTTE to lay down its arms, renounce terrorism and allow civilians trapped in the conflict zone to be evacuated; expressed support for the Secretary-General's proposal to send a humanitarian mission to the conflict zone and urged the Government of Sri Lanka to extend its support to that mission; and called on the parties to respect international humanitarian law. On 13 May, the Council held informal consultations, under "Other matters", on the situation in Sri Lanka. The President of the Council issued a statement to the press (SC/9659), in which the members of the Council expressed concern over the worsening humanitarian situation, and condemned LTTE for its terrorist activities. On 5 June, the Council held an informal interactive discussion on Sri Lanka to hear a briefing by the Secretary-General regarding his recent visit to the country. The representative of Sri Lanka also participated in the discussion. In his briefing the Secretary-General welcomed the end of the 25-year-long struggle of the Government of Sri Lanka against LTTE, which is recognized as a terrorist organization by many members of the Council, and shared his observations on the possible way ahead to address the humanitarian and political situation in the country, stressing in particular the needs of the internally displaced persons. The members of the Council expressed their support for the efforts of the United Nations and the Secretary-General's recommendations. Timor-Leste On 19 August 2008, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), Atul Khare, who presented the report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/501). He commended the authorities on their successful efforts to maintain security and stability, reviewed the progress made to date and highlighted the fact that the authorities in Timor-Leste had identified the need to address management gaps in the civil service, police and army as key priorities. In a statement to the Council, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, Zacarias Albano da Costa, indicated that the Government appreciated the efforts of the UNMIT police and envisaged that the resumption of policing responsibilities by the national police would be completed within the first half of 2009. The Council also held informal consultations, and thereafter adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/29) in which it, inter alia, reaffirmed the continued importance of the review and reform of the security sector in Timor-Leste, recognized efforts made by the national authorities and UNMIT for the reconstitution of the national police, and underlined that building an independent, professional and impartial national police service was a long-term process. On 19 February 2009, the Council held an open debate on the situation in Timor-Leste in the presence of the Secretary-General, who introduced his report on UNMIT (S/2009/72). The President of Timor-Leste, José Ramos-Horta, conveyed his gratitude for the support of the United Nations and reported on progress in the country. Members of the Council and other delegations affirmed their support for Timor-Leste and the activities of UNMIT. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General also addressed the Council. On 26 February, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1867 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of UNMIT until 26 February 2010. On 27 May, the Council held a meeting in private with the countries contributing troops to UNMIT. The Council and the troop-contributing countries were briefed by the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Takahisa Kawakami, on the issues related to the concept of operations and rules of engagement for the military liaison group and the police component of UNMIT. Members of the Council, the Deputy Special Representative and representatives of participating troop-contributing countries had an exchange of views. United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia On 19 June 2009, in closed consultations, the members of the Council heard a briefing on the activities of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the Centre, Miroslav Jenca. Following an exchange of views among the members, the President of the Council read a statement to the press (SC/9686), welcoming the efforts of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in addressing regional issues of common concern, and reaffirming the Council's support to the Centre to facilitate dialogue and assist the Governments of Central Asia in addressing multiple challenges facing the region. Middle East The Council regularly considered and reviewed the situation in the Middle East. The Council stressed the urgency of reaching comprehensive peace in the Middle East, and noted that intensified diplomatic action was needed to attain the goal set by the international community of lasting peace in the region. On 20 August 2008, the Council heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, which was followed by consultations of the whole. The Under-Secretary-General informed the Council that Israeli-Palestinian negotiations as part of the Annapolis process were continuing and that the fragile ceasefire between Israel and Hamas had been largely respected, but that the situation on the ground remained a cause for concern, particularly the continuing settlement activity across the West Bank and in East Jerusalem, and the rise of internal Palestinian violence. A meeting of the Quartet to be held in September, followed by an iftar with Arab partners, and a meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee were expected to provide occasions to take stock of the progress made and to assist in the implementation of donor pledges to address the impending Palestinian budget crisis. The briefing was followed by consultations of the whole on the issue. On 18 September, the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Robert Serry, briefed the Council on the negotiations between Israel and the Palestinian National Authority, in particular the talks of 26 and 31 August and 16 September 2008. He also stated that relations between the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon were improving, while the blockade imposed by Israel in the Gaza Strip was still a concern. The briefing was followed by consultations of the whole on the issue. On 26 September, the Council, at the request of the representative of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the League of Arab States, held a debate at the ministerial level. Although many delegations focused their statements on the settlements that were still going on in the Palestinian territories, others spoke about the global situation in the Middle East. On 22 October, the Council heard a briefing on the Middle East from the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs. He told the Council that, despite ongoing efforts by the parties concerned, the situation on the ground was not improving to the extent necessary to ensure a durable settlement. He hoped that, notwithstanding the transition currently under way, the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations would not only continue but intensify until the end of the year, within the Annapolis framework. During consultations of the whole that followed, members of the Council reaffirmed their support for the continuation of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, and urged the United Nations, as appropriate, to play a greater role in support of the peace process. Members of the Council also emphasized that the international community should not lose sight of the humanitarian situation on the ground. On 25 November, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. He expressed regret that Israel and the Palestinians were likely to fall short of their commitment, made at Annapolis, to reach an agreement by the end of the year. At the same time, he welcomed the parties' affirmation that they had engaged in direct, sustained and intensive negotiations. After the briefing, owing to the sensitivity of the issue, the Council held consultations of the whole, during which members of the Council held an interactive dialogue with the Under-Secretary-General. On 3 December, the Council held a debate to discuss the situation in connection with the Libyan ship which was headed to the Port of Gaza carrying humanitarian supplies. Members of the Council made statements. The Council also heard statements by the observer of Palestine and the representative of Israel. The Council did not reach any specific conclusion. On 5 December, the Council addressed events in Hebron in consultations of the whole. Following the consultations, the President of the Council informed the press that the members of the Council welcomed Israel's evacuation of settlers, condemned the resulting settler violence, urged respect for the rule of law without discrimination or exception and encouraged Israel and the Palestinian Authority to continue their security cooperation in the Hebron Governorate. On 16 December, the Council adopted resolution 1850 (2008), by 14 votes in favour, with 1 abstention. The adoption was preceded by a Council debate with the ministerial-level participation of several members, presided by the Prime Minister of Croatia, Ivo Sanader. The Secretary-General also addressed the Council. Reiterating the vision of the two-State solution while noting the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 and the Quartet's ongoing work, the Council in resolution 1850 (2008) declared its support for the Annapolis process and the irreversibility of negotiations. The Council supported the parties' agreed principles for bilateral negotiations and called on both parties to fulfil their obligations under the road map and refrain from any steps that could undermine confidence or prejudice the outcome of negotiations, while calling on all States and international organizations to contribute to an atmosphere conducive to negotiations and to assist the Palestinian Authority. It urged intensified diplomatic efforts to foster mutual recognition and peaceful coexistence in the region in the context of achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East, and welcomed the consideration of an international meeting in Moscow in 2009. On 18 December, the Council held an open debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. The Council received a briefing from the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, on the situation in Gaza and the West Bank. He also addressed the situation in Lebanon and the dynamics between the Syrian Arab Republic and Israel. He said that the main objective in the coming year was to sustain the political process during a period of transition, emphasizing the importance of the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008). He appealed for the observance of basic humanitarian principles in Gaza and warned against the escalation of violence. The Council then heard statements by the observer of Palestine and the representative of Israel, 13 other Member States, and the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. On 28 December, after consultations of the whole that had begun the previous evening following the outbreak of violence in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel, the President of the Council read a statement to the press (SC/9559), expressing serious concern at the escalation of the situation in Gaza and calling for an immediate halt to all violence, calling for all parties to address the serious humanitarian and economic needs in Gaza, and stressing the need for the restoration of calm in full, which would open the way for finding a political solution. On 31 December, the Council held an emergency meeting on the situation in the Gaza Strip and southern Israel. The Secretary-General addressed the Council, emphasizing profound concern that the Council's call for an end to the violence had gone unheeded, emphasizing the suffering of the civilian population in Gaza, and saying that all parties must fully uphold international humanitarian law. He stressed the need for decisive action and welcomed efforts by European and Arab leaders. The observer of Palestine and the representative of Israel also addressed the Council. Members of the Council made statements, followed by the representative of Egypt and the observer of the League of Arab States. On 3 January 2009, the Council held consultations of the whole on the situation in Gaza. On 6 and 7 January, the Council held a public debate at the ministerial level on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. During the debate, the Secretary-General, the President of the Palestinian Authority, the representative of Israel, and representatives of Member States and observers (including Ministers for Foreign Affairs, in particular of the Arab League States) made statements. On 8 January, after consultations of the whole, the Council held a meeting presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Bernard Kouchner, at which it adopted resolution 1860 (2009) by 14 votes in favour, with 1 abstention. In the resolution, the Council called, inter alia, for an immediate, durable and fully respected ceasefire, leading to the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza, as well as the unimpeded provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza. On 13 January, during consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Secretary-General before his visit to the Middle East. In their statements, Council members welcomed the efforts of the Secretary-General. On 15 January, in consultations of the whole, the Council was briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Haile Menkerios, on the situation in Gaza, following the attacks on the headquarters of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Following the consultations, the President made remarks to the press. On 21 January, the Council held an open meeting and was briefed by the Secretary-General following his visit to the Middle East. During the consultations of the whole that followed, members of the Council agreed to issue a statement to the press (SC/9580), in which they welcomed the ceasefire in Gaza, expressed their strong appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General and reiterated their grave concern at the humanitarian situation in Gaza. On 27 January, the Council held a meeting at which it heard briefings by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes, and the Commissioner-General of UNRWA, Karen AbuZayd, on the situation in Gaza. It was the first time that a Commissioner-General of UNRWA was invited to address the Council. Both the Under-Secretary-General and the Commissioner-General expressed great concern about the humanitarian situation in Gaza and stressed the importance of free access for humanitarian aid. The meeting was followed by consultations of the whole. On 18 February, the Council heard a briefing on the Middle East from the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. He reported to the Council that a number of issues, including the humanitarian situation in Gaza, Palestinian reconciliation, and the new political situation in Israel, needed to be addressed for the peace process to advance, and emphasized the importance of a durable and sustainable ceasefire as called for in resolution 1860 (2009). With regard to Lebanon, he noted that the situation remained relatively stable despite increased tension after the crisis in Gaza. During the consultations of the whole that followed, many Council members stressed the need for an effective ceasefire, unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance, opening of the crossings into Gaza and Palestinian reconciliation and unity. On 25 March, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs. He stated that two months after unilateral ceasefires were declared in Gaza there was a worrying situation of impasse and uncertainty. He said that, despite international engagement and support, little progress had been made on the key issues outlined in resolution 1860 (2009). He stressed the importance of the international community and the Quartet in helping to stabilize Gaza and reinvigorate the peace process. He also emphasized the need for commitment, by both the Israeli and Palestinian Governments, to a two-State solution, implementation of commitments on the ground, having a strategy for de-escalating tensions, and addressing the urgent humanitarian needs in Gaza. On Lebanon, he said that the killing on 23 March by a roadside bomb of the Deputy Representative in Lebanon of the Palestine Liberation Organization had shattered the prevailing relative calm in the country. Following the briefing, statements were made by the observer of Palestine, the representative of Israel, Council members, 25 other Member States, and the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. On 20 April, the Council was briefed on the situation in the Middle East by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs. The Council held informal consultations during which members stressed the need to achieve a stable ceasefire, implement the provisions of Council resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009) and open border crossings to allow the entry of more humanitarian aid. On 11 May, the Council held a ministerial-level meeting on the Middle East peace process chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Sergey V. Lavrov. The Secretary-General stressed the need to generate momentum in the Israeli-Palestinian talks, warning that the situation on the ground could worsen easily without fresh efforts by both sides as well as the international community. He pointed out that, following the inconclusive results of the previous year's negotiations, and the bloodshed in Gaza, the past three months had witnessed almost no progress on the two key resolutions -- 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009). He stressed that the challenge was to begin implementing transformative changes on the ground, and to kick-start a renewed and irreversible drive to achieve an Israeli-Palestinian agreement. Members of the Council expressed their hope that the commitments made by the parties would be kept and stated that the parties must pursue an irreversible effort towards the two-State solution, including by fully implementing commitments on the ground. The Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/14), read by Foreign Minister Lavrov, in which the Council stressed the urgency of reaching comprehensive peace in the Middle East. It stated that vigorous diplomatic action was needed to attain the goal set by the international community of lasting peace in the region, based on an enduring commitment of mutual recognition, freedom from violence, incitement and terror, and the two-State solution, building upon previous agreements and obligations. The Council also expressed its support for the proposal by the Russian Federation to convene, in consultation with the Quartet and the parties, an international conference on the Middle East in Moscow later in 2009. On 23 June, at a formal meeting, the Council heard a briefing on the situation in the Middle East by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. He reported to the Council that international diplomatic efforts were under way to reinvigorate the peace process for a two-State solution, and underlined the importance of reactivating the regional tracks alongside a rejuvenated Israeli-Palestinian track. He also emphasized the negative repercussions of the unresolved crisis in Gaza for efforts to advance the peace process. With regard to Lebanon, he noted that the parliamentary elections had been held on 7 June in an atmosphere of calm and that a climate of dialogue and cooperation had prevailed in Lebanon since then. During the consultations of the whole that followed, many Council members stressed the importance of the vision of two States, called on the parties to fulfil their obligations emanating from the road map and to avoid taking steps that might prejudge the final outcome of the negotiations. They also emphasized the need for securing Palestinian unity. On Lebanon, Council members expressed the expectation that a government in Lebanon could be established soon. On 27 July, the Council held an open debate on the situation in the Middle East, during which it heard a briefing from the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Oscar Fernandez-Taranco. The Assistant Secretary-General outlined the recent international efforts to create conditions under which negotiations between the parties could resume. He recalled that the Secretary-General and members of the Quartet had met in Trieste, Italy, on 26 June, and informed the Council that the members of the Quartet underlined the need for both parties to implement their obligations under the road map. He also emphasized that Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) remains the main framework for a way forward in Gaza. He called for a prompt and positive response to the Secretary-General's proposal for the entry of materials needed to complete construction of housing, health and education facilities suspended since 2007 as a means to kick-start recovery in Gaza. Following the briefing, statements were made by the observer of Palestine, the representative of Israel, Council members and 23 other Member States. Members of the Council reiterated their support for the ongoing efforts to reinvigorate the peace process in all its tracks and the convening of an international conference in Moscow. Lebanon In 2008 and 2009, there were positive developments, including the establishment of diplomatic relations between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. On 25 August 2008, a closed meeting was held with countries contributing troops to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The Council and the troop-contributing countries heard a briefing by the Director of the Asia and Middle East Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Wolfgang Weisbrod-Weber. Members of the Council, the Director and representatives of participating troop-contributing countries had an exchange of views. On 27 August, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1832 (2008), extending the mandate of UNIFIL until 31 August 2009, as recommended by the Secretary-General (S/2008/568) and requested by the Government of Lebanon. The Council asked all parties concerned to respect the cessation of hostilities, the Blue Line in its entirety, and the safety of UNIFIL and other United Nations personnel. The Council requested full cooperation to achieve the permanent ceasefire and the long-term solution envisioned in resolution 1701 (2006). The representatives of Israel and Lebanon participated in the consideration of the item. On 30 October, the Council heard a briefing on the Middle East from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), Terje Roed-Larsen. He presented to the Council the eighth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/654). He emphasized the importance of the comprehensive implementation of the resolution. Following the briefing, the Council held consultations of the whole, during which the members of the Council welcomed the progress so far in the implementation of the resolution. Members also encouraged all Lebanese parties to fully engage in the national dialogue process and to commit themselves to achieving meaningful progress. On 26 November, the Council was briefed by the Special Coordinator of the Secretary-General for Lebanon, Michael Williams, at consultations of the whole, at which it considered the Secretary-General's report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). On 4 December, in consultations of the whole, the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, the Legal Counsel, Patricia O'Brien, presented the Secretary-General's third report pursuant to resolution 1757 (2007) (S/2008/734) and briefed the members of the Council on steps taken by the Secretary-General towards the entry into operation of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The Council members reiterated their support for the establishment of the Special Tribunal. On 17 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1852 (2008) extending the mandate of the International Independent Investigation Commission until 28 February 2009, at the request of the Commissioner, Daniel Bellemare, and the Prime Minister of Lebanon, Fouad Siniora. The Commissioner presented the eleventh report of the Commission (S/2008/752) and noted that the investigation had made progress since the previous report, but indicated that it would continue even after the Special Tribunal was up and running on 1 March 2009. The Council also heard a statement by the representative of Lebanon, who expressed his Government's appreciation for the work of the Commission. In the consultations of the whole that followed, the members of the Council expressed their support for the work of the International Independent Investigation Commission and commended Mr. Bellemare for his work as Commissioner. The members of the Council also reiterated their support for the Secretary-General's efforts for the rapid establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and his call on Member States to contribute to its financing. On 1 March 2009, as had been conveyed to the Council by the Secretary-General in his letter to the President of 18 December 2008 (S/2008/824), and in accordance with resolution 1757 (2007), the Special Tribunal for Lebanon commenced operations at The Hague. On 3 March, following consultations of the whole, the President read out a statement to the press, in which Council members welcomed the functioning of the Tribunal, in order to bring to justice those responsible for assassinations and to end impunity, in accordance with the statute of the Tribunal. Council members commended the International Independent Investigation Commission and the Secretary-General for their efforts on the implementation of resolution 1757 (2007), and welcomed the United Nations commitment to ensure that the Tribunal would accomplish its mandate in an effective manner. Furthermore, they reiterated their support for the Tribunal and recalled resolution 1852 (2008), which underlined the importance of the full cooperation of Member States with the Office of the Prosecutor, in accordance with resolution 1757 (2007). On 10 March, the Council held consultations of the whole at which members were briefed by the Special Coordinator for Lebanon on the Secretary-General's report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2009/119). Council members also heard an update from the Director of the Asia and Middle East Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, who briefed the Council on the work of UNIFIL. On 7 May, the Council held a meeting to consider the Secretary-General's report on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), and was briefed by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. He noted that the domestic, political and security situation in Lebanon had improved markedly, creating a favourable environment for strengthening sovereignty, political independence and Government control throughout the country. The Special Envoy stated that the parliamentary elections to be held on 7 June would constitute a milestone in Lebanon's transition since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004). He stressed that the parties must continue to adhere to the Doha agreement, including the commitment to refrain from using weapons to settle internal political disputes. The Special Envoy informed the Council that the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon had nearly completed the process leading to full diplomatic relations. He also noted the lack of tangible process towards the disbanding and disarming of Lebanese and nonLebanese militias and confirmed that the process should occur through an inclusive political dialogue that addressed the political interests of all Lebanese people. He observed that the United Nations had no means to independently verify the reports about the illegal transfer of weapons across the Syrian border into Lebanon. He expressed concern at the continuation of provocative overflights of Lebanese territory. The briefing was followed by informal consultations. On 8 July, the Council held informal consultations on the situation in Lebanon, and was briefed by the Special Coordinator for Lebanon, who presented the report of the Secretary-General on resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2009/330). He highlighted the latest developments in Lebanon, in particular the parliamentary elections held on 7 June, the designation of Saad Hariri as Prime Minister, and the process towards the formation of a new government. He also reported on the establishment of full diplomatic relations between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic as one of the positive developments in the relations between the two countries, and noted that the next step to be taken would be the delineation of the common border between the two countries. He informed the Council about the current situation with regard to the outstanding implementation issues. The Council also received a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, who updated members on developments in the operational and security aspects of UNIFIL activities in its area of operation. Council members commended the progress made in the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), welcomed the successful parliamentary elections held on 7 June, and called on all parties to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006). On 23 July, the Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, on the recent developments in southern Lebanon following an incident involving an arms explosion on 14 July and the subsequent attacks on UNIFIL personnel during the ensuing investigation of the arms explosion. Members of the Council expressed concern over the recent events, condemned the incidents against UNIFIL personnel, called for there to be no infringement on the freedom of movement of UNIFIL within its area of operation, and noted that a joint UNIFIL-Lebanese Armed Forces investigation into the matter was ongoing. They also reiterated the need for the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) by all parties. On 10 December 2008, the Council held a private meeting with countries contributing troops to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), at which the participants were briefed about the developments relevant to the mandate of the Force. On the same day, during consultations, members of the Council heard a briefing by the Director of the Asia and Middle East Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Wolfgang Weisbrod-Weber, on the activities of UNDOF. Members of the Council expressed support for UNDOF and for the goal of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. On 12 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1848 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of UNDOF until 30 June 2009, together with an accompanying presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/46). On 19 June 2009, the Council held a private meeting with countries contributing troops to UNDOF, at which the participants were briefed about the recent developments relevant to its mandate. On the same day, during informal consultations, members of the Council heard a briefing by the Director of the Asia and Middle East Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the activities of UNDOF. After the briefing, members of the Council expressed support for UNDOF and for the goal of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. On 23 June, the Council adopted resolution 1875 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months until 30 December 2009, together with an accompanying presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/18). Europe Bosnia and Herzegovina On 20 November 2008, the Council held a public meeting on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and adopted resolution 1845 (2008), by which it authorized for a further year, until 21 November 2009, the European Union stabilization force (EUFOR) mandated to ensure continued compliance with the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Dayton Agreement) that ended fighting in that country in 1995. On 5 December, the Council held a debate on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Council was briefed by the High Representative for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Miroslav Lajčák, who presented his third report on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Council. The High Representative reported on progress achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the signing of a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union, though he noted that nationalist rhetoric threatened to dampen the momentum of positive trends. The Council also heard from the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Nikola Špirić, who concluded that 2008 was a successful year in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 25 March 2009, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1869 (2009), by which it welcomed and agreed with the designation by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council, on 13 March, of Valentin Inzko as the new High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. It reaffirmed the interpretative authority of the High Representative on civilian implementation of the Dayton Agreement, and underlined his role in pursuing such implementation, and in giving guidance to assist the parties to implement the Agreement. On 28 May, the Council held an open debate on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High Representative, Valentin Inzko, briefed the Council and presented the thirty-fifth report on the implementation of the Dayton Agreement (S/2009/246). Statements were made by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, representatives of the European Union presidency and Serbia. Cyprus On 4 September 2008, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/34), by which it welcomed the launch of fully fledged negotiations between the leaders of the Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots aimed at the reunification of Cyprus, as well as the appointment of Alexander Downer as Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for Cyprus. On 5 December, the Council held a private meeting with the countries contributing troops to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), at which the participants were briefed about the situation in Cyprus and developments relevant to the UNFICYP mandate there. Later that same day, the Council held closed consultations in which it considered the report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/744). Council members were briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNFICYP, Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, who informed the Council on the good progress of the fully fledged negotiations that were launched on 3 September 2008 and the prospect of a comprehensive and durable settlement for Cyprus they had created. On 12 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1847 (2008), in which it extended the mandate of UNFICYP until 15 June 2009. On 30 April 2009, the Council held informal consultations and was briefed by the Secretary-General's Special Adviser on Cyprus, who informed Council members that, in general terms, the negotiations between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot parties had been satisfactory. He emphasized that the final settlement of the conflict would have to be approved by both communities, through separate and simultaneous referendums. Thereafter, the Council held an open meeting at which the President made a statement on behalf of the Council (S/PRST/2009/10), in which the Council welcomed the progress made by the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders and reiterated its support for the good-offices mission of the Secretary-General. On 22 May, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General briefed the Council, in consultations of the whole, on UNFICYP, on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/248). The Special Representative noted the Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate of UNFICYP be extended until 15 December 2009 because, in the absence of a comprehensive settlement, UNFICYP continued to play a vital and unique role both as a stabilizing factor on the ground and as a source of substantive and administrative support. The consultations of the whole were preceded by a private meeting of the Council with the countries contributing troops to UNFICYP. On 29 May, the Council adopted resolution 1873 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of UNFICYP until 15 December 2009. The result of the Council's vote was 14 in favour to 1 against (Turkey). After the adoption, the representative of Turkey spoke in explanation of vote. Georgia On 7 August 2008, at the request of the Russian Federation, the Council convened consultations of the whole on the situation in Georgia. On 8 August, the Council held a debate in response to a letter dated 7 August 2008 from the representative of the Russian Federation (S/2008/533). The representative of Georgia submitted two letters (S/2008/534 and S/2008/535). In their interventions, members of the Council expressed their concern at events in Georgia and appealed to the parties for an immediate cessation of hostilities. On 8 August, a second debate was held by the Council in response to a letter of the same date from the representative of Georgia (S/2008/536) on the situation in Georgia. The representative of Finland, Kirsti Lintonen, in her capacity as representative of the Chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and the representative of Georgia participated in the debate. In their interventions, members of the Council expressed their deep concern about the deteriorating situation in Georgia and appealed to all parties concerned for restraint and an immediate cessation of hostilities. On 9 August, the Council held consultations of the whole concerning the situation in Georgia. The Council heard a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, on the situation in Georgia, in particular on the situation in and around the area of responsibility of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). Council members exchanged views on how to ensure that an immediate cessation of hostilities could be achieved. On 10 August, the Council held a debate in response to a letter of the same date from the representative of the United States of America on the situation in Georgia (S/2008/538). The representative of Georgia participated in the debate. The Council heard briefings by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, on the situation in Georgia and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the situation in and around the UNOMIG area of responsibility. In their interventions, Council members reiterated the urgent need for an immediate cessation of hostilities. On 11 August, the Council held a private debate in response to a letter of the same date from the representative of Georgia (S/2008/540). The representative of Georgia participated in the private debate. The Council heard briefings by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs on the situation in Georgia and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the situation in and around the UNOMIG area of responsibility. The members of the Council had an exchange of views on how to arrive at a ceasefire. On 19 August, the Council held a debate in response to a letter of the same date from the representative of France (S/2008/561). The Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs on the situation in Georgia and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the situation in and around the UNOMIG area of responsibility. Members of the Council discussed ways to ensure implementation by all the parties to the ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008. On 21 August, the Council held consultations of the whole at the request of the Russian Federation. The Council heard briefings by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs on the situation in Georgia and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the situation in and around the UNOMIG area of responsibility. On 28 August, the Council held consultations of the whole in response to a letter dated 27 August from the representative of Georgia (S/2008/587). Later the same day, the Council heard briefings by the Director of the Americas and Europe Division and Officer-in-Charge of the Department of Political Affairs, Elizabeth Spehar, on the situation in Georgia and the Officer-in-Charge of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, Wolfgang Weisbrod-Weber, on the situation in and around the UNOMIG area of responsibility. The representative of Georgia participated in the debate. Council members had an exchange of views on the situation in Georgia, specifically on the issue of the recognition by the Russian Federation of the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. On 9 September, one delegation introduced a draft resolution by which an arms embargo would be imposed against Georgia. No action was taken on that draft. On 9 October, the Council held a private meeting with the countries contributing troops to UNOMIG. In the consultations of the whole that followed, the Council heard a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the latest developments in Georgia. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNOMIG, Johan Verbeke, briefed the Council on his recent visit to Tbilisi and Sukhumi. Members of the Council expressed their views on the situation on the ground. Following the consultations, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1839 (2008), by which it extended the mandate of UNOMIG until 15 February 2009. On 27 October, during consultations of the whole, the Council heard a briefing from the Acting Director of the Europe and Latin America Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, David Harland, on recent developments. On 10 February 2009, the Council held a private meeting with troop-contributing countries, during which participants heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the latest developments in Georgia. After the private meeting, on the basis of the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/69), the Special Representative briefed the Council in consultations of the whole on the situation on the ground, followed by an exchange of views among members. On the same day, the Council again held consultations of the whole. On 13 February, following consultations of the whole, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1866 (2009), by which it extended the mandate of the United Nations mission until 15 June 2009. On 27 May, during consultations of the whole, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General briefed the Council on the proposal by the Secretary-General to establish a new mandate for the future United Nations presence as contained in his report (S/2009/254). Members of the Council welcomed the proposal and reiterated the need to maintain the United Nations presence in the region and to elaborate a new meaningful mandate of the United Nations mission. It was also emphasized that a revised and comprehensive security regime should constitute the core of any future United Nations presence, contributing to maintenance of peace and stability in the region. On 12 June, the Council held a private meeting with countries contributing troops to UNOMIG, during which the participants heard a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the latest developments in Georgia and activities of UNOMIG. On 15 June, the Council held two closed consultations to exchange views on a draft resolution, submitted by Austria, Croatia, France, Germany, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States, seeking to extend by two weeks the mandate of UNOMIG, which was to expire on the same day. The Council then proceeded to vote on the draft resolution, which received 10 votes in favour to 1 against (Russian Federation), with 4 abstentions (China, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Uganda, Viet Nam), and was not adopted. In view of this outcome, the Secretary-General instructed his Special Representative to take the measures required to cease the operations of UNOMIG. Kosovo On 6 August 2008, during consultations of the whole, Council members were briefed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, on the findings of the investigation into the events that occurred on 17 March in Mitrovica, Kosovo. The investigation, conducted by Francis Ssekandi, focused on evaluating the actions of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The investigation report confirmed that UNMIK acted within its mandate. On 26 November, the Council held a debate regarding the implementation of its resolution 1244 (1999) and considered the Secretary-General's report (S/2008/692) covering the activities of UNMIK and related developments. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNMIK, Lamberto Zannier, briefed the Council on the overall situation in Kosovo. He said the situation remained calm and stable, but the political transition following Kosovo's declaration of independence on 17 February was proving to be more complex than many observers had expected. The Council heard statements by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Vuk Jeremić, and Skender Hyseni, on behalf of Kosovo. The Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/44), in which it welcomed the report and stated that, taking into account the positions of Belgrade and Pristina on the report, which were reflected in their respective statements, it welcomed their intentions to cooperate with the international community. On 23 March 2009, the Council heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. He considered the previous four months as having been dynamic for Kosovo and UNMIK, with significant milestones yet also with the potential for volatility, although the situation remained substantially stable. He further stated that the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo had assumed full operational responsibility under the overall authority and within the framework of the United Nations. The Council also heard a statement by the President of Serbia, Boris Tadić, who emphasized that his country was a modern, non-threatening European democracy which was dedicated to resolving outstanding problems peacefully. The Council also heard statements by Skender Hyseni (Kosovo), who drew attention to the recent first anniversary of Kosovo's independence and welcomed the deployment of the European Union Mission. Statements were made by Council members. On 16 April, the Council held informal consultations and heard a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on the latest events relating to the situation in Kosovo and UNMIK. On 17 June, the Council held a public meeting to consider the Secretary-General's latest report covering the activities of UNMIK. In his briefing to the Council, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General stressed that the United Nations remained uniquely situated to play a useful role in Kosovo, by facilitating the resolution of problems as an intermediary between parties. He also said that, as the three-phased reconfiguration of UNMIK was winding up, the Mission was progressively shifting its focus towards an increasingly diplomatic and political role aimed at facilitating dialogue and fostering minority rights. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Skender Hyseni of Kosovo also participated in the meeting. Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe On 26 September 2008, at an open meeting, the Council heard a briefing from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Finland and current Chairman of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Alexander Stubb, on the activities of that organization and its cooperation with the Security Council, in particular in the context of conflict prevention and settlement. He also briefed the Council on Afghanistan, Georgia and Kosovo. On 27 February 2009, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece and Chairperson-in-Office of OSCE, Dora Bakoyannis, briefed the Council at a public meeting on the priorities and activities of OSCE, including its mission in Georgia, whose mandate had been extended following the decision of 12 February of the OSCE Permanent Council. The briefing was followed by an exchange of views among members. Thematic and general issues International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda On 29 September 2008, the Council adopted resolution 1837 (2008) by which it, inter alia, extended the terms of office of the permanent judges and the ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, until 31 December 2010 (for judges of the Appeals Chamber) and 31 December 2009 (for Trial Chamber and ad litem judges), or until the completion of their cases if sooner. On 12 December, the Council held a debate to hear a briefing on the completion strategy of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia by its President, Judge Patrick Robinson, and its Prosecutor, Serge Brammertz, and on the completion strategy of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda by its President, Judge Dennis Byron, and its Prosecutor, Hassan Bubacar Jallow. They presented their respective assessments of the implementation of the Tribunals' completion strategies (S/2008/729, S/2008/726). The Council members emphasized that the end of the mandate of the Tribunals should not signal that persons suspected of grave crimes were safe from justice. Members urged the Tribunals to continue to work on completing their respective mandates as early and as expeditiously as possible, without jeopardizing the fairness of the process. Ambassador Olivier Belle of Belgium, on behalf of the Chairman of the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, briefed the Council on the progress achieved by the Working Group on the issue of the establishment of residual mechanism(s) to carry out certain essential functions of the Tribunals after the closure of the Tribunals. The representatives of Rwanda, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kenya participated in the discussion. On the same day, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1849 (2008), authorizing the Secretary-General to appoint additional ad litem judges to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, temporarily exceeding the statutory maximum until 28 February 2009. On 19 December, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1855 (2008), by which it decided that the Secretary-General could appoint up to three additional ad litem judges to the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, temporarily exceeding the statutory maximum until 31 December 2009. The Council also adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/47), in which it took note of the presentations made on 12 December 2008 by the Presidents and Prosecutors of the Tribunals. The Council emphasized that trials must be conducted by the Tribunals as quickly and efficiently as possible, and reaffirmed the necessity of persons indicted by the Tribunals being brought to justice, calling on all States to intensify cooperation with the Tribunal. In that context, the referral of cases to competent national jurisdictions was reaffirmed as an essential part of the Tribunals' completion strategies. The Council further acknowledged the need to establish an ad hoc mechanism to carry out a number of essential functions of the Tribunals, including the trial of high-level fugitives, after the closure of the Tribunals. It expressed its appreciation to the Working Group for its work to date on the establishment of the mechanism and requested the Working Group to continue its efforts in that regard. In order to facilitate the further work of the Working Group, the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit a report on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the options for possible locations for the Tribunals' archives and the seat of the residual mechanism(s). On 4 June 2009, at a public meeting chaired by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, Ahmet Davutoğlu, the Council called on the International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda to continue to implement their completion strategies with maximum efficiency and to expedite the completion of all cases, without prejudice to due process and fair trial. After listening to the briefings by the Presidents and Prosecutors of the two Tribunals, members of the Council also stressed the importance of the international community continuing to work towards securing the arrests of the 15 individuals who had been indicted by the Tribunals but remained at large. The Council was also briefed by the representative of Austria, Thomas Mayr-Harting, in his capacity as Chairman of the Working Group. Members of the Council welcomed the progress on the work carried out by the Working Group concerning residual mechanism(s) and called on the Working Group to resolve the remaining outstanding issues as soon as possible. On 7 July, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1877 (2009), by which it, inter alia, decided to review the extension of the term of office of the permanent judges at the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia who are members of the Appeals Chamber by 31 December 2009; extended the term of office of specified permanent judges until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases to which they are assigned if sooner; extended the term of office of the permanent judges appointed to replace Iain Bonomy, Mohamed Shahabuddeen and Christine Van den Wyngaert until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases to which they will be assigned if sooner; extended the term of office of specified ad litem judges until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases to which they are assigned if sooner; and allowed ad litem judges Harhoff, Lattanzi, Mindua, Prandler and Trechsel to serve in the Tribunal beyond the cumulative period of service. On the same day, the Council also unanimously adopted resolution 1878 (2009), by which it, inter alia, decided to review the extension of the term of office of the permanent judges at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who are members of the Appeals Chamber by 31 December 2009; extended the term of office of specified permanent judges who are members of the Trial Chambers until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases to which they are assigned if sooner; extended the term of office of the permanent judge appointed to replace Sergei Aleckseevich Egorov until 31 December 2010, or until the completion of the cases to which he or she would be assigned if sooner; and extended the term of office of specified ad litem judges until 31 December 2010. Non-proliferation (Islamic Republic of Iran) On 11 September 2008, at a public meeting, the Council heard a briefing by the representative of Belgium, Jan Grauls, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), on nuclear activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran. On 27 September, the Council adopted resolution 1835 (2008) on nuclear activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran. On 10 December, the Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) presented the quarterly briefing on the work of the Committee. On 10 March 2009, the Council heard a briefing by the representative of Japan, Yukio Takasu, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), on the Committee's work, covering the period from 11 December 2008 to 10 March 2009. He briefed the Council on the implementation of sanctions imposed on the Islamic Republic of Iran, and emphasized that, during the reporting period, the Committee had received a number of reports and exchanged letters and notifications with States concerning their implementation of the sanctions. He informed the Council of the report of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on its programme during the technical cooperation cycle 2009-2011. The members of the Council who spoke after the presentation of the report underlined the importance of implementing resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008). On 15 June, the representative of Japan, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), presented to the Council the tenth quarterly report of the Committee, covering the period from 11 March to 15 June 2009. He mentioned the Committee's request for information from two Member States regarding a transfer of materiel that constituted a violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007). The members of the Council who spoke after the presentation of the report underlined the importance of implementing Council resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008) and noted with concern the findings of the most recent report of the Director General of IAEA. On 3 October 2008, in consultations of the whole, the representative of Italy, Giulio Terzi di Sant'Agata, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), presented his 90-day report in accordance with paragraph 12 (g) of resolution 1718 (2006), which covered the work of the Committee during the period from 3 July to 2 October 2008. On 12 February 2009, in consultations of the whole, the representative of Turkey, Baki İlkin, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), presented his 90day report in accordance with paragraph 12 (g) of resolution 1718 (2006), which covered the work of the Committee during the period from 10 October 2008 to 12 February 2009. On 5 April, the Council held informal consultations to discuss the launch by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Following the consultations, the President informed the press that the Council had met to discuss that critical situation and hear members' concerns. On 11 April, the Council held informal consultations to consider a draft presidential statement, following which the President briefed the press. On 13 April, at an open meeting held in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "Non-proliferation/Democratic People's Republic of Korea", the President read out a statement on behalf of the Council (S/PRST/2009/7), in which the Council condemned the launch by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on 5 April 2009; reiterated that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea must comply fully with its obligations under resolution 1718 (2006); demanded that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea not conduct any further launch; agreed to adjust the measures imposed in paragraph 8 of resolution 1718 (2006) through the designation of entities and goods; directed the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) to undertake its tasks to this effect; and called for the early resumption of the Six-Party Talks. On 24 April, the representative of Turkey, Baki İlkin, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), reported to the Council that the Committee had agreed to designate three entities and additional goods to be subject to the measures imposed in paragraph 8 of resolution 1718 (2006). On 13 May, the Council was briefed by the representative of Turkey in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), on its activities. On 25 May, during consultations of the whole, urgently convened at the request of the delegation of Japan, the members of the Council strongly condemned the nuclear test conducted by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on the same day, in a clear violation of resolution 1718 (2006). The members of the Council decided to start work immediately on a Security Council resolution on this matter in accordance with the Council's responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations. On 10 June, in closed consultations, the United States of America submitted a draft resolution regarding the nuclear test and the missile launches carried out by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on 25 May 2009 in violation of resolutions 1695 (2006) and 1718 (2006). The draft resolution was co-sponsored by France, Japan, the Republic of Korea and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. On 12 June, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1874 (2009), in which it condemned in the strongest terms the nuclear test conducted by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on 25 May 2009 and demanded that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea should not conduct any further nuclear test or any launch using ballistic missile technology. The Council also introduced financial measures, established new cargo inspection provisions, imposed additional restrictions on the supply to, and the export from, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of arms and related materiel, directed the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) to designate additional goods, entities and individuals, and established a Panel of Experts to help the Committee to monitor and improve implementation of the relevant measures. On 6 July, the Council held informal consultations on non-proliferation and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, during which Council members expressed their grave concern and condemned the firing of several missiles by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on 4 July, in yet another violation of relevant Council resolutions. They noted that the actions of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea had exacerbated the already heightened tension in the Korean peninsula. They called on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to comply with its international obligations as specified in relevant Council resolutions, including 1874 (2009), and called on all parties to refrain from any action that could aggravate the security situation in the region. The President of the Council made remarks to the press expressing condemnation and grave concern of members of the Council regarding the actions of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and emphasizing the importance of the completion of the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). Maintenance of international peace and security: mediation and settlement of disputes On 23 September 2008, under the chairmanship of the President of Burkina Faso, Blaise Compaoré, the Council held a high-level meeting on the item entitled "Maintenance of international peace and security: mediation and settlement of disputes". The meeting was attended by the Secretary-General, the Head of State of Panama, the Prime Minister of Croatia, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, South Africa, Indonesia, Italy and France, the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation, and the Minister of State for Africa, Asia and United Nations Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as well as the representatives of Viet Nam, the United States of America, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Costa Rica and China. In his opening remarks, President Compaoré stated that, by organizing the meeting, Burkina Faso wished to highlight the importance of mediation as a means of peaceful settlement of disputes. He stressed that successful mediation required the involvement of the parties to the conflict, impartial and knowledgeable mediators, proximity, priority of subregional and regional organizations, and the support of the international community, in particular the United Nations and the Security Council. The former Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Lakhdar Brahimi, appealed to the international community to promote mediation efforts. The Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/36), focusing on the importance of mediation. The Council requested the Secretary-General to ensure that all mediation activities undertaken within the United Nations system are in conformity with the Charter. It also noted the importance of women in the settlement of disputes, and requested the Secretary-General, when appointing mediators, to take the gender aspect into account. Finally, the Council requested the Secretary-General to report to it, within six months from the adoption of the presidential statement, on mediation and all relevant support activities, and to make recommendations to strengthen its effectiveness. On 21 April 2009, the Council held an open debate on the item entitled "Maintenance of international peace and security: mediation and settlement of disputes", and on the report of the Secretary-General on enhancing mediation and its support activities (S/2009/189). The Council was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, on the establishment of the Mediation Support Unit and a reserve pool of expert mediators; the importance of working with Member States, regional organizations and non-governmental organizations in efforts to mediate; and support activities for mediators in the planning and management of peace processes. At the end of the debate, the President made a statement on behalf of the Council (S/PRST/2009/8), in which it recognized the importance of mediation, which should be launched at the earliest possible phase of a conflict. It also emphasized the important role of the Secretary-General in promoting mediation, and welcomed the continued efforts by the Department of Political Affairs, in particular through the Mediation Support Unit, to respond to emerging and existing crises. The Council also recalled the important contribution of Member States, regional and subregional organizations, civil society and other stakeholders in the peaceful settlement of disputes. Maintenance of international peace and security: strengthening collective security and regulation of armaments On 19 November 2008, the Council held an open debate on the item entitled "Maintenance of international peace and security: strengthening collective security through general regulation and reduction of armaments", based on a letter dated 10 November 2008 from the representative of Costa Rica addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/697). The meeting was presided over by the President of Costa Rica and Nobel Peace Prize Laureate, Óscar Arias Sánchez. He noted that the meeting would focus on Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations, which gave the Council the responsibility to promote peace and security with the least diversion of resources for armaments by formulating plans for a system for the regulation of armaments. He underlined that the time had come to recognize the link between the waste of resources devoted to arms and the need for resources for development. The Council was addressed by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Sergio Duarte, who read a statement by the Secretary-General, stressing that the strengthening of collective security could build trust between States and pave the way for agreements and cooperation in other fields. Council members underlined the complex relationship between disarmament and development. The Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/43), in which it stressed that the regulation and reduction of armaments and armed forces constituted one of the most important measures to promote international peace and security with the least diversion of the world's human and economic resources. The Council also stressed the importance of an effective multilateral system to better address the challenges and threats confronting the world. Coordinated reports by Chairmen of counter-terrorism committees On 12 November 2008, the Council held a debate and was briefed by the Chairmen of its three subsidiary bodies dealing with counter-terrorism, namely, the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, chaired by the representative of Belgium, Jan Grauls; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, chaired by the representative of Croatia, Neven Jurica; and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), chaired by the representative of Costa Rica, Jorge Urbina. In accordance with resolutions 1805 (2008), 1810 (2008) and 1822 (2008), the Committees presented their 180-day reports, which covered their work during the past six months. The representative of Costa Rica also made a statement on behalf of all three Chairmen, briefing the Council on ongoing cooperation among the three Committees and their bodies of experts. On 26 May 2009, the Council was briefed by the Chairmen of the three subsidiary bodies on counter-terrorism, updating the Council on their work since the last such briefing to the Council. The representative of Austria, Thomas Mayr-Harting, briefed the Council in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). The representative of France, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, briefed the Council in his capacity as Acting Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), and the representative of Costa Rica, Jorge Urbina, briefed the Council in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The representative of Austria also made a statement on behalf of all three Chairmen, briefing the Council on ongoing cooperation among the three Committees and their bodies of experts. He presented an updated comparative table, highlighting the respective mandates of the three Committees and their experts. Briefing by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies On 15 December 2008, the Council was briefed by five outgoing representatives in their capacities as Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Council. The representative of Belgium, Jan Grauls, reported on the activities of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire; and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), concerning non-proliferation and the Islamic Republic of Iran. The representative of Indonesia, R. M. Marty M. Natalegawa, reported on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 918 (1995) concerning Rwanda; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. The representative of Italy, Giulio Terzi di Sant'Agata, reported on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) concerning non-proliferation/ Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The representative of Panama, Ricardo Alberto Arias, reported on the activities of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. The representative of South Africa, Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo, reported on the work of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia, and the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. On 29 April 2009, the Council held an open debate, presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Patricia Espinosa Cantellano, to consider the report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2009/158). The Council heard a statement by the Secretary-General and the report was introduced by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy. She reiterated the report's recommendation that broader criteria should be used for the inclusion of groups in the annexes to the reports of the Secretary-General. The Council also heard statements by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ann Veneman, and a former child soldier from Uganda, Grace Akallo. Statements were made by Council members and representatives of 58 other Member States, in which they expressed concern over the continuing recruitment and use of children in armed conflict in violation of international humanitarian law, the killing and maiming of children, rape and other sexual violence against children, their abduction, the denial of access of children to humanitarian aid, and attacks against schools. At the end of the debate, the President made a statement on behalf of the Council (S/PRST/2009/9), in which the Council indicated its intention to take action within three months on new criteria for including in the annexes to the Secretary-General's reports those parties that commit acts against children prohibited under international law. On 14 January 2009, the Council held an open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and was briefed by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes. The Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/1) and the updated aide-memoire on the protection of civilians in armed conflict contained in the annex to the presidential statement, which serves as a means to facilitate the consideration by the Council of issues pertaining to the protection of civilians. The Council reiterated the importance of the aide-memoire as a practical tool that provides a basis for improved analysis and diagnosis of key protection issues, particularly during deliberations on peacekeeping mandates. The Council stressed the need to implement the approaches set out therein on a more regular and consistent basis, taking into account the particular circumstances of each conflict situation. On 26 June, the Council held an open debate to discuss the Secretary-General's report on protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277). The Council heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, who gave a detailed account of the sufferings of millions of civilians trapped in armed conflict or forced into flight. He said that, despite certain progress in the past 10 years, particularly with respect to the Council's involvement, the situation on the ground remained largely unchanged, with civilians continuing to bear the brunt of the armed conflicts, and that much greater efforts were required to enhance compliance with the applicable laws and accountability on the part of those who failed to do so. During the ensuing debate, in which more than 40 delegations participated, speakers stressed the need for all parties to conflict to respect international humanitarian law and provide safe and unhindered access for humanitarian aid. On 29 October 2008, the Council held an open debate on women and peace and security, at which the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, presented an update on progress in the contribution of women to the prevention and resolution of conflicts and peacebuilding. The Council was also briefed by the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women, Rachel Mayanja, on the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2008/622). At the end of the debate, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/39), in which it recognized the need to facilitate the full and effective participation of women in peace processes and peacebuilding, and urged Member States and international, regional and subregional organizations to take measures to increase the participation of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and peacebuilding. It also called upon the Secretary-General to appoint more women to pursue good offices on his behalf. On 21 October 2008, during an open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, the Council invited the representative of Japan, Yukio Takasu, in his capacity as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission, to introduce the report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its second session (S/2008/417). The Council also heard statements by the representatives of Bangladesh, El Salvador, Guinea-Bissau, the Netherlands, Norway and Sierra Leone. The Council members commended the Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office for their work in the second year of operation. They encouraged the Commission to further improve its working methods so as to assist the countries concerned in delivering peace dividends on the ground. They supported the Commission's intention to strengthen its coordination and cooperation with relevant stakeholders, to better implement its mandates. The Council members also extended their support for strengthening interaction between the Council and the Commission. On 27 February 2009, in consultations of the whole, the representative of the Peacebuilding Support Office, Sally Fegan-Wyles, updated the Council on the status of the preparation of the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict, which was requested in the statement by the President of the Council of 20 May 2008 (S/PRST/2008/16). She informed the Council that the final report would be issued by the end of May. On 22 July, the Council held an open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding, presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda, Sam Kutesa. In his opening remarks, the Minister said that the task before the Council was to consider and refine strategies through which the United Nations, and the international community, could effectively support countries emerging from conflict to move towards sustainable peace, reconstruction, economic recovery and development. He noted that peacebuilding was premised on the fact that, without peace, development is not possible and yet, without development, peace is not durable. The Secretary-General presented his report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). He emphasized that peacebuilding entailed much more than ending war; it was about putting into place the institutions and trust that would carry people forward into a peaceful future. He said that, time and again, war-ravaged people had asked for help in establishing security and safety, restoring basic services and core Government functions, supporting a political transition and jump-starting economic recovery. The representative of Chile, Heraldo Muñoz, in his capacity as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission, said that the Commission would support national Governments in managing the difficult process of establishing clear and attainable peacebuilding priorities, working closely with United Nations country staff to ensure coordination and avoid duplication. The Council also heard a statement by the Director of the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery of the United Nations Development Programme, Jordan Ryan, who said that effective and quick peacebuilding action was essential if countries emerging from conflict were to succeed in meeting the Millennium Development Goals. He stressed the importance of effectively linking short-term peacebuilding activities with long-term recovery and development. The Director of the Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries Group of the World Bank, Alistair McKechnie, stressed the need for financial accountability to maintain long-term predictable financial support. He noted that often the highest priority is personal security, justice and ending impunity, and not the easier public services. Statements were made by participants including the Minister for Africa, Asia and the United Nations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Lord Malloch-Brown; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar; the Deputy Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa, Ebrahim Ismail Ebrahim; the Minister Delegate in Charge of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, Victims of War, Disarmament and Restructuring of the Army of the Central African Republic, Jean-Francis Bozizé; Council members, and representatives of 23 Member States. At the end of the debate, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/23), in which it emphasized the importance of national ownership and the need for national authorities to take responsibility for the early re-establishment of the institutions of Government, restoring the rule of law, revitalizing the economy, reforming the security sector, providing basic services and other key peacebuilding needs. The Council stressed the importance of greater coordination with the World Bank, other international financial institutions, and Member States in providing rapid, flexible and predictable funding. It reaffirmed the central role of regional and subregional organizations in peacebuilding. The Council requested the Secretary-General to report within 12 months to the Security Council and the General Assembly on progress achieved in fulfilling his agenda for action to improve the United Nations peacebuilding efforts, taking into consideration the views of the Peacebuilding Commission. On 13 August 2008, the members of the Council agreed on a statement to the press (SC/9422), condemning in the strongest terms the terrorist attack in the Lebanese town of Tripoli on 13 August, which caused numerous deaths and injuries, including to members of the Lebanese Armed Forces. The Council members underlined the need for all States to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of terrorism to justice, in accordance with obligations under international law and resolution 1373 (2001) and consistent with resolution 1624 (2005). The Council recalled the need to put an end to impunity in Lebanon and emphasized the importance of the unity of all the Lebanese people. On 19 August, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/31), in which it condemned in the strongest terms the terrorist suicide attack that occurred in Les Issers, Algeria, on 19 August. The Council underlined the need to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of the reprehensible act of terrorism to justice, and urged all States, in accordance with their obligations under international law and resolution 1373 (2001) and consistent with resolution 1624 (2005), to cooperate with the Algerian authorities to combat, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts. On 21 August, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/32), in which it condemned in the strongest terms the twin suicide terrorist attacks that occurred in Wah Cantt, Pakistan, on the same day. The Council underlined the need to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of terrorism to justice, and urged all States, in accordance with their obligations under international law and resolution 1373 (2001) and consistent with resolution 1624 (2005), to cooperate with the Pakistani authorities to combat, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts. Following the terrorist attacks perpetrated respectively in Lebanon (10 and 29 September), Pakistan (20 September), Spain (20 and 21 September) and the Syrian Arab Republic (27 September), the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/35) and statements to the press to condemn those attacks and to express its solidarity with the families of the victims, and the people and Governments of those countries. On 27 November, the President of the Council, on behalf of the Council members, read out a statement to the press (SC/9513), condemning the terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India, that started on 26 November, which included the taking of hostages and caused numerous deaths and injuries. The members of the Council expressed their condolences to the families of the victims and to the people and Government of India. On 9 December, the President of Croatia, Stjepan Mesić, chaired an open debate on threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts. The Council was briefed by the Secretary-General. In advance of the meeting, Croatia had circulated a concept paper (S/2008/738), focusing on revitalizing and strengthening international solidarity in combating the threat of terrorism, including the strengthening of the leading role of the United Nations in global counter-terrorism efforts. The Secretary-General stressed that, as a leading threat to international security, terrorism had to be one of the international community's main priorities. The Secretary-General emphasized that the international community needed to defend the human rights that terrorism so brutally violates, and urged the defence of values enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. He noted that the General Assembly's adoption of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006 was a landmark event, and United Nations mechanisms, such as the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and subsidiary bodies of the Council, were also important parts of the picture. The Secretary-General stated that, while it was more apparent than ever that the United Nations had become a deliberate target in Baghdad, Algeria and Somalia, those tragedies had neither deterred its will nor its ability to serve the international community. Following the briefing, statements were made by representatives of 46 States, members of the Security Council and non-members, in which they reaffirmed their commitment to pursue the struggle against terrorism. Many speakers noted that their countries had experienced this scourge, and agreed with the need for a revitalized and unified anti-terrorism effort and the need for a multidimensional approach. Many Council members also stressed the need for political and developmental initiatives to deal with conditions conducive to terrorism, as well as a renewed combat against money-laundering, drug trafficking and other networks that aided global terrorism. At the end of the debate, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/45), in which it reiterated its condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and emphasized the central role of the United Nations in the global struggle against terrorism. Furthermore, the Council expressed support for the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It emphasized the need to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding among civilizations, condemned incitement to terrorist acts and reaffirmed the importance of countering radicalization and extremism. On 11 June 2009, in consultations of the whole, the Council made an interim review of the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, pursuant to resolution 1805 (2008). Ambassador Jean-Pierre Lacroix of France, in his capacity as Acting Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, presented the report of the Committee to that effect and the Director of the Executive Directorate, Mike Smith, also briefed the Council. The members of the Council expressed their appreciation for the valuable work undertaken by the Executive Directorate since March 2008 and supported the content of the aforementioned report. Following the meeting, the President of the Council made brief remarks to the press, reaffirming the grave threat posed by terrorism, stressing the Council's commitment to fight this scourge, underlining the importance of coordination and cooperation among the three subsidiary bodies of the Council dealing with counter-terrorism, and appreciating the Executive Directorate's contribution to the Counter-Terrorism Committee in monitoring and promoting the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). On 17 July, following the terrorist attacks that occurred in Jakarta on the same day, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/22), in which it condemned in the strongest terms those terrorist attacks. The Council underlined the need to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers and sponsors of those reprehensible acts of terrorism to justice, and urged all States, in accordance with their obligations under international law and relevant Security Council resolutions, to cooperate actively with the Indonesian authorities in this regard. Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) On 18 August 2008, at a formal meeting, the Council heard a briefing by the representative of Costa Rica, Jorge Urbina, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). In its report to the Council (S/2008/493) the Committee noted the progress achieved, and highlighted the tasks that remained to be performed. Other matters Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) On 27 August 2008, an open debate was held on the working methods of the Council in response to a letter dated 4 August 2008 from the representative of Belgium to the Secretary-General transmitting a concept paper (S/2008/528). The concept paper stated that the purpose of the debate was to assess the implementation of the measures set out in the note by the President (S/2006/507), identifying the improvements achieved while simultaneously stressing the challenges that still needed to be tackled. The debate was organized at the request of Costa Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland (the "Small Five" group) (see S/2008/418). The Secretary-General stated that it was essential for the Security Council to keep addressing issues related to its working methods, owing to its increasingly complex responsibilities and a growing array of new challenges in the maintenance of international peace and security. The debate, in which 47 countries actively participated, focused on making the Council more efficient, effective, transparent, accountable and accessible. Many speakers reiterated the need for finding the right balance among these aspects and noted the role of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in further improving the working methods of the Council. International Court of Justice On 28 October 2008, the Council, at a private meeting, heard a briefing from the President of the International Court of Justice, Judge Rosalyn Higgins, on the work of the Court in relation to the work of the Council. On 6 November, the Council and the General Assembly, at simultaneous and separate meetings, reelected two judges whose terms were due to expire and chose three new judges to serve on the International Court of Justice. The five elected judges were Ronny Abraham (France), Awn Shawkat AlKhasawneh (Jordan), Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade (Brazil), Christopher Greenwood (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) and Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf (Somalia). Statement at the solemn meeting in observance of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People On 24 November 2008, the President of the Security Council made a statement, on behalf of the Council members, at the solemn meeting in observance of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. In his remarks, the President said that the international community was witnessing a series of constructive efforts and initiatives undertaken by relevant actors in the region and beyond, which the Council strongly hoped would advance the process towards achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. While some progress had been made in the year since the Annapolis Conference with the resumption of direct, bilateral negotiations, the situation on the ground remained a serious concern. Among other things, the President of the Council stressed that, to make progress, the parties must avoid actions that undermined confidence and could prejudice the outcomes of negotiations. On 30 October 2008, the Council held a public meeting to adopt its annual report to the General Assembly, covering the period from 1 August 2007 to 31 July 2008. The introduction to the report was prepared by the delegation of Viet Nam, as presidency of the Council in July 2008. The body of the report was prepared by the Secretariat. The decision was reflected in a note (S/2008/678) by the President of the Council. On 18 November, as previously agreed by the other members of the Council, the President of the Council presented to the General Assembly the annual report of the Security Council, covering the period from 1 August 2007 to 31 July 2008 (A/63/2). On behalf of all members of the Council, the President of the Council stated that the annual report demonstrated the diverse array of issues that the Council discussed during the reporting period. Bureaux of subsidiary bodies and members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission On 6 January 2009, in consultations of the whole, the Council elected new bureaux for its subsidiary bodies for 2009. A note by the President of the Council describing the composition was circulated later (S/2009/2). On the same day, the Council elected Burkina Faso and Mexico as members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for a one-year term starting on 1 January 2009, in addition to the five permanent members of the Council. On 8 January 2009, at an open meeting, the Council was briefed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, António Guterres, on the situation of refugees and internally displaced persons. The High Commissioner commented on recent trends in forced displacement. He pointed out that forced displacement was often the result of threats to international peace and security. He presented three challenges for the international community, namely, the role of peacekeeping in the protection of civilians, the concurrent needs to ensure staff security and to deliver humanitarian protection and assistance, and the difficulty of preserving humanitarian space in the context of an integrated United Nations presence. Council members welcomed the briefing by the High Commissioner and expressed the wish to increase the frequency of such briefings. Peacekeeping operations On 22 January 2009, at the Mission of France, Council members held an informal seminar on peacekeeping operations, chaired jointly by France and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The former Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Jean-Marie Guéhenno; the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy; the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, Susana Malcorra; the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet; the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia and Head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia, Ellen Margrethe Løj; and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Hédi Annabi, attended. The Executive Director of the Security Council Report, Colin Keating, and the Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University, Bruce Jones, were also present. The discussion, for which a joint Franco-British non-paper had provided background, focused on the current challenges to peacekeeping operations, and on a proposal for a method to address them in the Council. Three broad series of issues were identified, namely, effective strategic oversight, resource constraints, and lessons learned from implementation. France and the United Kingdom proposed to address them as a priority in the coming months, in close contact with the Secretariat and the main stakeholders, and to take stock of progress by August 2009. On 23 January, the Council held a debate on peacekeeping operations. In addition to Council members, speakers included the Under-Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support, the Special Representative for Haiti, representatives of major troop contributors across geographic regions (India, Pakistan, Jordan, Uruguay), and representatives of regional organizations (European Union and African Union) and of the Non-Aligned Movement. The participants welcomed the Franco-British initiative to address the challenges of peacekeeping. In addition to issues already raised on 22 January, they stressed, in particular, the need to reinforce dialogue among the main actors, particularly with troop-contributing countries, at all stages of the preparation, conduct and evaluation of operations. On 29 June, the Council held a thematic debate on the reform of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, with the participation of major troop- and police-contributing countries, and including the European Union, the African Union, and the NonAligned Movement. The Council was briefed by the Under-Secretaries-General for Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support on their joint review of the United Nations peacekeeping system and its expected outcome, in the form of a non-paper entitled "A new partnership agenda: charting a new horizon for United Nations peacekeeping". In the debate that followed, in which 35 delegations spoke, there was a broad consensus among the Member States on many issues concerning the United Nations peacekeeping mechanisms, and participants underlined their strong support for the reform initiatives. All speakers stressed the necessity of a comprehensive reform agenda, featuring all aspects of the peacekeeping machinery, including the political-strategic, administrative, financial and operational levels, as well as the need to strengthen coordination and cooperation among all stakeholders, in particular between the Security Council, the troop- and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat. Private debate on the maintenance of international peace and security: respect for international humanitarian law On 29 January 2009, during a private debate, the Council considered the issue of respect for international humanitarian law. The Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, the Legal Counsel, Patricia O'Brien; the Head of the New York Delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Dominique Buff; the Director of the New York Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Pierre Bertrand; the Director of the New York Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Jessica Neuwirth; and the Chief of the Policy Development and Studies Branch of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Hansjoerg Strohmeyer, briefed the Council on the subject. The members of the Council expressed concern over the increase in the number of violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, and stressed the need for all parties to conflict to respect international humanitarian law. Briefing by the Secretary-General On 9 February 2009, the Council held consultations of the whole to hear a briefing from the Secretary-General on his recent visit to the African Union summit and several countries in the Middle East and South Asia. The Secretary-General touched upon the situations in Somalia, the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Zimbabwe, Guinea, Mauritania, Madagascar, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Iraq and Gaza, as well as other countries and areas. Security Council retreat The Council held its annual retreat on 20 and 21 March 2009 with the Secretary-General to consider the issue of peacekeeping. I Resolution number Date of adoption Subject 4 August 2008 7 August 2008 19 August 2008 27 August 2008 The situation in the Middle East (UNIFIL) 22 September 2008 24 September 2008 27 September 2008 29 September 2008 7 October 2008 9 October 2008 14 October 2008 15 October 2008 29 October 2008 20 November 2008 2 December 2008 12 December 2008 The situation in the Middle East (UNDOF) 16 December 2008 17 December 2008 19 December 2008 International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994 22 December 2008 8 January 2009 14 January 2009 16 January 2009 23 January 2009 Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2006/920) 27 January 2009 13 February 2009 26 February 2009 23 March 2009 25 March 2009 30 April 2009 26 May 2009 29 May 2009 12 June 2009 23 June 2009 26 June 2009 7 July 2009 23 July 2009 30 July 2009 Statements made and/or issued by the President of the Security Council during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Statement by the President Date S/PRST/2008/29 S/PRST/2008/30 S/PRST/2008/31 S/PRST/2008/32 21 August 2008 S/PRST/2008/33 4 September 2008 S/PRST/2008/34 S/PRST/2008/35 S/PRST/2008/36 23 September 2008 S/PRST/2008/37 S/PRST/2008/38 21 October 2008 S/PRST/2008/39 S/PRST/2008/40 S/PRST/2008/41 30 October 2008 S/PRST/2008/42 7 November 2008 S/PRST/2008/43 19 November 2008 Maintenance of international peace and security: strengthening collective security through general regulation and reduction of armaments S/PRST/2008/44 26 November 2008 S/PRST/2008/45 9 December 2008 S/PRST/2008/46 S/PRST/2008/47 S/PRST/2008/48 S/PRST/2009/1 S/PRST/2009/2 3 March 2009 S/PRST/2009/3 18 March 2009 S/PRST/2009/4 6 April 2009 S/PRST/2009/5 7 April 2009 S/PRST/2009/6 9 April 2009 S/PRST/2009/7 13 April 2009 S/PRST/2009/8 21 April 2009 S/PRST/2009/9 29 April 2009 S/PRST/2009/10 S/PRST/2009/11 5 May 2009 S/PRST/2009/12 S/PRST/2009/13 8 May 2009 S/PRST/2009/14 11 May 2009 S/PRST/2009/15 15 May 2009 S/PRST/2009/16 S/PRST/2009/17 18 June 2009 S/PRST/2009/18 S/PRST/2009/19 9 July 2009 S/PRST/2009/20 10 July 2009 S/PRST/2009/21 15 July 2009 S/PRST/2009/22 17 July 2009 S/PRST/2009/23 22 July 2009 Symbol S/PV.5954 11 August 2008 S/PV.5965 25 August 2008 S/PV.5972 9 September 2008 S/PV.5975 19 September 2008 S/PV.5989 8 October 2008 S/PV.5991 United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia S/PV.6002 28 October 2008 S/PV.6023 S/PV.6032 5 December 2008 S/PV.6035 10 December 2008 S/PV.6044 15 December 2008 S/PV.6070 21 January 2009 S/PV.6078 29 January 2009 S/PV.6081 10 February 2009 S/PV.6109 22 April 2009 S/PV.6110 23 April 2009 S/PV.6126 22 May 2009 S/PV.6129 27 May 2009 United Nations Integrated Mission in S/PV.6136 5 June 2009 S/PV.6140 S/PV.6146 19 June 2009 S/PV.6166 S/PV.6169 24 July 2009 Meeting Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (S/2008/281) 6 August 2008 Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1770 (2007) (S/2008/495) 8 August 2008 Letter dated 7 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/533) Letter dated 8 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/536) 10 August 2008 Letter dated 9 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/537) Letter dated 10 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/538) Letter dated 11 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Georgia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/540) 18 August 2008 Letter dated 8 July 2008 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/493) Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2008/485) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2008/466) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (S/2008/501) Letter dated 19 August 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/561) 20 August 2008 26 August 2008 Letter dated 21 August 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/568) Letter dated 4 August 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2008/528) 28 August 2008 11 September 2008 Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) 18 September 2008 Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (S/2008/601) Letter dated 3 September 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Burkina Faso to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2008/590) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (S/2008/601 and Add.1) 26 September 2008 Briefing by the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Letter dated 4 September 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Finland to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/594) Letter dated 22 September 2008 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/615) Seventeenth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Liberia (S/2008/553) Letter dated 24 September 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/621) Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country (S/2008/628) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2008/586) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia (S/2008/631) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security (S/2008/617) Report of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2008/417) 22 October 2008 23 October 2008 Note verbale dated 3 October 2008 from the Permanent Mission of Djibouti to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/635) 27 October 2008 Eighteenth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (S/2008/645) Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/659) Letter dated 8 October 2008 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/598) Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2008/622) Letter dated 15 October 2008 from the Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2008/655) Consideration of the draft report of the Security Council to the General Assembly Eighth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) (S/2008/654) 5 November 2008 Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2008/662) 6 November 2008 Election of five members of the International Court of Justice (S/2008/502, S/2008/503 and Add.1 and 2 and S/2008/504) Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations assistance in support of its peace process (S/2008/670) 12 November 2008 14 November 2008 Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008) (S/2008/688) Strengthening collective security through general regulation and reduction of armaments Letter dated 10 November 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/697) Letter dated 31 October 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/703) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2008/709) Letter dated 13 November 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/705) 25 November 2008 Fourth special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2008/728) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2008/692) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic and the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country (S/2008/733) 3 December 2008 4 December 2008 Briefing by the head of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan Letter dated 26 November 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2008/738) 11 December 2008 Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (S/2008/745) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus (S/2008/744) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/2008/737) Letter dated 5 December 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/767) Letter dated 21 November 2008 from the President of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/729) Letter dated 21 November 2008 from the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/726) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (S/2008/760) Letter dated 2 December 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/752) 18 December 2008 Letter dated 10 December 2008 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/769) Letter dated 12 December 2008 from the Acting Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/785) Letter dated 18 December 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/799) Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/781) Fourth special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2008/728 and Add.1) Letter dated 10 December 2008 from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/773) 31 December 2008 Letter dated 31 December 2008 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/842) Letter dated 31 December 2008 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/843) 6 and 7 January 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (S/2008/760 and Add.1) Letter dated 11 September 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/602) 15 January 2009 Letter dated 19 December 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/804) Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations assistance in support of its peace process (S/2009/1) Nineteenth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (S/2009/21) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office for West Africa (S/2009/39) 5 February 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2009/61) 9 February 2009 First report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2009/59) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1839 (2008) (S/2009/69) 17 February 2009 18 February 2009 19 February 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (S/2009/72) Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008) (S/2009/102) 27 February 2009 Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 10 March 2009 Letter dated 3 March 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/128) Identical letters dated 24 December 2008 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council (S/2008/813) 19 March 2009 Briefing by the Security Council mission to Haiti (11 to 14 March 2009) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security (S/2009/135) 20 March 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/132) Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 1846 (2008) (S/2009/146) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2009/149) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2009/129) 8 April 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country (S/2009/169) Twenty-seventh report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2009/160) Letter dated 4 April 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/176) 20 April 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on enhancing mediation and its support activities (S/2009/189) 24 April 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (S/2009/199) 27 April 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2009/201) 28 April 2009 Twentieth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (S/2009/196) Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2009/158) Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2009/211) Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara (S/2009/200 and Corr.1) Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations assistance in support of its peace process (S/2009/221) 7 May 2009 Ninth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) (S/2009/218) Letter dated 6 May 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/232) 13 May 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia pursuant to Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) (S/2009/210) 28 May 2009 Letter dated 13 May 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/246) Briefing by the Security Council mission to Africa (14 to 21 May 2009) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus (S/2009/248) 4 June 2009 Letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/252) Letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994 addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/247) 8 June 2009 Second report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2009/267) 9 June 2009 Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (S/2009/270) 11 June 2009 Letter dated 25 May 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/271) 15 June 2009 Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1808 (2008), 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009) (S/2009/254) 17 June 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (S/2009/300) Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008) (S/2009/284) 22 June 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country (S/2009/309) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (S/2009/295) Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country (S/2009/302) Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277) 29 June 2009 30 June 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security (S/2009/323) Letter dated 19 June 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/333) Letter dated 26 June 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/334) Letter dated 7 July 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/336) Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office for West Africa (S/2009/332) Twenty-eighth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2009/335) 13 July 2009 16 July 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) Report of the Secretary-General on the request of Nepal for United Nations assistance in support of its peace process (S/2009/351) Twenty-first progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (S/2009/344) Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2009/297) Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2009/352) 27 July 2009 28 July 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (S/2009/359) 29 July 2009 Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2009/373) Meetings of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council held during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Sixty-sixth session 21 and 22 October 2008 Sixty-seventh session 28 and 29 April 2009 Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia Informal consultations/meetings 9 September; 9 December 2008; 20 January; 24 March; 21 July 2009 Formal/plenary meetings 20 October 2008 (38th); 9 February 2009 (39th) 8 and 15 September; 6, 13, 20, 22 and 28 October; 10, 17 and 24 November; 1 and 17 December 2008; 19 January; 2 and 23 February; 9 and 30 March; 27 April; 4 and 12 May; 1, 8, 19 and 29 June; 13, 20 and 30 July 2009 Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism 18 September (207th); 20 October (208th); 30 October (209th); 13 November (210th); 11 December 2008 (211th); 22 January (212th); 12 February (213th); 26 February (214th); 5 March (215th); 19 March (216th); 30 April (217th); 7 May (218th); 18 June (219th); 9 July (220th); 16 July 2009 (221st) 3 October 2008; 22 January; 19, 21 and 28 May; 16 July 2009 Meetings of Sub-Committee A 28 August; 20 November; 22 December 2008; 5 and 11 February; 12 March; 1 April; 15 May; 2 and 10 June 2009 Meetings of Sub-Committee B 3 December 2008; 6 and 11 February; 12 March; 2 April; 29 May; 11 and 25 June 2009 Meetings of Sub-Committee C 20 January; 6 and 11 February; 13 March; 3 April; 11 May; 12 and 26 June; 14 and 27 July 2009 Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia 31 October; 26 November; 5 and 12 December 2008; 9 January; 13 February; 1 May; 5 and 16 June; 29 July 2009 Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo 13 August; 10 December 2008; 30 January; 11 March; 13 May 2009 27 August (23rd); 16 October 2008 (24th) Informal consultations/meetings (including working groups) 5, 12 and 14 August; 28 and 31 October; 10 November; 5 and 12 December 2008; 16, 20 and 28 January; 4, 9, 12 and 25 February; 27 April; 27 May; 3 and 23 June 2009 19 September; 8 October 2008; 15 January; 27 March; 8 April; 14 May; 15 July 2009 5 September; 10 October; 4 November; 2 and 12 December 2008; 27 January; 3 March; 28 April; 26 May; 8 July 2009 Formal meetings 24 April (2nd);15 July (3rd);16 July 2009 (4th) 15 and 20-24 April; 19 June; 1, 7, 9, 10 and 13-16 and 30 July 2009 10 September; 15 October 2008 25 February; 29 April; 9 and 19 June; 17 July 2009 13 November; 1 December 2008; 17 March; 18 June 2009 5 September; 14 November; 19 December 2008; 24 February; 1 July 2009 17 September; 17 and 29 October; 24 November; 2 and 10 December 2008; 14 May; 28 July 2009 28 August; 2, 4, 10 and 18 September; 15, 20 and 27-31 October; 5 and 18 November; 11 December 2008; 4, 11 and 25 February; 4, 12 and 18 March; 15 and 23 April; 6, 15 and 20 May; 1, 4, 12, 22 and 24 June; 1, 7 and 9 July 2009 A. Annual reports of committees S/2008/806 S/2009/94 S/2008/848 S/2009/79 S/2009/236 S/2008/832 S/2008/829 Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire S/2008/840 Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan S/2008/830 S/2008/839 B. Annual reports of working groups S/2008/836 S/2008/849 S/2009/378 S/2009/398 Date submitted In response to Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities: Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team S/2009/245 Resolution 1822 (2008) Côte d'Ivoire: Group of Experts S/2008/598 Resolution 1782 (2007) S/2009/188 Resolution 1842 (2008) Democratic Republic of the Congo: Group of Experts S/2008/772 Resolution 1807 (2008) S/2008/773 S/2009/253 14 May 2009 Resolution 1857 (2008) Liberia: Panel of Experts S/2008/785 Resolution 1819 (2008) S/2009/290 Resolution 1854 (2008) Somalia: Monitoring Group S/2008/769 Resolution 1811 (2008) Sudan: Panel of Experts S/2008/647 Resolution 1779 (2007) Report S/2008/782 Report of the Security Council mission to Afghanistan, 21 to 28 November 2008 S/2009/175 3 April 2009 Report of the Security Council mission to Haiti, 11 to 14 March 2009 S/2009/303 Report of the Security Council mission to the African Union; Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Liberia (14 to 21 May 2009) Peacekeeping operations established, functioning or terminated, 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Peacekeeping operation Established by resolution Resolution(s) relating to the operation's mandate adopted during the reporting period United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) none United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) * Mandate terminated on 15 June 2009, pursuant to resolution 1866 (2009). United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)* United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) Assistance missions and offices established, functioning or terminated, 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 Mission or office Established by Decisions relating to the mandate adopted during the reporting period United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA) S/1999/1236 United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) S/2001/1129 United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) * Mandate terminated on 30 September 2008, pursuant to resolution 1793 (2007). United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL)* United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) Reports of the Secretary-General issued during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 S/2008/522 and Corr.1 The Peacebuilding Fund S/2008/532 Children and armed conflict in Chad S/2008/531 and Corr.1 Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other organizations S/2008/553 15 August 2008 Seventeenth progress report on the United Nations Mission in Liberia S/2008/558 Deployment of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur S/2008/586 S/2008/601 and Add.1 12 and 15 September 2008 S/2008/612 Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine S/2008/617 The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security S/2008/622 25 September 2008 S/2008/628 Developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country S/2008/631 3 October 2008 The situation in Abkhazia, Georgia S/2008/645 13 October 2008 Eighteenth progress report on the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire S/2008/654 16 October 2008 Eighth semi-annual report on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) S/2008/659 17 October 2008 S/2008/662 20 October 2008 The Sudan S/2008/670 24 October 2008 Request of Nepal for United Nations assistance in support of its peace process S/2008/688 Report pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1830 (2008) S/2008/693 10 November 2008 Children and armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo S/2008/695 Children and armed conflict in Afghanistan S/2008/709 17 November 2008 S/2008/715 18 November 2008 Eighth report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) S/2008/728 and Add.1 21 November and 2 December 2008 Fourth special report on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo S/2008/692 24 November 2008 United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo S/2008/733 The situation in the Central African Republic and the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country S/2008/734 Third report submitted pursuant to resolution 1757 (2007) S/2008/737 United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (1 July-31 December 2008) S/2008/744 28 November 2008 United Nations operation in Cyprus S/2008/745 Fourth report on the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi S/2008/751 S/2008/760 and Add.1 4 and 10 December 2008 S/2008/761 Twenty-seventh report pursuant to paragraph 14 of resolution 1284 (1999) S/2008/781 S/2008/804 Report pursuant to presidential statement of 4 September 2008 (S/PRST/2008/33) S/2009/1 2 January 2009 S/2009/21 Nineteenth progress report on the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire S/2009/39 S/2009/59 30 January 2009 First report on the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone S/2009/60 Report pursuant to resolution 1863 (2009) S/2009/61 S/2009/66 3 February 2009 Children and armed conflict in the Central African Republic S/2009/69 and Corr.1 The situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, pursuant to resolution 1839 (2008) S/2009/72 4 February 2009 United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (9 July 2008-20 January 2009) S/2009/83 S/2009/84 Children and armed conflict in the Sudan S/2009/86 Eighteenth progress report on the United Nations Mission in Liberia S/2009/105 Report pursuant to resolution 1856 (2008) S/2009/102 20 February 2009 S/2009/106 24 February 2009 Fourth report submitted pursuant to resolution 1757 (2007) S/2009/119 Ninth report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) S/2009/129 6 March 2009 S/2009/132 9 March 2009 S/2009/135 S/2009/146 16 March 2009 Report pursuant to resolution 1846 (2008) S/2009/149 17 March 2009 S/2009/158 and Corr.1 26 March 2009 S/2009/160 27 March 2009 Twenty-seventh report on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo S/2009/163 30 March 2009 Report pursuant to resolution 1862 (2009) S/2009/169 31 March 2009 S/2009/189 Enhancing mediation and its support activities S/2009/190 Comprehensive report requested in a letter dated 26 March 2008 from the President of the Security Council to the Secretary-General S/2009/196 Twentieth progress report on the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire S/2009/200 and Corr.1 S/2009/199 14 April 2009 S/2009/201 S/2009/210 16 April 2009 Report on Somalia pursuant to resolution 1863 (2009) S/2009/211 17 April 2009 S/2009/218 Ninth semi-annual report on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) S/2009/221 S/2009/248 S/2009/254 18 May 2009 Report pursuant to resolutions 1808 (2008), 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009) S/2009/261 20 May 2009 Report pursuant to resolution 1867 (2009) S/2009/258 21 May 2009 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the options for possible locations for the archives of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the seat of the residual mechanism(s) for the Tribunals S/2009/267 Second report on the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone S/2009/270 Fifth report on the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi S/2009/277 S/2009/278 1 June 2009 Children and armed conflict in Myanmar S/2009/284 2 June 2009 S/2009/295 United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (1 January-30 June 2009) S/2009/297 S/2009/299 10 June 2009 Special report on the United Nations Mission in Liberia S/2009/300 S/2009/302 S/2009/304 Peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict S/2009/309 S/2009/332 S/2009/323 S/2009/325 25 June 2009 Children and armed conflict in Sri Lanka S/2009/330 Tenth report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) S/2009/335 Twenty-eighth report on the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo S/2009/344 Twenty-first progress report on the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire S/2009/351 S/2009/352 S/2009/357 14 July 2009 S/2009/359 S/2009/362 Report pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008) S/2009/373 20 July 2009 S/2009/385 Report pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 1859 (2008) S/2009/391 and Add.1 28 July and 3 August 2009 Elections in the Sudan S/2009/393 S/2008/10/Add.31-52 S/2009/10 and Add.1-30 S/2008/571 22 August 2008 Bureaux of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council S/2008/678 Adoption of the annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly S/2008/795 Extension of the mandate of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa S/2008/847 Security Council documentation and working methods and procedure S/2009/2 6 January 2009 S/2009/181 Bureau of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa S/2009/182 Bureau of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia Month Country August 2008 Belgium S/2008/596 September 2008 Burkina Faso S/2009/108 October 2008 China S/2008/696 November 2008 Costa Rica S/2009/96 December 2008 Croatia S/2009/328 January 2009 France S/2009/107 February 2009 Japan S/2009/138 March 2009 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya S/2009/229 April 2009 Mexico S/2009/353 May 2009 Russian Federation S/2009/363 June 2009 Turkey S/2009/412 July 2009 Uganda S/2009/447 Questions considered by the Security Council under its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security Chapter 1 A. The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question Meetings of the Council 5963 (20 August 2008); 5974 (18 September 2008); 5983 (26 September 2008); 5999 (22 October 2008); 6022 (25 November 2008); 6030 (3 December 2008); 6045 (16 December 2008); 6049 (18 December 2008); 6060 (31 December 2008); 6061 (6 and 7 January 2009); 6063 (8 January 2009); 6072 (21 January 2009); 6077 (27 January 2009); 6084 (18 February 2009); 6100 (25 March 2009); 6107 (20 April 2009); 6123 (11 May 2009); 6150 (23 June 2009); 6171 (27 July 2009) Consultations of the whole 20 August; 18 and 25 September; 22 October; 25 November; 3, 5, 13, 27 and 31 December 2008; 3, 7, 8, 13, 15, 21 and 27 January; 9, 13 and 18 February; 20 April; 7 and 13 May; 23 June 2009 Resolutions adopted Presidential statements Reports of the Secretary-General General Assembly resolution 62/83 Communications dated from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009 S/2008/513 1 August 2008 Identical letters from the observer of Palestine to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2008/584 Identical letters from the representatives of Indonesia and South Africa to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2008/615 Letter from the representative of Saudi Arabia to the President of the Security Council S/2008/623 Letter from the observer of Palestine to the President of the Security Council S/2008/625 Letter from the representative of Cuba to the President of the Security Council S/2008/629 S/2008/667 S/2008/689 S/2008/717 S/2008/735 Letter from the representative of Cuba to the Secretary-General S/2008/736 Identical letters from the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2008/753 Letter from the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the President of the Security Council S/2008/754 S/2008/755 S/2008/765 Letter from the representative of Egypt to the President of the Security Council S/2008/768 S/2008/794 S/2008/790 Identical letters from the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2008/807 Identical letters from the representative of Israel to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2008/814 24 December 2008 S/2008/815 27 December 2008 S/2008/816 S/2008/817 Letter from the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the President of the Security Council S/2008/818 Identical letters from the representative of Jordan to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2008/819 S/2008/828 29 December 2008 S/2009/13 S/2008/835 30 December 2008 S/2008/841 Letter from the representative of France to the President of the Security Council S/2008/842 S/2008/843 S/2008/844 S/2008/845 S/2009/3 S/2009/6 4 January 2009 S/2009/4 5 January 2009 S/2009/7 Letter from the representative of Qatar to the Secretary-General S/2009/12 S/2009/15 S/2009/22 S/2009/8 S/2009/9 S/2009/14 7 January 2009 Identical letters from the representative of Egypt to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2009/24 S/2009/27 S/2009/26 9 January 2009 S/2009/30 12 January 2009 S/2009/32 13 January 2009 S/2009/33 S/2009/36 S/2009/40 S/2009/50 Identical letters from the representative of Qatar to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2009/65 2 February 2009 S/2009/73 Letter from the representative of Egypt to the Secretary-General S/2009/74 Identical letters from the representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2009/95 Letter from the representative of Pakistan to the Secretary-General S/2009/98 S/2009/113 25 February 2009 S/2009/131 2 March 2009 S/2009/123 S/2009/125 Letter from the representative of Yemen to the President of the Security Council S/2009/130 S/2009/153 S/2009/157 S/2009/194 S/2009/202 S/2009/209 S/2009/212 Letter from the observer of the League of Arab States to the President of the Security Council S/2009/228 S/2009/250 4 May 2009 Letter from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council S/2009/240 S/2009/241 S/2009/244 12 May 2009 S/2009/265 19 May 2009 Letter from the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People to the Secretary-General S/2009/269 S/2009/338 2 July 2009 S/2009/345 8 July 2009 S/2009/358 Letter from the representative of Italy to the Secretary-General S/2009/380 Letter from the observer of Palestine to the President of the Security Council S/2009/514 Letter from the representative of Egypt S/2009/517 S/2009/518 B. The situation in the Middle East 1. United Nations Disengagement Observer Force 6039 (12 December 2008); 6148 (23 June 2009) (see also part II, chapter 26.B) 21 August; 10 December 2008; 21 January; 19 June 2009 S/PRST/2008/46; S/PRST/2009/18 Peacekeeping operations established, functioning or terminated United Nations Truce Supervision Organization Resolution 50 (1948) Established (A number of military observers are assigned to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force) Resolution 350 (1974) Established Resolution 1848 (2008) Mandate extended until 30 June 2009 Resolution 1875 (2009) Mandate extended until 30 December 2009 Resolution 350 (1974) and subsequent resolutions, including resolution 1821 (2008) Resolution 350 (1974) and subsequent resolutions, including resolution 1848 (2008) S/2009/34 S/2009/35 Letter from the President of the Security Council to the Secretary-General 2. United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) 5967 (27 August 2008) (see also part II, chapter 26.C) 20 and 26 August; 11 and 18 September; 22 and 30 October; 25 and 26 November 2008; 21 January; 18 February; 10 March; 20 April; 7 May; 23 June; 8 and 23 July 2009 (A number of military observers are assigned to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon) Resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) Established Resolution 1832 (2008) Mandate extended until 31 August 2009 Resolution 1701 (2006) S/2008/516 30 July 2008 S/2008/517 S/2008/563 S/2008/564 S/2008/568 S/2008/576 S/2008/582 S/2008/604 S/2008/607 15 September 2008 S/2008/608 S/2008/627 S/2008/650 S/2008/651 S/2008/669 S/2008/680 S/2008/698 S/2008/699 S/2008/721 S/2008/730 S/2008/747 S/2008/758 S/2008/759 S/2008/810 S/2009/38 S/2009/41 S/2009/42 S/2009/43 S/2009/45 20 January 2009 S/2009/75 S/2009/76 S/2009/91 11 February 2009 Letter from the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Secretary-General S/2009/97 S/2009/110 S/2009/141 12 March 2009 S/2009/142 S/2009/155 S/2009/183 S/2009/184 S/2009/191 S/2009/215 S/2009/227 S/2009/238 S/2009/239 S/2009/264 S/2009/268 S/2009/287 S/2009/292 S/2009/293 S/2009/307 S/2009/322 S/2009/348 6 July 2009 S/2009/349 S/2009/365 S/2009/375 S/2009/379 3. Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) 6008 (30 October 2008); 6120 (7 May 2009) 21 August; 18 September; 22 and 30 October 2008; 21 January; 18 February; 20 April; 7 May; 23 June; 8 July 2009 Resolution 1559 (2004) S/2008/578 Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Qatar to the Secretary-General 4. Security Council resolution 1595 (2005) 6047 (17 December 2008); 6048 (17 December 2008) 21 August; 4 and 17 December 2008; 18 February; 3 and 10 March 2009 Resolution 1757 (2007) S/2008/752 S/2008/764 Letter from the representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General S/2008/824 S/2008/825 Chapter 2 5971 (4 September 2008); 6038 (12 December 2008); 6115 (30 April 2009); 6132 (29 May 2009) (see also part II, chapter 26.A) 5 and 10 December 2008; 30 April; 22 and 28 May 2009 S/PRST/2008/34; S/PRST/2009/10 Resolution 186 (1964) Established Resolution 1847 (2008) Mandate extended until 15 June 2009 Resolution 1873 (2009) Mandate extended until 15 December 2009 Resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent resolutions, including resolution 1818 (2008) Resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent resolutions, including resolution 1847 (2008) S/2008/524 Identical letters from the representative of Cyprus to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2008/552 13 August 2008 Letter from the representative of Turkey to the Secretary-General S/2008/704 and Corr.1 Letter from the representative of Cyprus to the Secretary-General S/2008/719 S/2008/731 21 November 2008 S/2008/741 S/2008/742 S/2008/749 S/2008/750 S/2008/788 S/2009/81 6 February 2009 S/2009/115 S/2009/187 S/2009/216 S/2009/291 S/2009/294 S/2009/296 Letter from the representative of Cyprus to the President of the Security Council S/2009/313 S/2009/321 Chapter 3 6117 (30 April 2009) (see also part II, chapter 26.D) 20 November 2008; 22 and 30 April 2009 Resolution 690 (1991) Established Resolution 1871 (2009) Mandate extended until 30 April 2010 Resolution 1813 (2008) S/2009/19 S/2009/20 S/2009/198 Letter from the representative of Namibia to the Secretary-General S/2009/197 10 April 2009 Letter from the representative of Morocco to the President of the Security Council Chapter 4 5958 (19 August 2008); 5959 (19 August 2008); 6085 (19 February 2009); 6086 (26 February 2009) (see also part II, chapter 26.K) Assistance missions and offices established, functioning or terminated Resolution 1704 (2006) Established Resolution 1867 (2009) Mandate extended until 26 February 2010 Resolution 1802 (2008) Resolution 1867 (2009) Chapter 5 6075 (23 January 2009); 6153 (29 June 2009) S/2009/112 23 February 2009 Letter from the representatives of France and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the President of the Security Council Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to the President of the Security Council Chapter 6 5985 (29 September 2008); 6051 (19 December 2008) (see also part II, chapter 26.G) 9 and 19 September; 17 December 2008; 19 March; 25 June 2009 Resolution 1509 (2003) Established Resolution 1836 (2008) Mandate extended until 30 September 2009 Reports of the Panel of Experts on Liberia Resolution 1777 (2007) Resolution 1836 (2008) Mission S/2008/665 S/2008/666 Letter from the Acting Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia to the President of the Security Council S/2008/813 Identical letters from the Secretary-General to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2009/47 S/2009/109 Note by the President of the Security Council 6 May 2009 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) to the President of the Security Council S/2009/243 Chapter 7 5957 (19 August 2008); 5970 (4 September 2008); 5987 (7 October 2008); 6009 (30 October 2008); 6019 (20 November 2008); 6020 (20 November 2008); 6026 (2 December 2008); 6046 (16 December 2008); 6050 (19 December 2008); 6068 (16 January 2009); 6095 (20 March 2009); 6124 (13 May 2009); 6125 (15 May 2009); 6127 (26 May 2009); 6158 (9 July 2009); 6173 (29 July 2009) 18 and 26 August; 9 and 30 October; 20 November; 11 and 15 December 2008; 3, 9 and 12 February; 19 March; 13, 15 and 22 May; 19 June; 29 July 2009 S/PRST/2008/33; S/PRST/2008/41; S/PRST/2009/15; S/PRST/2009/19 Report of the Monitoring Group on Somalia S/PRST/2001/30 and resolution 1816 (2008) Resolution 1863 (2009) S/PRST/2001/30 and resolution 1863 (2009) Resolution 1846 (2008) S/PRST/2001/30 S/2008/723 Letter from the representative of Ethiopia to the President of the Security Council Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia to the President of the Security Council S/2008/786 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) to the President of the Security Council Letter from the representative of South Africa to the President of the Security Council S/2008/846 S/2009/80 Letter from the representative of the United States of America to the President of the Security Council S/2009/136 S/2009/172 S/2009/213 Letter from the representative of Eritrea to the President of the Security Council S/2009/237 Identical letters from the representative of Kenya to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2009/251 Letter from the representative of Somalia to the President of the Security Council S/2009/256 S/2009/260 S/2009/312 16 June 2009 Letter from the representative of Italy to the Secretary-General S/2009/376 Chapter 8 A. The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina 6021 (20 November 2008); 6033 (5 December 2008); 6099 (25 March 2009); 6130 (28 May 2009) (see also part II, chapter 10) S/2008/705 13 November 2008 S/2008/732 S/2008/838 S/2009/44 S/2009/246 S/2009/354 1 July 2009 B. Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999) 6025 (26 November 2008); 6097 (23 March 2009); 6144 (17 June 2009) 6 August 2008; 23 March; 16 April 2009 Resolution 1244 (1999) Established Resolution 1244 (1999) S/2008/549 S/2008/600 10 September 2008 S/2008/638 2 October 2008 S/2008/803 Letter from the representative of Serbia to the Secretary-General S/2009/208 1 April 2009 Letter from the representative of the Russian Federation to the Secretary-General C. International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 5986 (29 September 2008); 6040 (12 December 2008); 6155 (7 July 2009) 22 September; 22 October; 11 and 17 December 2008 S/2008/515 Note by the Secretary-General S/2008/555 S/2008/621 Letter from the Secretary-General to the President of the General Assembly S/2008/729 and Add.1 21 November and 31 December 2008 Letter from the President of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 to the President of the Security Council S/2008/767 S/2008/774 Letter from the representative of Serbia to the President of the Security Council Letter from the representative of Belgium to the President of the Security Council S/2009/252 S/2009/333 S/2009/334 S/2009/336 S/2009/386 S/2009/387 Chapter 9 6052 (19 December 2008); 6156 (7 July 2009) 22 October; 17 December 2008 S/2008/514 S/2008/726 Letter from the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994 to the President of the Security Council S/2008/799 S/2009/247 S/2009/403 S/2009/404 4 August 2009 Chapter 10 6041 (12 December 2008); 6053 (19 December 2008); 6134 (4 June 2009) (see also part II, chapters 8 and 9) Chapter 11 5951 (8 August 2008); 5952 (8 August 2008); 5953 (10 August 2008); 5954 (11 August 2008); 5961 (19 August 2008); 5969 (28 August 2008); 5992 (9 October 2008); 6082 (13 February 2009); 6143 (15 June 2009) (see also part II, chapter 26.E) 7-11, 19-21 and 28 August; 9 September; 8, 9 and 27 October 2008; 10 and 13 February; 27 May; 15 June 2009 Draft resolutions considered at a formal meeting and not adopted S/2009/310 (6143rd meeting, 15 June 2009) Official communiqués Resolution 858 (1993) Established Resolution 1839 (2008) Mandate extended until 15 February 2009 Resolution 1866 (2009) Mandate extended until 15 June 2009 Resolution 1808 (2008) Resolution 1839 (2008) Resolutions 1808 (2008), 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009) S/2008/518 S/2008/519 S/2008/533 Letter from the representative of the Russian Federation to the President of the Security Council S/2008/534 Identical letters from the representative of Georgia to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2008/535 S/2008/536 Letter from the representative of Georgia to the President of the Security Council S/2008/537 9 August 2008 S/2008/541 S/2008/542 S/2008/543 S/2008/544 S/2008/538 S/2008/540 S/2008/545 S/2008/546 Letter from the representative of Ukraine to the Secretary-General S/2008/551 S/2008/557 S/2008/562 16 August 2008 S/2008/561 S/2008/573 S/2008/574 S/2008/587 S/2008/614 Identical letters from the representatives of China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2008/637 6 October 2008 S/2008/668 Letter from the representative of Azerbaijan to the Secretary-General S/2008/674 S/2008/725 S/2008/727 S/2009/48 22 January 2009 S/2009/127 S/2009/305 S/2009/306 S/2009/308 S/2009/342 S/2009/371 Chapter 12 5990 (8 October 2008); 5993 (14 October 2008); 6101 (6 April 2009) (see also part II, chapters 26.I and 30) 12 September; 8 October 2008; 27 January; 18 February 2009 Resolution 1542 (2004) Established Resolution 1840 (2008) Mandate extended until 15 October 2009 Resolution 1780 (2007) Resolution 1840 (2008) Mission to Haiti, 11 to 14 March 2009 S/2008/640 2 September 2008 Letter from the representative of Uruguay to the President of the Security Council S/2009/139 S/2009/164 S/2009/165 S/2009/204 Letter from the representative of Mexico to the Secretary-General Chapter 13 5966 (26 August 2008); 6037 (11 December 2008); 6057 (22 December 2008); 6138 (9 June 2009) (see also part II, chapters 16 and 33) 26 August; 11 and 19 December 2008; 9 June 2009 United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi Resolution 1719 (2006) Established Resolution 1858 (2008) Mandate extended until 31 December 2009 Resolution 1791 (2007) Resolution 1858 (2008) S/2009/167 Letter from the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Chairperson of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2009/288 3 June 2009 Letter from the representative of Gabon to the Secretary-General Chapter 14 5977 (22 September 2008); 5994 (14 October 2008); 6094 (19 March 2009); 6098 (23 March 2009); 6154 (30 June 2009); 6162 (15 July 2009) (see also part II, chapters 19 and 30) 26 August; 22 September 2008; 9 February; 19 June 2009 Political missions established, functioning or terminated United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan Resolution 1401 (2002) Established Resolution 1868 (2009) Mandate extended until 23 March 2010 General Assembly resolution 62/6 and Security Council resolution 1806 (2008) General Assembly resolution 63/18 and Security Council resolution 1806 (2008) General Assembly resolution 63/18 and Security Council resolution 1868 (2009) Mission to Afghanistan, 21 to 28 November 2008 S/2008/597 S/2008/603 12 September 2008 S/2008/708 S/2008/770 S/2009/177 S/2009/192 Letter from the representatives of the Russian Federation and the United States of America to the Secretary-General S/2009/235 Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Afghanistan to the President of the Security Council S/2009/273 S/2009/275 S/2009/283 S/2009/372 Letter from the representative of Uzbekistan to the Secretary-General Chapter 15 5948 (4 August 2008); 6080 (9 February 2009); 6137 (8 June 2009); 6163 (16 July 2009) (see also part II, chapter 33) United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone Resolution 1620 (2005) Established Resolution 1793 (2007) Mandate terminated on 30 September 2008 United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone Resolution 1829 (2008) Established Resolution 1829 (2008) S/2008/850 Letter from the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Chairperson of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2009/17 S/2009/18 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone to the President of the Security Council S/2009/220 S/2009/326 20 June 2009 S/2009/397 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997) to the President of the Security Council Chapter 16 6058 (22 December 2008); 6067 (15 January 2009) (see also part II, chapters 13, 17, 18 and 32) 11 and 26 November; 15, 17 and 19 December 2008; 15, 16 and 28 January; 17 February; 9 and 23 April; 15 July 2009 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the President of the Security Council S/2008/641 Letter from the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the President of the Security Council S/2008/644 10 October 2008 S/2008/646 S/2008/649 Letter from the representative of Rwanda to the President of the Security Council S/2008/652 S/2008/684 3 November 2008 S/2008/686 4 November 2008 S/2008/685 S/2008/701 S/2008/724 Identical letters from the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) to the President of the Security Council S/2008/791 S/2008/826 23 December 2008 S/2008/827 S/2009/151 S/2009/281 S/2009/282 Chapter 17 The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo 5998 (21 October 2008); 6006 (29 October 2008); 6018 (20 November 2008); 6024 (26 November 2008); 6055 (22 December 2008); 6056 (22 December 2008); 6083 (17 February 2009); 6104 (9 April 2009); 6159 (10 July 2009) (see also part II, chapters 16, 19 and 26.F) 26 August; 12 September; 3, 22, 28 and 29 October; 11 and 26 November; 15, 17 and 19 December 2008; 16 and 28 January; 9 and 17 February; 9 April; 28 May; 10 July 2009 S/PRST/2008/38; S/PRST/2008/40 Resolution 1279 (1999) Established Resolution 1843 (2008) Mandate modified Resolution 1856 (2008) Mandate extended until 31 December 2009 Reports of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo Resolution 1794 (2007) and S/PRST/2008/38 Resolution 1856 (2008) S/2008/526 S/2008/591 S/2008/592 3 September 2008 S/2008/681 31 October 2008 S/2008/682 S/2008/703 S/2009/52 S/2009/93 Chapter 18 6027 (2 December 2008); 6091 (10 March 2009); 6102 (7 April 2009); 6147 (22 June 2009) (see also part II, chapters 16, 19, 33 and 42) 2 December 2008; 16 January; 10 March; 22 June 2009 United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic S/1999/1236 Established S/PRST/2009/5 Mandate to terminate upon the establishment of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic S/PRST/2009/5 Established S/PRST/2001/25 S/PRST/2001/25 and S/PRST/2009/5 S/2008/809 S/2009/128 S/2009/214 S/2009/279 S/2009/280 Chapter 19 6114 (29 April 2009) Country concerned Resolution 1612 (2005) Chad Central African Republic S/2009/158 and Corr.1 S/PRST/2008/6 Letter from the representative of Mexico to the President of the Security Council Chapter 20 5988 (7 October 2008); 5995 (15 October 2008); 6089 (3 March 2009); 6103 (8 April 2009); 6105 (9 April 2009); 6149 (23 June 2009); 6152 (26 June 2009) (see also part II, chapters 33 and 37) 11 December 2008; 3 March; 8 and 9 April; 9 and 23 June 2009 S/PRST/2008/37; S/PRST/2009/2; S/PRST/2009/6 United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau Resolution 1233 (1999) Established Resolution 1876 (2009) Mandate extended until 31 December 2009 United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau Resolution 1876 (2009) Established Resolutions 1233 (1999) and 1580 (2004) S/2008/740 Letter from the representative of Portugal to the President of the Security Council S/2008/762 Letter from the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Chairperson of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2008/777 S/2008/778 S/2009/55 S/2009/56 S/2009/120 S/2009/298 Chapter 21 6066 (14 January 2009); 6151 (26 June 2009) S/PRST/2008/18 S/2008/636 Letter from the representative of Switzerland to the Secretary-General S/2009/31 S/2009/324 Chapter 22 6005 (29 October 2008) S/PRST/2007/40 Resolution 1820 (2008) S/2008/655 Letter from the representative of China to the Secretary-General Chapter 23 Briefing by the President of the International Court of Justice 6002 (28 October 2008) Chapter 24 Briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 6062 (8 January 2009) Chapter 25 5982 (26 September 2008); 6088 (27 February 2009) S/2008/594 Letter from the representative of Finland to the President of the Security Council Chapter 26 A. United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus 6032 (5 December 2008); 6126 (22 May 2009) (see also part II, chapter 2) S/PV.6032; S/PV.6126 B. United Nations Disengagement Observer Force 6035 (10 December 2008); 6146 (19 June 2009) (see also part II, chapter 1.B.1) S/PV.6035; S/PV.6146 C. United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 5965 (25 August 2008) (see also part II, chapter 1.B.2) D. United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara 6109 (22 April 2009) (see also part II, chapter 3) E. United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia/The situation in Georgia 5991 (9 October 2008); 6081 (10 February 2009); 6140 (12 June 2009) (see also part II, chapter 11) S/PV.5991; S/PV.6081; S/PV.6140 F. United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 6023 (26 November 2008) (see also part II, chapter 17) G. United Nations Mission in Liberia 5972 (9 September 2008) (see also part II, chapter 6) H. United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire 6070 (21 January 2009); 6166 (23 July 2009) (see also part II, chapter 29) S/PV.6070; S/PV.6166 I. United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti 5989 (8 October 2008) (see also part II, chapter 12) J. United Nations Mission in the Sudan 6110 (23 April 2009) (see also part II, chapter 32) K. United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste 6129 (27 May 2009) (see also part II, chapter 4) L. African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur 6169 (24 July 2009) M. United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad 5975 (19 September 2008) (see also part II, chapter 42) Chapter 27 5962 (19 August 2008); 5964 (21 August 2008); 5978 (22 September 2008); 6034 (9 December 2008); 6164 (17 July 2009) (see also part II, chapters 28 and 31) 19 and 21 August; 17, 22 and 27 September 2008; 20 February; 11 June; 17 July 2009 S/PRST/2008/31; S/PRST/2008/32; S/PRST/2008/35; S/PRST/2008/45; S/PRST/2009/22 Reports of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team S/2008/567 14 August 2008 Letter from the representative of Morocco to the Secretary-General S/2008/585 Letter from the representative of Panama to the Secretary-General S/2008/575 S/2008/632 S/2008/675 S/2008/711 S/2008/712 S/2008/738 Letter from the representative of Croatia to the Secretary-General S/2008/775 Identical letters from the representative of France to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2008/811 S/2008/833 Letter from the representative of the Philippines to the President of the Security Council Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities to the President of the Security Council S/2009/53 S/2009/54 S/2009/71 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism to the President of the Security Council S/2009/114 Identical letters from the representative of New Zealand to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council * The reports of States were transmitted to the President of the Security Council by letters from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism. S/2009/133 Fifth report of the Bahamas* S/2009/134 Report of Madagascar pursuant to resolution 1624 (2005) S/2009/179 Letter from the representative of the Republic of Korea to the President of the General Assembly S/2009/219 S/2009/289 Letter from the Acting Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism to the President of the Security Council S/2009/389 Chapter 28 Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the 6015 (12 November 2008); 6043 (15 December 2008); 6128 (26 May 2009) (see also part II, chapters 27 and 31) Chapter 29 6001 (27 October 2008); 6004 (29 October 2008); 6014 (7 November 2008); 6071 (21 January 2009); 6076 (27 January 2009); 6113 (28 April 2009); 6133 (29 May 2009); 6168 (23 July 2009); 6174 (30 July 2009) (see also part II, chapters 26.H and 37) 27 October; 7 November 2008; 21 January; 28 April; 25 June; 23 July 2009 S/PRST/2008/42; S/PRST/2009/16 Resolution 1528 (2004) Established Resolution 1865 (2009) Mandate extended until 31 July 2009 Resolution 1880 (2009) Mandate extended until 31 January 2010 Reports of the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire Resolution 1826 (2008) Resolution 1865 (2009) Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire to the President of the Security Council S/2008/694 11 November 2008 Letter from the representative of Burkina Faso to the President of the Security Council S/2008/793 S/2008/834 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) to the President of the Security Council S/2009/5 S/2009/101 S/2009/257 Chapter 30 6031 (4 December 2008); 6093 (19 March 2009); 6131 (28 May 2009) 6 August 2008; 27 January; 18 February 2009 Mission to Afghanistan, 21 to Mission to Haiti, 11 to 14 March 2009 Chapter 31 * Resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted under this agenda item. Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction* 5955 (18 August 2008) (see also part II, chapters 27 and 28, and part V, chapter 8) Identical letters from the representative of France to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2008/820 26 December 2008 S/2008/821 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to the President of the Security Council S/2009/62 Letter from the Acting Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to the President of the Security Council S/2009/63 S/2009/124 S/2009/170 S/2009/171 of Kenya to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council Chapter 32 5956 (18 August 2008); 5996 (15 October 2008); 6003 (28 October 2008); 6010 (5 November 2008); 6028 (3 December 2008); 6054 (19 December 2008); 6079 (5 February 2009); 6096 (20 March 2009); 6112 (27 April 2009); 6116 (30 April 2009); 6135 (5 June 2009); 6136 (5 June 2009); 6139 (11 June 2009); 6170 (24 July 2009); 6175 (30 July 2009) (see also part II, chapters 16, 19, 26.J, 26.L, 36 and 42) 18 and 26 August; 11 September; 3 and 28 October; 5 November; 10 and 19 December 2008; 16 and 28 January; 3, 5, 9, 10, 12 and 17 February; 10, 17, 19 and 26 March; 23, 24, 27 and 30 April; 11 and 19 June; 17 July 2009 Resolution 1590 (2005) Established Resolution 1870 (2009) Mandate extended until 30 April 2010 Resolution 1769 (2007) Established Resolution 1881 (2009) Mandate extended until 31 July 2010 Reports of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan Resolution 1769 (2007) Resolution 1828 (2008) Resolution 1590 (2005) Resolutions 1590 (2005) and 1870 (2009) Resolutions 1769 (2007) S/2008/525 5 August 2008 Letter from the representative of Senegal to the President of the Security Council S/2008/559 S/2008/656 Letter from the representative of Lebanon to the President of the Security Council Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan to the President of the Security Council S/2008/713 Letter from the representative of the Sudan to the President of the Security Council S/2008/714 S/2008/739 S/2008/743 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) to the President of the Security Council S/2009/64 Letter from the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to the Secretary-General S/2009/99 S/2009/100 S/2009/104 S/2009/117 Identical letters from the representatives of Cuba, Oman, Senegal and Uganda to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2009/144 S/2009/148 S/2009/162 Identical letters from the representative of the Sudan to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council S/2009/173 S/2009/207 15 April 2009 S/2009/259 S/2009/318 S/2009/356 S/2009/368 S/2009/374 S/2009/382 S/2009/383 S/2009/388 Letter from the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the President of the Security Council Chapter 33 5997 (21 October 2008); 6165 (22 July 2009) General Assembly resolution 60/287 S/PRST/2008/16 S/2008/620 Letter from the Secretary-General to the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission S/2009/168 Chapter 34 5949 (6 August 2008); 5950 (7 August 2008); 6016 (14 November 2008); 6059 (22 December 2008); 6087 (26 February 2009); 6145 (18 June 2009) (see also part V, chapter 3) 3 and 9 February; 16 April 2009 United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq Resolution 1500 (2003) Established Resolution 1830 (2008) Mandate extended until 7 August 2009 Resolution 1830 (2008) Resolution 1859 (2008) S/2008/510 S/2008/523 Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the President of the Security Council S/2008/530 S/2008/566 Letter from the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the President of the Security Council S/2008/588 Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Costa Rica to the Secretary-General S/2008/676 of the Syrian Arab Republic to the Secretary-General and the President S/2008/687 S/2008/706 S/2008/722 Letter from the representative of Poland to the President of the Security Council S/2008/783 S/2008/784 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) to the President of the Security Council S/2009/116 S/2009/143 Letter from the representative of Iraq to the President of the Security Council S/2009/178 24 March 2009 Letter from the representative of Kuwait to the President of the Security Council S/2009/226 Letter from the President of the Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission to the President of the Security Council S/2009/230 1 May 2009 S/2009/314 S/2009/346 S/2009/347 S/2009/395 Chapter 35 5973 (11 September 2008); 5984 (27 September 2008); 6036 (10 December 2008); 6090 (10 March 2009); 6142 (15 June 2009) (see also part V, chapter 8) 26 and 27 September 2008 S/2008/520 Letter from the representatives of France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America to the President of the Security Council S/2008/554 S/2008/643 S/2008/776 Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) to the President of the Security Council S/2009/137 S/2009/174 S/2009/311 Chapter 36 6029 (3 December 2008) (see also part II, chapters 32 and 42) Chapter 37 6073 (21 January 2009); 6157 (7 July 2009); 6160 (10 July 2009) 21 January; 7 and 10 July 2009 S/2001/1129 Established Letter dated 21 December 2007 from the President of the Security Council (S/2007/754) Chapter 38 6161 (13 July 2009) (see also part II, chapter 19) 11 September 2008; 21 January; 20 February; 22 May 2009 Chapter 39 6106 (13 April 2009); 6141 (12 June 2009) 3 October 2008; 12 February; 5, 8 and 11 April; 13 and 25 May; 10 June; 6 and 10 July 2009 S/2008/547 Letter from the representative of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the President of the Security Council Letter from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) to the President of the Security Council S/2009/176 4 April 2009 Letter from the representative of Japan to the President of the Security Council S/2009/186 Letter from the representative of the Republic of Korea to the President of the Security Council S/2009/205 S/2009/222 S/2009/271 25 May 2009 S/2009/274 Identical letters from the representative of Mongolia to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Security Council S/2009/315 S/2009/316 S/2009/364 Letter from the Acting Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) to the President of the Security Council Chapter 40 * S/2006/920. Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council* 6013 (7 November 2008); 6069 (16 January 2009); 6074 (23 January 2009); 6119 (5 May 2009); 6167 (23 July 2009) 7 November 2008; 16 and 21 January; 20 July 2009 United Nations Mission in Nepal Resolution 1740 (2007) Established Resolution 1864 (2009) Mandate extended until 23 July 2009 Resolution 1879 (2009) Mandate extended until 23 January 2010 Resolution 1825 (2008) Resolution 1864 (2009) S/2008/837 S/2009/57 S/2009/58 S/2009/360 Chapter 41 A. Mediation and settlement of disputes 5979 (23 September 2008); 6108 (21 April 2009) S/PRST/2008/36; S/PRST/2009/8 S/2008/590 Letter from the representative of Burkina Faso to the Secretary-General B. Strengthening collective security through general regulation and reduction of armaments 6017 (19 November 2008) S/2008/697 Letter from the representative of Costa Rica to the President of the Security Council C. Respect for international humanitarian law 6078 (29 January 2009) Chapter 42 5976 (19 September 2008); 5980 (24 September 2008); 5981 (24 September 2008); 6042 (12 December 2008); 6064 (14 January 2009); 6111 (24 April 2009); 6121 (8 May 2009); 6122 (8 May 2009); 6172 (28 July 2009) (see also part II, chapters 18, 19, 26.M, 32 and 36) 19 September; 12 December 2008; 13 February; 17 March; 24 April; 7 and 8 May 2009 Resolution 1778 (2007) Established Resolution 1834 (2008) Mandate extended until 15 March 2009 Resolution 1861 (2009) Mandate extended until 15 March 2010 Resolution 1778 (2007) Resolution 1834 (2008) Resolution 1861 (2009) S/2008/679 Letter from the representative of Chad to the President of the Security Council S/2009/121 S/2009/122 S/2009/231 Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Chad to the President of the Security Council S/2009/232 S/2009/242 S/2009/249 Letter from the representative of Qatar to the President of the Security Council S/2009/255 16 May 2009 S/2009/317 S/2009/355 S/2009/369 Chapter 43 A. General issues 6092 (18 March 2009); 6118 (5 May 2009) S/PRST/2009/3; S/PRST/2009/11 Resolution 1809 (2008) B. Djibouti and Eritrea 6000 (23 October 2008); 6065 (14 January 2009) (see also part V, chapter 6) 17 September 2008; 7 April; 21 July 2009 Resolution 1862 (2009) S/2008/602 S/2008/605 16 September 2008 S/2008/635 Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Djibouti to the President of the Security Council S/2008/673 Letter from the representative of Eritrea to the Secretary-General S/2008/690 S/2008/700 S/2008/766 Letter from the representative of Djibouti to the President of the Security Council S/2009/28 S/2009/180 S/2009/217 S/2009/319 C. Zimbabwe 6044 (15 December 2008) 19 September; 20 November 2008; 9 February 2009 D. Mauritania 5960 (19 August 2008) 18 August 2008; 9 February 2009 S/2009/85 A. Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) 5968 (27 August 2008) S/2008/528 Letter from the representative of Belgium to the Secretary-General S/2008/589 29 August 2008 B. General matters S/2008/10/ Add.31-52 15 August 2008- Summary statement by the Secretary-General on matters of which the Security Council is seized and on the stage reached in their consideration: addenda S/2009/87 Identical letters from the representative of Pakistan to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council 26 January- 3 August 2009 Summary statement by the Secretary-General on matters of which the Security Council is seized and on the stage reached in their consideration and addenda S/2009/70 26 January 2009 S/2009/78 S/2009/89 Letter from the representative of the United Arab Emirates to the Secretary-General S/2009/90 12 February 2009 S/2009/92 S/2009/118 Letter from the representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the President of the Security Council S/2009/145 11 March 2009 S/2009/193 S/2009/206 6007 (30 October 2008) 6011 (6 November 2008); 6012 (6 November 2008) S/2008/502 Memorandum by the Secretary-General S/2008/503 and Add.1 and 2 30 July, 31 October and 3 November 2008 S/2008/504 31 July 2008 S/2008/619 Letter from the representative of Spain to the Secretary-General The Military Staff Committee, established pursuant to Article 47 of the Charter of the United Nations, functioned continually under its draft rules of procedure during the period under review. The Committee held a total of 26 meetings and remained prepared to carry out the functions assigned to it under the terms of Article 47 of the Charter. In accordance with the request made to the Security Council by the General Assembly in paragraph 178 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), the Military Staff Committee has considered the composition, mandate and working methods of the Committee. These discussions are ongoing. S/2008/663 S/2008/664 S/2009/233 S/2009/234 Communications concerning the question of the Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa islands S/2008/577 S/2008/593 S/2008/609 17 September 2008 S/2009/195 Communications concerning the situation between Iraq and Kuwait S/2008/509 S/2008/658 Twenty-seventh report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 14 of resolution 1284 (1999) S/2009/203 S/2009/262 S/2009/263 S/2009/350 S/2009/370 S/2008/683 S/2008/702 S/2008/812 S/2008/823 S/2009/51 S/2009/103 S/2009/156 Letter from the representative of Armenia to the Secretary-General S/2009/343 S/2008/691 Letter from the representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to the Secretary-General S/2008/707 Letter from the representative of Greece to the Secretary-General S/2008/718 S/2008/746 27 November 2008 S/2008/763 S/2009/82 S/2009/150 S/2009/285 S/2009/381 Communications concerning the situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia S/2008/630 Communications concerning relations between Cameroon and Nigeria S/2008/756 S/2008/757 Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office for West Africa Communications concerning the nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction S/2009/67 S/2009/68 Letter from the representative of Gabon to the President of the Security Council S/2009/185 Communications concerning the Collective Security Treaty Organization S/2009/126 S/2009/516 S/2008/677 Letter from the representative of Kazakhstan to the Secretary-General S/2009/341 Communications concerning relations between Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan Letter from the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the President S/2008/565 Letter from the representative of Thailand to the President of the Security Council S/2008/569 Letter from the representative of Cambodia to the President of the Security Council S/2008/595 5 September 2008 S/2008/606 S/2008/611 S/2008/653 S/2008/657 S/2008/660 S/2008/661 Communications concerning relations between Cuba and the United States of America S/2009/515 S/2008/599 S/2009/140 S/2009/402 Letter from the representative of Guinea to the Secretary-General S/2009/329 28 June 2009 Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Honduras to the President of the Security Council S/2009/166 The United Nations Compensation Commission, established under Security Council resolution 687 (1991), was mandated to process claims and pay compensation for losses arising as a direct result of Iraq's unlawful invasion and occupation of Kuwait from 2 August 1990 until 2 March 1991. Successful claims are paid with funds drawn from the United Nations Compensation Fund, which is funded by a percentage of the proceeds generated by the export sales of Iraqi petroleum and petroleum products. This percentage, originally set at 30 per cent by the Security Council under its resolution 705 (1991), is currently at 5 per cent in accordance with paragraph 21 of Council resolution 1483 (2003), which provides that 5 per cent of the proceeds of all export sales of Iraqi petroleum, petroleum products and natural gas shall be deposited into the Compensation Fund. As from mid-2007, the Commission secretariat was downsized into its residual format in accordance with the decision taken by the Governing Council at its fifty-eighth session to maintain the Compensation Fund under the continuing oversight of the Governing Council, assisted by a small secretariat. During the period under review, the Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission held two regular sessions (sixty-sixth and sixty-seventh) and a number of informal meetings, at which it considered various issues relating to the activities of the Commission, including payment of compensation awards to successful claimants, and the monitoring of environmental projects being undertaken with funds awarded under the F4 category of claims. Since the conclusion of the claims processing stage in June 2005, and during the period under review, the Commission has focused its work, with a small secretariat, on payment of awards to claimants and the Follow-up Programme for Environmental Awards established by the Governing Council at its fifty-eighth session in 2005 under decision 258 to monitor the implementation of various environmental projects. With respect to the Programme, the secretariat of the Commission has continued working with the participating claimant Governments (Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia) and the Government of Iraq to monitor project implementation under decision 258, including assisting with the development of project plans, and with ensuring the integration of the independent reviewers with the work of the national focal point of each Government. In addition, the Governing Council, by decision 266 adopted in April 2009, established a structure for the administration of funds for the five projects valued at greater than $50 million that are subject to a phasing plan requirement under decision 258. During the period under review, the Commission made available a total amount of $2,251,023,408 to Governments for distribution among successful claims. The payments were made pursuant to decision 256 (2005), adopted by the Governing Council at its fifty-eighth session, concerning the payment mechanism and the priority of payment of the outstanding awards. In accordance with that decision, awards with outstanding amounts greater than $500 million receive a maximum amount of $2 million per quarter, while awards with outstanding amounts smaller than $500 million, as well as remaining F4 environmental awards, receive rounds of payments of $2 million until all available funds in the Compensation Fund have been exhausted. At present, 10 awards remain to be paid to the Government of Kuwait upon the availability of funds, one subject to the Follow-up Programme for Environmental Awards, and nine, totalling $24 billion, subject to consultations between Iraq and Kuwait under the auspices of the Commission. The Commission has awarded total compensation in the amount of $52,383,356,716 to individuals, corporations and Governments. As at 31 July 2009, $27,624,607,655 has been made available to Governments and international organizations for payment to successful claimants. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia is mandated by the Security Council to oversee the implementation of the general and complete arms embargo on Somalia first imposed by resolution 733 (1992) and subsequently amended by resolutions 1356 (2001), 1425 (2002), 1725 (2006), 1744 (2007), 1772 (2007), 1846 (2008) and 1851 (2008). Pursuant to paragraph 11 of resolution 1844 (2008), the Committee is also mandated, in accordance with the criteria set out in that resolution, to designate individuals and entities subject to a travel ban, an assets freeze, and a targeted arms embargo imposed respectively by paragraphs 1, 3 and 7 of that resolution, and to monitor the implementation of those measures. The Committee is supported by a Monitoring Group, whose mandate was extended and expanded by the Council in paragraph 3 of resolution 1853 (2008). In 2008, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo (South Africa) as Chairman, with the delegations of Croatia and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya providing the Vice-Chairmen. For 2009, Claude Heller (Mexico) served as Chairman and the delegations of Croatia and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya continued to serve as Vice-Chairmen. During the reporting period, the Committee met five times in informal consultations. During its informal consultations on 9 September 2008, the Committee heard a midterm briefing by the Monitoring Group on Somalia. On 23 September, the Committee addressed letters to several Member States and one regional organization to follow up on requests for information by the Monitoring Group. In informal consultations on 9 December the Committee heard a presentation by the Monitoring Group of its final report (S/2008/769) and discussed the observations and recommendations contained therein. On 11 December, the Chairman briefed the members of the Council on the final report and the Committee's discussion. On 19 December, the Committee addressed a note verbale to all Member States drawing attention to the Group's recommendation related to the tracing of weapons contained in paragraph 269 of its report and related existing mechanisms, and to the need for compliance with the provisions for exemptions to the arms embargo as set forth in paragraphs 11 and 12 of resolution 1772 (2007). On 19 December, the Committee adopted its annual report for 2008 (S/2008/806). On 20 January 2009, the Committee discussed various aspects of its work in the light of the adoption of resolution 1844 (2008), by which additional tasks were entrusted to the Committee. During its informal consultations on 24 March, the Committee met with the members of the Monitoring Group on Somalia, re-established pursuant to resolution 1853 (2008), and heard a presentation by its Coordinator. The Committee also discussed its future programme of work. As agreed during that meeting and pursuant to paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008), the Chairman made a brief statement on the Committee's work during the Security Council's consultations on 9 April. On 17 February, the Committee approved a note verbale addressed to all Member States drawing their attention to the various provisions of resolution 1844 (2008). On 11 May, the Committee adopted consolidated and revised guidelines for the conduct of its work, taking into account the relevant provisions of resolution 1844 (2008). These guidelines are available on the Committee's website, which can be found at http://www.un.org/sc/committees/751/index.shtml. During the reporting period, the Committee approved four requests for exemptions to the arms embargo for non-lethal military equipment pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 1356 (2001) and seven requests for an exemption to the arms embargo pursuant to paragraph 11 (b) of resolution 1772 (2007). One request for an exemption to the arms embargo pursuant to paragraph 11 (b) of resolution 1772 (2007) was not approved by the Committee and, in this connection, on 18 June, the Chairman sent a letter to the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). On 21 July, the Committee held informal consultations with the Monitoring Group to discuss the development of the draft list of individuals and entities pursuant to paragraph 3 (e) of resolution 1853 (2008). On 29 July, the Chairman of the Committee briefed the Security Council pursuant to paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008). Judicial activity remained intense over the reporting period. In total, from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009, the Appeals Chamber delivered three judgements involving four accused, bringing to 86 the number of cases fully completed. The Trial Chambers delivered three judgements involving nine accused and at their peak ran eight trials simultaneously in the Tribunal's three courtrooms, taking advantage of interstices in trial schedules. At the close of the reporting period, appeal proceedings are ongoing for 142 accused, and 21 are currently on trial. Four accused remain at the pretrial stage. Unfortunately, two more accused remain at large, their continuing flight jeopardizing the successful implementation of the completion strategy. The Tribunal has improved efficiency by implementing various procedural reforms aimed at increasing the speed of proceedings, while respecting fully the due process rights of the accused. The Tribunal is continuously looking for new measures to improve the conduct of its proceedings and to protect the accused's right to an expeditious trial. As part of this commitment, the working groups on speeding up trials and appeals were reconstituted in 2008 to assess the effectiveness of measures implemented and to identify fresh innovations to enhance the efficient conduct of trials and appeals. To cope with the increase in the number of contempt cases, a working group was established to assess the procedural and substantive aspects of contempt proceedings and to recommend methods of expediting their adjudication. The working group's report and recommendations are expected soon. The Tribunal also benefited from the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1800 (2008), by which it authorized the assignment of up to four additional ad litem judges for the period until 31 December 2008. This measure allowed the Tribunal to commence new trials and make maximum use of the permanent judges. The Council by resolution 1837 (2008) extended the terms of office of the Tribunal's trial and ad litem judges until 31 December 2009, and its current appeal judges until 31 December 2010. A further extension is required for the Tribunal to complete its work. A joint proposal was made to the Security Council by the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the Tribunal for Rwanda in connection with the completion strategy for the redeployment of trial judges to the Appeals Chamber in order for the core work of the Tribunal to be completed in 2013. The Office of the Prosecutor took a number of steps to reduce the time necessary to present cases in ongoing and upcoming trials by using written evidence in lieu of oral testimony, by moving the Trial Chambers to take judicial notice of adjudicated facts and by endeavouring to speed up the transition from pretrial to trial. Viewing the completion strategy as a strategy designed to allow the continuation of the Tribunal's activities by domestic courts in the former Yugoslavia, the Tribunal hosted a number of working visits, seminars, training programmes and conferences for judicial professionals in the region. The Office of the Prosecutor further strengthened its cooperation with national prosecutorial authorities, by sharing information and expertise. A concrete example is the new joint project of the European Commission and the Office of the Prosecutor enabling liaison prosecutors and interns from the region to work in the Office of the Prosecutor. During the reporting period, the Office of the Prosecutor continued to transfer investigative materials to Bosnia and Herzegovina, including five complete case files (relating to 16 suspects and covering five municipalities). In keeping with this spirit of partnership, the Tribunal initiated a number of projects to ensure that its methods, practices, know-how and jurisprudence will be fully accessible to future international courts. With the assistance of the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, a compilation of the Tribunal's developed practices -- from investigations to the enforcement of sentences -- was prepared and disseminated to local governmental and non-governmental actors in the region. In conjunction with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the impact of the Tribunal's outreach activities and training programmes is being assessed. The Tribunal has responded to requests for access to material protected by the Tribunal that is relevant to proceedings before domestic courts from judges or parties in other jurisdictions pursuant to rule 75 (H) of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence. That rule was adopted in order to assist other jurisdictions in trying war crimes cases in their own courts. The Tribunal continued to respond diligently to requests for information from the Office of the Legal Counsel with respect to the development of a residual mechanism, as the Tribunal draws closer to the completion of its mandate. Since 1 August 2008, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has maintained its high level of productivity, while upholding trial fairness and the rights of the accused. Further to the arrest of three fugitives in the previous reporting period, the Office of the Prosecutor has accelerated efforts to arrest the remaining 13 fugitives, many of whom are in the conflict zones of the Great Lakes region. Efforts at seeking further cooperation with Member States are also under way. The hunt continues for top fugitives Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and others earmarked for trial in Arusha. The Office of the Prosecutor continues to receive and to respond to requests for mutual legal assistance from national jurisdictions conducting investigations with a view to the prosecution or extradition of Rwandan fugitives appearing on the INTERPOL wanted list. During the period under review, the Prosecutor continued to finalize preparation of the cases against the fugitive indictees with a view to the eventual transfer of nine of the 13 fugitives for trial to national jurisdictions. The Tribunal continues to assist Rwandan authorities in their efforts at putting in place effective legal arrangements to meet the conditions for transfer of cases as already established by the Appeals Chamber. The Prosecutor hopes, in the course of the year, that Rwandan efforts will be sufficient for the filing of further applications by the Prosecutor for transfer of the cases of the fugitives to Rwanda for trial. In respect of the four fugitives identified for trial, the Prosecutor has requested an amendment to the rule of the Tribunal to allow for the taking of special depositions towards the preservation of evidence in respect of potential witnesses who may, when the fugitives are eventually tried, be unavailable to testify at their trials. Eight trial judgements concerning 11 accused were delivered, including a judgement in a contempt of court case. In addition, the evidence phase in six trials against 17 accused was completed. All these cases are now in the judgement drafting phase. Trials are in progress against six persons in five cases. At the appeals level, in addition to many interlocutory decisions on review and reconsideration and pre-appeal orders and decisions, two judgements in single-accused cases were delivered during the reporting period. This brings to 27 the total number of persons whose judgements have been completed at the appellate level. There are currently seven pending appeals from judgement. In all trials of which the Tribunal is currently seized, with the possible exception of the Karemera et al. case, judgement delivery is expected before the end of 2010. The Registry continues to support the judicial process by servicing the other organs of the Tribunal and the defence, and by seeking support from States and/or international institutions, inter alia to ensure the appearance of witnesses and their safety, and to fund activities not covered by the regular budget. During the reporting period, three prisoners were released after serving their sentences. One detainee was acquitted. Nine prisoners were transferred to Mali and nine others to Benin to serve the remainder of their sentence. One acquitted person has been relocated to a Member State, while two acquitted persons remain under the Tribunal's protection. In line with the Tribunal's completion strategy, the Registry has stepped up all outreach activities, including the inauguration of 10 information centres across Rwanda and the organization of capacity-building programmes for the Rwandan judiciary; has received the report of the expert group on archives issues; and has continued to provide active support in the facilitation of the trial-readiness of cases. The Tribunal continues its intense efforts to comply with the completion strategy. However, the challenge in all 10 new cases, including one re-trial, to commence in 2009, has required some adjustment of the projections. By resolution 1878 (2009), the Security Council has therefore granted, at the request of the Tribunal, another extension of the mandate of the judges until the end of 2010 or the completion of the cases they are assigned to, if sooner. The services of the Appeals Chamber judges will be needed beyond 2010. The efforts of the Tribunal to complete all first instance trials have been assisted by the adoption of resolution 1855 (2008), by which the Council authorized an increase of the number of ad litem judges serving at the Tribunal and allowed for benches to be composed exclusively of ad litem judges. Three new ad litem judges joined the Tribunal in the first months of 2009. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone is mandated by the Security Council to oversee the implementation of the measures imposed by resolution 1171 (1998), which consist of an arms embargo on nongovernmental forces in Sierra Leone and travel restrictions on members of the former military junta and of the Revolutionary United Front as designated by the Committee. In 2008, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam) as Chairman, while the delegations of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Panama served as Vice-Chairmen. For 2009, Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam) continues to serve as Chairman, with the delegations of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Turkey providing the Vice-Chairmen. The Committee held no formal meetings or informal consultations during the reporting period. During the period under review, the Committee received two notifications pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 1171 (1998). On 13 February 2009, the Committee adopted its report for 2008 to the Security Council (S/2009/94). The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) is mandated by the Security Council to oversee the implementation of sanctions measures, consisting of an assets freeze, travel ban and arms embargo against individuals or entities belonging to or associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban as set out in resolutions 1267 (1999), 1333 (2000), 1390 (2002), 1452 (2002), 1455 (2003), 1526 (2004), 1617 (2005), 1735 (2006) and 1822 (2008). In 2008, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Jan Grauls (Belgium), who served as Chairman, with Burkina Faso and the Russian Federation serving as Vice-Chairmen. Since January 2009, Thomas Mayr-Harting (Austria) has served as Chairman, while Burkina Faso and the Russian Federation continued to serve as Vice-Chairmen. During the reporting period, the Committee held 2 formal and 27 informal meetings. Pursuant to paragraphs 28 and 29 of resolution 1822 (2008), the Committee during the latter part of 2008 conducted a thorough review of its guidelines in order to align them with the new provisions set out in that resolution. Several sections of the guidelines were restructured, and substantive changes were introduced, in particular in the sections on the Consolidated List (section 5), listing (section 6), de-listing (section 7) and updating the Consolidated List (section 8). Moreover, two new sections were drafted, one describing the procedures for the conduct of the review of the Consolidated List pursuant to paragraphs 22, 25 and 26 of resolution 1822 (2008) (section 9), the other detailing the procedure for the consideration of requests for exemptions from the travel ban (section 11). The revised guidelines were approved by the Committee on 9 December 2008. The Committee also updated all fact sheets and the general information available on the website with a view to reflecting the provisions of resolution 1822 (2008). Pursuant to paragraph 25 of resolution 1822 (2008), the Committee commenced a comprehensive review of all names that were included in the Consolidated List on 30 June 2008. As at 31 July 2009, the Committee had initiated the review of 287 names by circulating those names to the respective designating States and States of citizenship and residence. The remaining 201 names will be sent to reviewing States in two batches, in August and November 2009, respectively. The Committee also started making accessible on its website narrative summaries of the reasons for listing for each entry on the Consolidated List, in accordance with paragraph 13 of resolution 1822 (2008). As at 31 July, the Committee had approved for posting on its website 117 narrative summaries. Narrative summaries that have been posted on the Committee's website can be found at http://www.un.org/ sc/committees/1267/narrative.shtml. Pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004), 1617 (2005), 1735 (2006) and 1822 (2008), the Chairman undertook one visit to a selected country during the reporting period. From 23 to 25 June 2009 he visited the Russian Federation and attended the 8th Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies and Law Enforcement Organizations, held at Irkutsk. As a result of this visit, the Chairman was able to convey useful information on the implementation of sanctions measures to the Committee upon his return. On 11 May 2009, the Chairman transmitted the ninth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, established pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004), to the President of the Security Council (S/2009/245). The Committee intends to report to the Council on its position on the Monitoring Team's report in August 2009. Pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008), the Chairman presented his 180-day oral briefings, together with the Chairmen of the Committees established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, and resolution 1540 (2004) on 12 November 2008 and 26 May 2009, respectively. By those briefings the Council was informed of the work of the Committee and the Monitoring Team, as well as of the implementation of the sanctions measures by States. During the reporting period, two States submitted their reports on the implementation of sanctions measures in accordance with resolution 1455 (2003), bringing the total number of reports submitted to 156. In addition, one State submitted the checklist pursuant to resolution 1617 (2005), bringing the number of submitted checklists to 61. The Monitoring Team undertook several visits to various regions to discuss sanctions implementation with States and international organizations. The Team also held regular meetings with experts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the group of experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to identify areas of convergence and overlap and to help facilitate concrete cooperation, including in the area of reporting, among the three Committees. On 31 December 2008, the Chairman transmitted the report on the work of the Committee in 2008 to the Security Council (S/2008/848). On 11 December 2008 and 1 July 2009, the Chairman held public briefings for Member States, at which he relayed information on new developments in the work of the Committee. On 20 October, the Committee met with the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, Martin Scheinin. On 9 February 2009, the Committee received a high-level delegation from Algeria for a voluntary briefing on sanctions implementation, pursuant to paragraph 30 of resolution 1822 (2008). During the reporting period, the Committee added the names of 24 individuals to the Al-Qaida section of the Consolidated List. The Committee updated the information contained in 71 entries referring to individuals associated with Al-Qaida, 23 individuals associated with the Taliban, and 41 entities associated with Al-Qaida. On two occasions, two entries associated with Al-Qaida referring to the same entity were merged into one entry. The Consolidated List is available on the Committee's website at http://www.un.org/sc/committees/1267/ consolist.shtml. During the reporting period, the Committee delisted five individuals from the Al-Qaida section of the Consolidated List. The Committee received seven requests for de-listing during the reporting period, including second and third requests, respectively, from two individuals who had submitted petitions previously, from the focal point for de-listing established pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006). Of these, the Committee de-listed one individual. Four individuals remained on the List after the process of the consideration of their requests within the Committee had been completed. The remaining two requests were still under consideration at the end of the reporting period. The names of individuals, groups, undertakings and entities that have been removed from the Consolidated List pursuant to a decision by the Committee can be found at http://www.un.org/ sc/committees/1267/docs/De-listed.htm. The Committee also further enhanced the user-friendliness of its website through a simplification of the structure and the introduction of a sitemap. The Committee also continued its cooperation with INTERPOL. At the request of the Committee, INTERPOL publishes INTERPOL-Security Council Special Notices for individuals and entities included on the Committee's Consolidated List. The issuance of special notices is part of ongoing cooperation efforts between INTERPOL and the United Nations and serves, inter alia, to assist Member States in implementing the relevant sanctions measures. The special notices are thus distributed to all 187 countries members of INTERPOL with the objective of alerting national law enforcement agencies that an assets freeze, a travel ban and an arms embargo are in place with regard to the targeted individuals and entities. As at 31 July 2009, 342 notices for individuals and entities were published on the INTERPOL website. The notices can be found at http://www.interpol.int/Public/ NoticesUN/Default.asp. The Committee continued to consider notifications and requests submitted pursuant to resolution 1452 (2002) in accordance with the guidelines for the conduct of its work. The Committee also approved a request for an exemption to the travel ban set out in paragraph 1 (b) of resolution 1822 (2008). Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, known as the Counter-Terrorism Committee, is mandated to monitor the implementation of that resolution. The Committee has been assisted in its work by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, established pursuant to resolution 1535 (2004) for an initial period ending on 31 December 2007. By resolution 1805 (2008) the Council decided that the Directorate will continue to operate as a special political mission under the policy guidance of the Committee until 31 December 2010. In 2008 and 2009, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Neven Jurica (Croatia) as Chairman, while the delegations of France, the Russian Federation and Viet Nam served as Vice-Chairmen, who each chaired one of the Committee's three subcommittees. On 22 April 2009 the Chairman nominated Jean-Maurice Ripert (France) to act on his behalf in accordance with paragraph 2 (c) of the guidelines of the Committee for the conduct of its work. During the reporting period, the Committee held 15 formal meetings, 6 informal meetings and 28 Subcommittee meetings. Resolution 1373 (2001) sets out a comprehensive agenda of counter-terrorism activities, including steps aimed at bringing to justice perpetrators of terrorist acts as well as those who harbour, aid and support them. It also requires all States to cooperate on a wide range of issues related to counter-terrorism. All States are required to report to the Committee on their implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). As at 31 July 2009, the total number of reports the Committee has received from Member States and other entities stands at 711. The Committee has also received 100 reports from Member States pursuant to resolution 1624 (2005) since the adoption of that resolution. During the reporting period, the Committee submitted three semi-annual programmes of work to the Security Council, covering the periods from July to December 2008 (S/2008/471); January to June 2009 (S/2009/71); and July to December 2009 (S/2008/389). In monitoring and promoting the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), the Committee has continued to work towards the adoption of a tailor-made approach for each individual State, analysing its accomplishments in implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and seeking ways and means to increase the efficiency of its engagement, including through the facilitation of technical assistance. The Committee has continued to use the preliminary implementation assessment as an analytical tool designed to provide a systematic, even-handed, transparent and effective way to monitor the extent to which States have met their obligations under resolution 1373 (2001). As at 31 July 2009, 190 Member States have received their preliminary implementation assessments together with an invitation to provide any relevant comments or updated information by a specified date. At its 209th meeting, on 20 November 2008, the Committee endorsed a discussion paper prepared by the Executive Directorate which outlined procedures for "stocktaking" of each Member State's implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The "stocktaking" exercise covers States whose preliminary implementation assessments had been updated to include new information derived from their responses to those assessments or through other communications with the Committee, as well as States for which no or very little new information was available. The strategic aim of the "stocktaking" exercise is to enhance the Committee's dialogue with each State and bolster that State's counter-terrorism defences and capacity to cooperate internationally. During the reporting period, in the context of the "stocktaking" exercise, the Committee approved updated preliminary implementation assessments for 29 States, together with cover letters inviting them to provide updates, including new information on progress in implementing the resolution for the next "stocktaking" to be conducted within 15 months. In the course of the "stocktaking" exercise, the Committee also agreed to invite Permanent Representatives of States to meet informally with the subcommittees to discuss the preliminary implementation assessments for their States, problems encountered in providing information to the Committee, the overall implementation by each of those States of the relevant Council resolutions and ways to further enhance the dialogue between the Committee and that State. During the period under review, the subcommittees met with the Permanent Representatives or designated representatives of 17 States. At its 213th meeting, the Committee received a presentation of the technical guide to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which the Executive Directorate is developing based on the work of its five cross-cutting technical groups. The guide sets out the requirements and steps for implementing the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) and contributes to ensuring the consistency and even-handedness in the work of the Committee. The Committee has continued, through its Executive Directorate, to conduct visits to Member States, with their consent, in order to engage in detailed discussions on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in line with resolution 1535 (2004). During the reporting period, the Committee has visited Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Burkina Faso, Denmark, Egypt, Kenya, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Panama, the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Singapore, Uganda, the United Kingdom and Uzbekistan. The Committee has continued to work to deepen its engagement and cooperation with international, regional and subregional organizations and has encouraged and assisted them in the development of capacities that would improve their ability to assist their members with the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). On 24 February 2009, the Committee approved, through a silence procedure, the consolidated report on the implementation of the Plan of Action adopted at the fifth special meeting with international, regional and subregional organizations, held in Nairobi from 29 to 31 October 2007. During the reporting period, the Committee was briefed by the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism; the Assistant Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization for Political Affairs and Security Policy; the Chairman of the Working Group of the Meeting of Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies and Law Enforcement; the Chief of the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and the Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. During the period under review, the Committee continued to implement its mandate under resolution 1624 (2005), that is, to include in its dialogue with Member States their efforts to implement that resolution and to work with Member States to help build capacity, including through promoting good practices and facilitating the exchange of information. At its 214th meeting the Committee endorsed a discussion paper, prepared by the Executive Directorate, on resolution 1624 (2005). At its informal meetings on 19, 21 and 28 May 2009 the Committee considered the interim review of the work of the Executive Directorate pursuant to paragraph 2 of resolution 1805 (2008), which was subsequently adopted by the Committee and issued as a document of the Council on 4 June 2009 (S/2009/289). The three counter-terrorism-related Security Council Committees have continued the practice of coordinating their periodic briefings to the Council. Such briefings were held on 12 November 2008 and 26 May 2009. The Committee's website is maintained and updated by its Executive Directorate and can be found at http://www.un.org/sc/ctc/. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) is mandated by the Security Council to continue to identify, pursuant to paragraphs 19 and 23 of resolution 1483 (2003), individuals and entities whose funds, assets or economic resources should be frozen and transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq. As set out in paragraph 23 of resolution 1483 (2003), those individuals and entities include the previous Government of Iraq or its State bodies, corporations or agencies located outside Iraq, as well as other senior officials of the former Iraqi regime and their immediate family members, including entities owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by them or by persons acting on their behalf or at their direction. In 2008, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Michel Kafando (Burkina Faso), with Belgium serving as Vice-Chairman. Burkina Faso continued to provide the Chairman in 2009, with Japan serving as Vice-Chairman. While the Committee held no meetings during the reporting period, it did consider several issues brought to its attention, in particular related to its lists of individuals and entities established pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003). The lists are available on the Committee's website, at http://www.un.org/sc/ committees/1518/index.shtml. On 3 February 2009, the Chairman transmitted the report on the work of the Committee in 2008 to the Security Council (S/2009/79). The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia is mandated by the Security Council to oversee the measures imposed by that resolution and by resolution 1532 (2004), of which the following are currently in effect: the arms embargo imposed by resolution 1521 (2003) and subsequently modified by resolutions 1683 (2006) and 1731 (2006); the travel ban imposed by resolution 1521 (2003); and the assets freeze imposed by resolution 1532 (2004). During the sanctions review held during informal consultations on 20 October 2006, the members of the Council concluded that there was no basis for reinstating the prohibition on the import of Liberian timber, which had expired on 20 June 2006. By its resolution 1753 (2007), the Council decided to terminate the measures on diamonds. By its resolution 1854 (2008), the Council renewed the measures on arms imposed by paragraph 2 of resolution 1521 (2003) and modified by paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolution 1683 (2006) and paragraph 1 (b) of resolution 1731 (2006) and renewed the measures on travel imposed by paragraph 4 of resolution 1521 (2003) for a further period of 12 months. It also extended the mandate of the current Panel of Experts appointed pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 1819 (2008) for a further period until 20 December 2009. In 2008, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Giadalla Azuz Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) as Chairman, while the delegations of Indonesia and South Africa served as Vice-Chairmen. For 2009, Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) served as Chairman, with the delegations of Uganda and Turkey as the Vice-Chairmen. During the period under review, the Committee held 10 informal consultations to discuss various issues relating to the sanctions regime. During the reporting period the Committee received 13 requests for de-listing (11 individuals; one entity; one individual together with eight entities) in total from the focal point for de-listing established pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006). Of these, the Committee de-listed three individuals. Nine other individuals, two of whom had also submitted requests previously, and nine entities remained on the Committee's list(s) after the process of consideration of the requests within the Committee had been completed. With respect to a request for de-listing received in the previous reporting period, the outcome of which had been pending, the individual concerned remained on the Committee's lists after the process of consideration of that request within the Committee was completed in the current reporting period. The latest versions of the travel ban and assets freeze lists are available on the Committee's webpage, at http://www.un.org/sc/committees/1521/index.shtml. The Committee also considered 10 requests for travel ban waivers under paragraph 4 (c) of resolution 1521 (2003), of which 4 were granted. The Committee considered and approved one request, submitted in accordance with paragraph 2 (b) of resolution 1532 (2004), to authorize the release of hitherto frozen funds to cover the extraordinary expenses of an entity included in the assets freeze list. The Committee approved four requests, submitted in accordance with paragraph 2 (e) of resolution 1521 (2003), for exceptions to the arms embargo to allow for the equipping and training of the Liberian armed forces and police, and, in accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution 1683 (2006), for limited supplies of weapons and ammunition for use by members of the Government of Liberia police and security forces who have been vetted and trained since the inception of the United Nations Mission in Liberia. The Committee also received a request in accordance with resolution 1683 (2006) for the transfer of arms and ammunition from the Special Security Service to the Liberia National Police for the training of a police support unit. The request is still pending. On 6 May 2009, the Committee adopted its report for 2008 to the Security Council (S/2009/236). At its informal consultations on 31 October 2008, the Committee held a discussion on the informal written update from the Panel of Experts. The Committee also considered two requests for de-listing received from the focal point for de-listing. On 26 November, the Committee considered two additional requests for de-listing received from the focal point. At its informal consultations on 5 December 2008, the Committee heard a briefing by the Panel of Experts on its report submitted pursuant to resolution 1819 (2008) (S/2008/785). On 12 December, the Committee further discussed the report and recommendations of the Panel of Experts. On 17 December, as part of the Council's sanctions review, the Chairman briefed the Security Council on the main findings contained in the report and on the Committee's discussion of the report and its recommendations. The Committee considered one request for delisting received from the focal point for de-listing at its informal consultations on 9 January 2009. At informal consultations on 5 June, the Committee heard a briefing from the Panel of Experts on its midterm report submitted pursuant to resolution 1854 (2008) (S/2009/290). On 16 June, the Committee further discussed the Panel's report and its recommendations. On 25 June the Vice-Chairman briefed the Council on the main findings contained in the report and on the Committee's discussion of the report and its recommendations. During its informal consultations on 29 July, the Committee discussed revised draft guidelines for the conduct of its work, the approval of which is pending. Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo was established on 12 March 2004 by the Security Council to oversee and assess the implementation of the arms embargo originally imposed by paragraph 20 of resolution 1493 (2003), and to undertake the tasks set out by the Council in paragraph 15 of resolution 1807 (2008) and paragraph 6 of resolution 1857 (2008). The sanctions regime was subsequently renewed and amended with the adoption of resolutions 1533 (2004), 1596 (2005), 1649 (2005), 1698 (2006), 1771 (2007), 1807 (2008) and 1857 (2008), by which, inter alia, the Council imposed targeted travel and financial sanctions on individuals and entities as designated by the Committee. The Committee is supported by a Group of Experts to monitor the implementation of the sanctions regime with particular focus on North and South Kivu and Ituri. The Group of Experts was originally established by resolution 1533 (2004) and its mandate was subsequently renewed and amended by resolutions 1552 (2004), 1596 (2005), 1616 (2005), 1654 (2006), 1698 (2006), 1771 (2007), 1807 (2008) and 1857 (2008). By resolution 1807 (2008), the Council limited the applicability of the arms embargo, previously imposed by paragraph 20 of resolution 1493 (2003) and paragraph 1 of resolution 1596 (2005), to all nongovernmental entities and individuals operating in the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and clarified that the measures on arms and technical training no longer apply to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same time, by paragraph 5 of resolution 1807 (2008), the Council reiterated the obligation of supplier States to notify the Committee of all shipments of arms and related materiel to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of any provision of assistance, advice or training related to military activities in the that country. By resolution 1857 (2008), the Council decided to extend the sanctions regime and the mandate of the Group of Experts as set out in resolution 1807 (2008) for a further period expiring on 30 November 2009, while further amending the criteria for the application of targeted travel and financial sanctions. In 2008 the Bureau of the Committee consisted of R. M. Marty M. Natalegawa (Indonesia) as Chairman, with the delegations of Costa Rica and Viet Nam serving as Vice-Chairmen. On 31 December 2008, the Chairman conveyed the Committee's annual report to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/832). In 2009, Baki İlkin (Turkey) served as Chairman of the Committee, with the delegations of Costa Rica and Viet Nam serving as Vice-Chairmen. During the reporting period, the Committee held five informal consultations. On 13 August 2008, the Committee discussed the interim report of the Group of Experts pursuant to paragraph 18 (d) of resolution 1807 (2008), and considered the recommendations contained therein. On 26 August, the Chairman briefed the Security Council during informal consultations on the Committee's discussions on the report and its recommendations. On 10 December, the Committee discussed the final report of the Group of Experts and considered the recommendations contained therein. The Committee also considered a confidential annex prepared by the Group of Experts in connection with paragraph 18 (f) of resolution 1807 (2008). The interim and final reports of the Group of Experts were issued as documents of the Council simultaneously on 12 December (S/2008/772 and S/2008/773, respectively). On 17 December, the Chairman briefed the Council during informal consultations on the Committee's discussions on the report and its recommendations. On 31 December, the Chairman transmitted to the Security Council the report of the Committee on its activities from 1 January to 31 December 2008 (S/2008/832). In its informal consultations of 30 January 2009, the Committee held a discussion on its programme of work and the relevant provisions of resolution 1857 (2008), by which the Committee's mandate was expanded. The Committee also discussed follow-up measures to be taken pursuant to the final report of the Group of Experts (S/2008/773). On 11 March, the Committee held an exchange of views with the Group of Experts re-established pursuant to resolution 1857 (2008). On 13 May, the Committee discussed the interim report of the Group of Experts pursuant to paragraph 8 of resolution 1857 (2008), and considered the recommendations contained therein. The interim report of the Group was issued on 18 May (S/2009/253). On 28 May, the Chairman briefed the Council during informal consultations on the Committee's discussions on the report and its recommendations. In connection with its mandate to designate individuals and entities subject to the measures originally established by paragraphs 11 and 13 of resolution 1596 (2005), on 3 March the Committee designated four additional individuals, all members of one of the non-governmental armed groups operating in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (Callixte Mbarushimana, Stanislas Nzeyimana, Pacifique Ntawunguka and Leopold Mujyambere). During the reporting period, the Committee also updated the list of individuals and entities subject to the travel ban and assets freeze imposed by paragraphs 13 and 15 of resolution 1596 (2005), as renewed by paragraphs 9, 11 and 14 of resolution 1807 (2008), on the basis of information provided by the Groups of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo reestablished pursuant to resolutions 1771 (2007) and 1807 (2008) and the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands. During the reporting period, the Committee received six notifications regarding technical training and assistance to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, or deliveries of non-lethal military equipment for humanitarian and protective use, in pursuance of paragraph 5 of resolution 1807 (2008). Pursuant to paragraph 15 (d) of resolution 1807 (2008), the Committee has informed the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo of every notification received pursuant to paragraph 5 of that resolution. During the reporting period, the Committee received no requests for exemptions pursuant to the assets freeze, and no requests for de-listing from the focal point for de-listing established pursuant to resolution 1730 (2006). Pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 1857 (2008), by which the Council called upon all States, in particular those of the region, to support the implementation of the measures specified in the resolution, to cooperate fully with the Committee in carrying out its mandate and to report to the Committee, within 45 days from the date of adoption of the resolution, on the actions they have taken to implement the measures imposed by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the resolution, the Committee has received replies from Australia, Austria, Belgium, China, France, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Serbia, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The Committee's website can be found at http://www.un.org/sc/committees/1533/index.shtml. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) was established by the Security Council on 28 April 2004 for a period of no longer than two years with a mandate to report to the Council, for its examination, on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) concerning the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The Committee's mandate was extended for a further two years by resolution 1673 (2006). By resolution 1810 (2008) the Council extended the mandate of the Committee for a period of three years, until 25 April 2011. In 2008 and 2009, the Committee was chaired by Jorge Urbina (Coast Rica). In 2008, the delegations of Croatia, Indonesia and the United Kingdom, and in 2009 the delegations of Croatia, Mexico and the United Kingdom served as Vice-Chairmen. Each Vice-Chairman chaired one of the Committee's three subcommittees. During the period under review, the Committee held two formal and nine informal meetings. The Committee continued to be supported in its work by eight experts. On 25 August 2008, the Committee approved a note verbale inviting Member States to nominate experts to assist the Committee in fulfilling its mandate. On 19 December, the Committee approved the recruitment of three new experts to replace three outgoing experts (see S/2008/820). On 29 December, the Chairman of the Committee informed the President of the Security Council that the Committee, acting in accordance with paragraph 13 of resolution 1810 (2008), had initiated a discussion on options for developing and making more effective the existing funding mechanisms for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) (see S/2008/821). On 17 March 2009, the Committee adopted a paper by the Chairman entitled "Consideration of options for funding mechanisms for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)" (S/2009/171). On 2 March 2009, acting in accordance with paragraph 9 of resolution 1810 (2008), the Committee adopted its programme of work for the period from 1 February 2009 to 31 January 2010 (S/2009/124), which had been drafted by a working group established by the Committee for that purpose. In its programme of work, the Committee, inter alia, introduced, on a trial basis, a new system of working groups on (a) monitoring and national implementation; (b) assistance; (c) cooperation with international organizations, including the Security Council Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001); and (d) transparency and media outreach. During the reporting period, the working group on monitoring and national implementation held one meeting; the working group on assistance no meetings; the working group on cooperation one meeting; and the working group on transparency and media outreach one meeting. On 30 January, the Committee established a working group to consider the modalities of a comprehensive review of the status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 1810 (2008) (see S/2009/63). On 1 April, the Committee adopted a report on modalities for considering a comprehensive review in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 1810 (2008) (S/2009/170). During the reporting period, the Committee experts continued to update the matrices for Member States on the basis of new information with regard to their efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004). The Chairman of the Committee participated in joint briefings by the Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) to the Security Council, held on 12 November 2008 and 26 May 2009. As part of its outreach activities, members of the Committee and the Committee's experts continued to participate in seminars, workshops and conferences, explaining to participants the work of the Committee and the requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) with a view to strengthening support for its implementation. The Committee, with the support of interested Member States and the Office for Disarmament Affairs, also organized several regional and subregional workshops on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). At its 23rd meeting, the Committee was briefed by the Chief of the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and, at its 24th meeting, the Committee heard briefings from the Chairman of the 2008 meetings of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention as well as the Head of the Convention's Implementation Support Unit. The Committee's website is maintained and updated by the Office for Disarmament Affairs and can be found at http://www.un.org/sc/1540/. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) is mandated to oversee the implementation of the sanctions regime consisting of an arms embargo, travel ban and assets freeze imposed by that resolution, as renewed and expanded by resolution 1643 (2005), by which the Security Council decided that all States should take the necessary measures to prevent the import of all rough diamonds from Côte d'Ivoire to their territory. By its resolution 1842 (2008), the Council renewed until 31 October 2009 the sanctions regime imposed by resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1643 (2005). The Council also extended until 31 October 2009 the mandate of the Group of Experts as set out in paragraph 7 of resolution 1727 (2006). In 2008, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Jan Grauls (Belgium) as Chairman, while the delegations of Italy and South Africa provided the Vice-Chairmen. For 2009, Claude Heller (Mexico) served as Chairman, with the delegations of Austria and Uganda serving as Vice-Chairmen. During the reporting period, the Committee held seven informal consultations. On 31 December 2008, the Chairman transmitted to the Security Council the report of the Committee on its activities from 1 January to 31 December 2008 (S/2008/829). During its informal consultations on 8 October 2008, the Committee considered the final report of the Group of Experts submitted in accordance with paragraph 10 of resolution 1782 (2007), and possible actions to be taken by the Committee. On 9 October, the report was issued as a document of the Council (S/2008/598) and on 27 October the Committee Chairman briefed the Council during informal consultations on the Committee's discussions on the report and its recommendations. On 14 November, the Committee sent a note verbale to all States drawing their attention to paragraphs 7, 9 and 11 of resolution 1572 (2004) as well as paragraph 6 of resolution 1643 (2005) and relevant paragraphs of the final report of the Group of Experts. During its informal consultations on 15 January 2009, the Committee held an exchange of views with the Group of Experts prior to the Group's deployment to the field. On 8 April, the Committee considered the midterm report of the Group of Experts submitted in accordance with paragraph 11 of resolution 1842 (2008), which was subsequently issued as a document of the Council (S/2009/188). On 1 May, the Committee sent a note verbale to all States drawing their attention to paragraphs 7, 9 and 11 of resolution 1572 (2004) as well as paragraph 6 of resolution 1643 (2005), as renewed by paragraph 1 of resolution 1842 (2008), and relevant paragraphs of the midterm report of the Group of Experts. During its informal consultations on 14 May, the Committee considered a letter from the Permanent Representative of Côte d'Ivoire requesting the delisting of one of the sanctioned individuals. In a letter dated 29 May, the Chairman informed the Permanent Representative of Côte d'Ivoire that the Committee was unable to agree to the de-listing request. During its informal consultations on 19 September and 8 October 2008 and on 14 January, 27 March, 8 April and 15 July 2009, the Committee received briefings from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the monthly media and arms embargo monitoring reports prepared by the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI). Furthermore, during its consultations on 19 September 2008 and on 15 January, 27 March and 15 July 2009, the Committee also considered the quarterly human rights reports prepared by UNOCI. The Committee's website can be found at http://www.un.org/sc/committees/1572/index.shtml. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan is mandated by the Security Council to monitor an arms embargo on all non-governmental entities and individuals, including the Janjaweed, operating in the States of Northern Darfur, Southern Darfur and Western Darfur, which was subsequently expanded to include all the parties to the N'Djamena Ceasefire Agreement and any other belligerents in the above-mentioned States in the Sudan. The Committee is also mandated to monitor the implementation of the travel ban and assets freeze imposed by resolution 1591 (2005) and, inter alia, to designate individuals subject to those measures, in accordance with the criteria set out in that resolution. By resolution 1672 (2006), the Council decided that all States shall implement those measures with respect to the four individuals named in the resolution. The list of individuals subject to the travel ban and assets freeze is also available on the Committee's webpage, at http://www.un.org/sc/committees/1591/index.shtml. From 1 to 21 August 2008, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Marcello Spatafora (Italy) as Chairman, while the delegations of Croatia and Panama provided the Vice-Chairmen. From 22 August to 31 December 2008, Giulio Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy) took over the chairmanship. For 2009, Thomas Mayr-Harting (Austria) served as Chairman, with the delegations of Croatia and Mexico providing the Vice-Chairmen. On 14 August, the Committee received a second update report from the Panel of Experts on the Sudan whose mandate had been extended by resolution 1779 (2007). On 2 September, pursuant to a request for assistance contained in the report, the Chairman sent letters to 16 States drawing their attention to the pending requests for information addressed to them by the Panel. In informal consultations on 5 September, the Committee discussed its future programme of work. On 15 September, the Committee received a letter from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan addressing matters raised during his earlier bilateral meeting with the Chairman. In informal consultations on 10 October, the Committee received an oral and visual presentation from the Panel of Experts concerning its final report, and members of the Committee discussed with the panellists the findings and recommendations contained therein. Committee members further discussed each of the recommendations in greater detail in subsequent informal consultations held on 4 November; they agreed to implement some of the recommendations or elements thereof. On 20 November, the Chairman sent a letter to the Government of the Sudan concerning various aspects of the sanctions regime, to which a response was received on 22 December. In addition, the Chairman sent a letter to the relevant official in the United Nations Secretariat on various matters related to arms embargo monitoring, to which a response was received on 10 December. With the agreement of the members, and on the basis of his own proposal, on 20 November the Chairman also sent a letter to the Chairman of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, highlighting a case study contained in the Panel's final report. In informal consultations on 2 December, the members of the Committee agreed that the Chairman would contact the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and Chad to express the Committee's interest in hearing those representatives' views on the Panel's final report. They also discussed a letter from a nongovernmental organization containing a request to brief the Committee. The Committee heard the briefing in informal consultations on 12 December. On 23 December, the Committee adopted its annual report for 2008 (S/2008/840). In informal consultations on 27 January 2009, the Committee heard an interim briefing by the Panel of Experts, whose mandate had been extended by resolution 1841 (2008). In informal consultations on 3 March, the Committee discussed a progress report submitted by the Panel, which had been unable to travel to the Sudan: initially because the Government of the Sudan had not granted a visa to the arms expert, and subsequently owing to security conditions. The Chairman also updated the Committee on his bilateral contacts with the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and Chad. In informal consultations on 28 April, the Committee held an exchange of views with the Joint African Union-United Nations Special Representative for Darfur on matters related to the work of the Committee, particularly the role of the United Nations-African Union Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in arms embargo monitoring. In informal consultations on 26 May, the Committee discussed the midterm report of the Panel of Experts. With the agreement of the members, on 2 June the Chairman forwarded the two recommendations contained in the report -- the first relating to information-sharing between the relevant peacekeeping operations and the Panel and the second relating to security clearance for the Panel -- to the relevant officials in the Secretariat for their views. A response was received on 8 June. The Chairman also updated the Committee on his bilateral contact with the Permanent Representative of the Sudan. In informal consultations on 8 July, the Committee discussed an oral progress report delivered by the Panel of Experts. On 30 July, pursuant to a request for assistance from the Panel, the Chairman sent a letter to a State drawing its attention to the pending requests for information and assistance addressed to it by the Panel. On 11 September and 10 December 2008 and on 10 March and 19 June 2009, the Chairman of the Committee delivered periodic reports to the Security Council, as called for in paragraph 3 (a) of resolution 1591 (2005), each time describing the Committee's activities and, where appropriate, the Chairman's bilateral contacts during the preceding 90 days. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1636 (2005) is mandated to undertake tasks described in paragraph 3 and the annex to that resolution, in order to assist in the investigation into the terrorist bombing in Beirut on 14 February 2005 that killed the former Prime Minister of Lebanon Rafiq Hariri, and 22 others. In 2008 and 2009, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Michel Kafando (Burkina Faso) as Chairman. For 2008, the delegations of Belgium and Viet Nam served as Vice-Chairmen, while for 2009 the delegations of Austria and Viet Nam served as Vice-Chairmen. During the reporting period, the Committee held no consultations or meetings and did not prepare an annual report. The Committee's website can be found at http://www.un.org/sc/committees/1636/index.shtml. The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) is mandated to oversee the implementation of the measures imposed by that resolution with respect to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Security Council by resolution 1874 (2009) imposed additional measures, including an expansion of the arms embargo to cover the supply, sale or transfer to or from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of all arms and related technology, with the exception of the provision by States to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of small arms and light weapons and their related materiel under a notification regime. By resolution 1874 (2009) the Council also expanded the financial measures to include a ban on financial transactions, technical training, advice services or assistance related to such arms and materiel. The Council called upon Member States to prevent the provision of financial services or the transfer of financial assets or resources (including by freezing such resources), or public financial support for trade with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that could contribute to that country's nuclear-related, ballistic missile-related and other weapons of mass destruction-related programmes. The Council directed the Committee to designate entities, goods and individuals in order to adjust measures imposed by resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009). Furthermore, in resolution 1874 (2009) the Council called for the inspection of cargo to and from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea under the conditions and circumstances specified in the resolution. Also included were provisions authorizing, under specific circumstances, the seizure and disposal of items identified during inspection, the supply of which to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was prohibited, and a ban on the provision of bunkering services and other servicing to vessels of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In 2008, the Bureau of the Committee consisted of Marcello Spatafora (Italy) as Chairman until, on 22 August, Giulio Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy) took over the Chairmanship. The delegations of Costa Rica and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya served as Vice-Chairmen. In 2009, Baki İlkin (Turkey) assumed the Chairmanship; the Vice-Chairmen remained unchanged. During the period under review, the Committee held three formal meetings and 18 informal consultations to discuss various aspects of the sanctions regime. In informal consultations on 15 and from 20 to 24 April 2009, pursuant to the Statement by the President of the Council of 13 April 2009 (S/PRST/2009/7), the members of the Committee met to discuss proposals for the designation of additional goods and entities as subject to the measures imposed in paragraph 8 of resolution 1718 (2006), namely, the nuclear-related, ballistic missile-related and other weapons of mass destruction-related embargo and the assets freeze, as well as the Committee's report to the Council. At a formal meeting on 24 April, the Committee adopted a decision by which it determined that the items listed in document S/2009/205 shall be subject to the embargo and by which it designated three entities as subject to the assets freeze. The Committee also adopted its report to the Council (S/2009/222). On 12 May, the Committee approved the dispatch of a note verbale to all Member States informing them of its decision. In informal consultations on 19 June, pursuant to specific paragraphs of resolution 1874 (2009), the members of the Committee met to discuss the text of a note verbale to all Member States, drawing their attention to (a) the Council's call for the submission of implementation reports and the Committee's mandate to receive and consider such reports (paras. 22 and 25); (b) the designation of entities, goods and individuals and the request to the Committee to report to the Council (para. 24); (c) the programme of work (para. 25); and (d) the creation of a Panel of Experts (para. 26). On 29 June, the Committee approved the note verbale. In informal consultations on 1, 6, 7, 9, 10, and from 13 to 15 July, the members of the Committee continued their discussion of the latter three items. At a formal meeting on 15 July, the Committee adopted its programme of work, covering compliance, investigations, outreach, dialogue, assistance and cooperation, for the period from 15 July 2009 to 15 July 2010, which was transmitted on the same date to the Security Council, pursuant to paragraph 25 of resolution 1874 (2009). Pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution 1874 (2009), on 16 July, the Committee transmitted its report (S/2009/364) to the Security Council, conveying its decision to designate additional entities, goods and individuals subject to the provisions of resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009). On the same day the Committee dispatched a note verbale to all Member States informing of the Committee's decision. On 30 July the Committee continued its discussion on the designation of entities, goods and individuals and heard a briefing by the United States Special Envoy for the implementation of resolution 1874 (2009). In accordance with paragraph 12 (g) of resolution 1718 (2006), the Chairman presented periodic reports to the Council on the work of the Committee, on 3 October 2008 and on 12 February and 13 May 2009. During the period under review, the Committee received three reports from Member States pursuant to paragraph 11 of resolution 1718 (2006) and 21 reports from Member States pursuant to paragraph 22 of resolution 1874 (2009). The Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) is mandated to oversee the implementation of the measures imposed by resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008) with respect to the Islamic Republic of Iran. The measures include a proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities-related and nuclear weapon delivery systems-related embargo; an export ban on arms and related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran; and targeted measures, namely, an assets freeze, a travel ban and a travel notification requirement on designated individuals and entities. In addition, in resolution 1737 (2006) the Council called upon all States to prevent specialized teaching or training of Iranian nationals in disciplines which would contribute to the proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities of the Islamic Republic of Iran and its development of nuclear weapon delivery systems. In resolution 1747 (2007) the Council called upon all States to exercise vigilance and restraint in the provision of heavy weapons and related services to the Islamic Republic of Iran, and called upon all States and international financial institutions not to enter into new commitments for grants, financial assistance and concessional loans to the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, except for humanitarian and developmental purposes. In resolution 1803 (2008) the Council called upon all States to exercise vigilance in the areas of public-provided financial support for trade with the Islamic Republic of Iran and of banking with that country, particularly with respect to Bank Melli and Bank Saderat, and to inspect the cargoes to and from the Islamic Republic of Iran of aircraft and vessels, at their airports and seaports, owned or operated by two Iranian companies, provided that there were reasonable grounds to believe that the aircraft or vessel was transporting goods prohibited under resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) or 1803 (2008). In cases when such inspection of cargoes is undertaken, the Council requires all States to submit to it within five working days a written report on the inspection. In 2008, Johan C. Verbeke (Belgium) served as Chairman until 4 June, when Jan Grauls (Belgium) took over the Chairmanship. The delegations of Burkina Faso and Costa Rica provided the Vice-Chairmen. In 2009, Yukio Takasu (Japan) assumed the Chairmanship; the Vice-Chairmen remained unchanged. During the period under review, the Committee held two informal consultations. In informal consultations on 10 September 2008, the Committee received a briefing from a member of the Committee on its efforts to implement the provisions of paragraph 10 of resolution 1803 (2008). In that paragraph the Council called upon all States to exercise vigilance over the activities of financial institutions in their territories with all banks domiciled in the Islamic Republic of Iran, in particular with Bank Melli and Bank Saderat, and their branches and subsidiaries abroad, in order to avoid such activities contributing to proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities or to the development of nuclear weapon delivery systems. In informal consultations on 15 October, the Committee received a briefing from a member of the Committee on its efforts to implement the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 of resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph 8 of resolution 1803 (2008). These paragraphs relate to the prohibition on the transfer of goods and technology to the Islamic Republic of Iran that could contribute to enrichment-related, reprocessing or heavy-water-related activities, or to the development of nuclear weapon delivery systems; and to the prohibition on the transfer of any further items that, as determined by the State, would contribute to the pursuit of activities related to other topics about which the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) had expressed concerns or which IAEA had identified as outstanding. During those consultations, the Committee also received a briefing from a State in connection with a project which fell within the scope of the provisions on IAEA cooperation as described in paragraph 16 of resolution 1737 (2006), aimed at strengthening the effectiveness of the regulatory oversight of the safety at the nuclear power plant at Bushehr, Islamic Republic of Iran. On 23 December, the Committee adopted its annual report for 2008 (S/2008/839). On 3 February 2009, the Committee received a letter from a State seeking guidance with respect to its inspection of cargo on a vessel under its flag that had been found to be carrying arms-related materiel. The Committee, in its reply of 6 February, stated that the transfer of the materiel in question constituted a violation of the export ban on arms and related materiel set out in paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007). The State provided additional details regarding the materiel on 12 February, 27 March and 26 May; the Committee responded once, on 24 February. On 9 March, in connection with this transfer, the Committee sent letters to two concerned States inviting them to provide within 10 working days any additional relevant information. The Committee subsequently received a response from one of those States, which, however, did not provide any such information. The Committee therefore sent a second letter to both States on 1 May, reiterating its request. During the period under review, the Committee received, pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006), two notifications concerning the intention of States to receive payments or to authorize the unfreezing of assets in order to cover payments, due under contracts entered into prior to the listing of certain entities. In addition, the Committee received, with reference to paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006), five notifications concerning the supply of items for use in the nuclear power plant at Bushehr. The Committee responded to four written queries from Member States requesting clarifications on certain aspects of the sanctions regime. With regard to reporting by States on their implementation of all the relevant measures set out in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008), by the end of the period under review, the Committee had received 91 reports under resolution 1737 (2006), 78 reports under resolution 1747 (2007) and 66 reports under resolution 1803 (2008). The Chairman of the Committee delivered four periodic reports to the Security Council, pursuant to subparagraph 18 (h) of resolution 1737 (2006), on 11 September and 10 December 2008, and on 10 March and 15 June 2009. Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations held five meetings in 2009, with the participation of major troop- and police-contributing countries, funds-contributing countries and other stakeholders, including regional organizations. The Working Group had a discussion on addressing gaps between mandates and their implementation. The Chairman of the Working Group submitted the interim report of the Working Group (S/2009/398) to the President on 31 July. The Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa continues to carry out its mandate as a subsidiary organ of the Council, pursuant to the presidential statement of 31 January 2002 (S/PRST/2002/2), in which the Council, inter alia, recognized the need for adequate measures to prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa and indicated its intention to consider the setting up of an ad hoc Working Group to monitor the recommendations contained in its presidential statement and to enhance coordination with the Economic and Social Council. During the reporting period, the Working Group was chaired by Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo (South Africa) in 2008, and, in 2009, by Francis K. Butagira (Uganda), followed by Ruhakana Rugunda, (Uganda), who is the current Chairman. By his note dated 18 December 2008 (S/2008/795), the President of the Security Council indicated the extension of the mandate of the Working Group for a period of one year, until 31 December 2009. During the period under review, the Working Group held four meetings. The Chairman of the Working Group briefed the Security Council on the activities of the Working Group at the Council's 6043rd meeting, on 15 December 2008. On 1 December 2008, the Working Group held an interactive meeting on the responsibility to protect, which brought together Council members and representatives of several non-governmental organizations. The Chairman of the Working Group observed that the interactive meeting had been convened for two reasons: first, the Secretary-General was expected to present his report on the responsibility to protect to the General Assembly early in 2009, and the latter, in turn, would debate the report. It was hoped that the Working Group's meeting would contribute to that debate. Second, the concept of the responsibility to protect fell within the mandate of the Working Group, as conflict prevention was a critical aspect of the responsibility to protect. In that regard, the Chairman noted with concern that the transformation of the concept of the responsibility to protect into practice was slow. The concept paper prepared by the Chairman for the meeting contended that, since the costs of military intervention were sky-rocketing and prevention could save lives and necessary infrastructure for development, the necessity for conflict prevention had become indisputable. Therefore, in order to mainstream conflict prevention into the spectrum of the responsibility to protect, and to move the latter from theory to practice, it was critical that several issues be resolved. The first related to the threshold for preventive intervention. This would require that, as new situations arose necessitating preventive action by the international community, there would be broad consensus as to when and how to act. The second related to a common understanding that the responsibility to protect was not confined to military intervention. The third issue was how to ensure that the responsibility to protect was broadly appreciated not as a threat to smaller nations but as a moral imperative aimed at reducing suffering globally. That, it was believed, would spur Governments and nongovernmental organizations to make available the necessary resources to ensure protection. The last issue called for a clear interface between the sovereign State and the international community in determining the necessity for preventive intervention. On 18 June 2009, the Working Group met to review and formally adopt its programme of work for 2009. The Working Group also heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), Said Djinnit, on the situation in the West Africa region, the impact of the increase in drug trafficking and the risk of relapse posed to countries in the region previously in conflict. He highlighted the major factors behind the problem of drug-trafficking in West Africa, including the fact that international trafficking networks were taking advantage of the porous borders and weak law enforcement capacities of the region. In highlighting the link between the spread of drug-trafficking in the subregion and the risk of relapse into conflict, he warned that, if not addressed properly and immediately, the surge in drug-trafficking in West Africa could jeopardize democratic governance in the region, support the expansion of criminal gangs and terrorist networks and further threaten peace, security and development across the entire continent. Welcoming the recent endorsement of the operational plan for the Regional Action Plan of the Economic Community of West African States, the Special Representative noted that, in support of the implementation of that Plan, UNOWA, together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and INTERPOL had forged a partnership to launch a joint programme in four pilot countries (Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone) to strengthen national police and law enforcement capacities. He stressed that the support of the international community would be crucial to translate the objectives of national integrated programmes into operational mechanisms. He also underlined the importance of the Council's continued support to countries of the subregion to overcome these challenges. Members of the Working Group welcomed the timely and thorough briefing by the Special Representative and underlined the importance of addressing the threat posed by drug-trafficking in the region. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict is mandated by the Security Council to review the reports of the monitoring and reporting mechanism referred to in paragraph 3 of resolution 1612 (2005) and the progress in the development and implementation of the action plans mentioned in paragraph 7 of the resolution, and to consider other relevant information presented to it. The monitoring and reporting mechanism seeks to monitor the following six grave abuses: killing or maiming of children; recruiting or using child soldiers; attacks against schools or hospitals; rape and other grave sexual violence against children; abduction of children; and denial of humanitarian access for children. The Working Group is mandated, in particular, (a) to make recommendations to the Council on possible measures to promote the protection of children affected by armed conflict, including through recommendations on appropriate mandates for peacekeeping missions and recommendations with respect to the parties to the conflict; and (b) to address requests, as appropriate, to other bodies within the United Nations system for action to support the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005) in accordance with their respective mandates. During the reporting period, and pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), the Chairman of the Working Group submitted a report to the Council on developments in relation to the Working Group for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 (S/2009/378). The Working Group held five formal meetings. On the basis of reports of the Secretary-General produced in the context of the monitoring and reporting mechanism mentioned above, the Working Group considered the situation of children in seven conflict situations: in Chad (S/2008/532), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2008/693), Afghanistan (S/2008/695), the Central African Republic (S/2009/66), the Sudan (S/2009/84), Myanmar (S/2009/278) and Sri Lanka (S/2009/325). The Working Group also adopted conclusions on the situation of children in armed conflict in the Philippines (S/AC.51/2008/10), Sri Lanka (S/AC.51/2008/11), Nepal (S/AC.51/2008/12), Uganda (S/AC.51/2008/13), Somalia (S/AC.51/2008/14), Chad (S/AC.51/2008/15), Afghanistan (S/AC.51/2009/1), the Central African Republic (S/AC.51/2009/2) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/AC.51/2009/3). Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions During the reporting period, the Working Group held a total of eight informal meetings to discuss various issues related to the Security Council's documentation and procedures. In 2008, the Chairmanship of the Working Group was held by Ricardo Alberto Arias (Panama) and, in 2009, by Yukio Takasu (Japan). On 31 December 2008, following an earlier discussion and preliminary agreement within the Working Group, the Security Council approved a note by the President of the Security Council (S/2008/847) with a view to further enhancing the efficiency and transparency of its work. Pursuant to that note, and reaffirming the Council's commitment to implementing all previously agreed measures, in particular those contained in the note by the President of 19 July 2006 (S/2006/507), the Council agreed on a revised format for the summary statement by the Secretary-General on matters of which the Security Council is seized. On 30 January 2009, the revised summary statement was issued as S/2009/10. The Working Group held a meeting on 14 May 2009 for the purpose of adopting its programme of work and to discuss the Chairman's "focus paper" pertaining to the implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2006/507). On 28 July, a meeting of members of the Working Group and representatives of the "Small Five" Member States (Costa Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland) was convened, in response to a request from Switzerland, on behalf of the "Small Five", in a letter dated 30 April 2009, to discuss the working methods of the Security Council. Relevant information pertaining to the work of the Working Group has been made available, in all official languages, on the webpage, at http://www.un.org/sc/wgdocs/. The Informal Working Group on International Tribunals was established on an informal basis in 2000 to consider matters relating to the United Nations and United Nations-assisted Tribunals, particularly the International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. The Working Group consists of the legal advisers of the missions of the members of the Security Council and is assisted by the Office of Legal Affairs. Until 2007, its chairmanship rotated with the monthly rotation of the presidency of the Council and it met only on an ad hoc basis. At the end of 2007, given the intensive work relating to residual issues and the completion strategies of the Tribunals, the Working Group decided to appoint a single Chairman and started meeting on a regular basis. In 2008 the chairmanship of the Working Group was held by Belgium and in 2009 it was taken over by Austria. During the reporting period, the Working Group held 34 meetings (15 meetings in 2008 and 19 meetings in 2009). The discussions of the Working Group were informed, inter alia, by a joint paper produced by the Tribunals (revised in September 2007) and a report of the Advisory Committee on Archives chaired by Justice Richard Goldstone (presented in September 2008). The Working Group held several meetings and videoconferences with the principals of the Tribunals and informally met with the host countries of the Tribunals, Rwanda and the countries of the former Yugoslavia. The members of the Working Group also had informal exchanges of views with the President, Registrar and members of the Management Committee of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. From 26 September to 3 October 2008 the Working Group visited the Tribunals in The Hague and Arusha, and attended a seminar on the theme "Legacy of the International Criminal Tribunals" in Brussels. From August to December 2008, after general discussions during the first part of the year, the Working Group's focus moved to draft elements for a possible Security Council resolution dealing with the residual issues, prepared by the Chairman with the assistance of the Office of Legal Affairs. That draft resolution passed through two readings, leading to three successive versions of the draft. While a number of elements were gaining support, significant areas of difference remained and it was not possible to finalize the draft before the end of 2008. On 19 December 2008, following discussions and agreement reached within the Working Group, the Security Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/47), in which it acknowledged the need to establish an ad hoc mechanism to carry out a number of essential functions of the Tribunals, including the trial of high-level fugitives, after the closure of the Tribunals. The Council expressed its appreciation to the Working Group for its work to date on the establishment of the mechanism and requested it to continue its efforts in that regard. In order to facilitate its further work, the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit a report on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the options for possible locations for the Tribunals' archives and the seat of the residual mechanism(s) (see S/2009/258). On the same day, after consideration by the members of the Working Group, the Permanent Representative of Belgium sent a letter to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/849), which provides a detailed account of the activities of the Working Group during 2008. During the first half of 2009, under the new Austrian chairmanship, the Working Group met nearly every week to take forward the discussions on the establishment of the residual mechanism(s). The Working Group continued with an in-depth examination of eight residual functions identified by the Tribunals as essential to be carried out after their closure, namely, trial of fugitives; trial of contempt cases; protection of witnesses; review of judgements; referrals of cases to national jurisdictions, including revocation; supervision of enforcement of sentences; assistance to national jurisdictions; and maintenance of the archives. It also discussed the potential commencement date(s) of the mechanism(s) as well as its (their) structure, including whether there should be one or two mechanisms, or one mechanism with two branches, and the related questions of the possible colocation of the Tribunals' archives with the mechanism(s), and its (their) location. The discussions were informed by Chairman's non-papers with input from the Tribunals, which were produced with the assistance of the Office of Legal Affairs. In July 2009 the Working Group held a first round of discussions of the contents and recommendations of the Secretary-General's report on the administrative and budgetary aspects of the options for possible locations for the archives and the seat of the residual mechanism(s) for the Tribunals (S/2009/258), with a view to resuming negotiations on a new draft Security Council resolution to establish the residual mechanism(s) during the second part of the year. On 12 December 2008 and 4 June 2009, at the biannual public meetings of the Security Council to hear the briefings on the completion strategies of the International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the representatives of Belgium and Austria, in their respective roles as Chairmen of the Group, briefed the Council on the progress of the Working Group. In order to facilitate the completion strategies, the Working Group also considered various requests by the Presidents of the Tribunals, including the extension of the judges' terms of office and greater flexibility in their appointment to cases, the enlargement of the Appeals Chamber through the redeployment of trial judges, and, as a temporary measure, the appointment of additional ad litem judges. Following negotiations and agreement reached among its members, the Group made recommendations to the Security Council for the adoption of appropriate resolutions. As a result, the Security Council adopted resolutions 1837 (2008), 1849 (2008), 1855 (2008), 1877 (2009) and 1878 (2009). Austria Indonesia Italy Panama South Africa United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Viet Nam II Representatives and deputy, alternate and acting representatives accredited to the Security Council The following representatives and deputy, alternate and acting representatives served on the Security Council during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009: * Term of office began on 1 January 2009. ** Term of office ended on 31 December 2008. Austria* Mr. Michael Spindeleggera (Federal Minister for European and International Affairs) Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting Mr. Christian Ebner Mr. Nikolaus Lutterotti Mr. Konrad Bühler Mr. Jürgen Heissel Ms. Gabriele Juen Ms. Barbara Kaudel Ms. Valerie Kyrle Ms. Hannah Liko Ms. Ulrike Nguyen Mr. Christoph Wieland Belgium** Mr. Karel de Guchtb (Minister for Foreign Affairs) Mr. Jan Grauls Mr. Olivier Belle Mr. Karl Dhaene Mr. Bart Lammens Ms. Delphine Delieux Mr. Pierre Cartuyvels Mr. William Roelants de Stappers Mr. Christophe Payot Mr. Axel Kenes Mr. Peter Van Kemseke Ms. Christine Detaille Mr. Blaise Compaoréc (President of Burkina Faso) Mr. Bedouma Alain Yodad Mr. Michel Kafando Mr. Paul Robert Tiendrébéogo Mr. Bonaventure Koudougou Mr. Antoine Somdah Mr. Ibsen Sifana Koné Mr. Saïdou Zongo Mr. Léopold Bonkoungou Ms. Mariam Fofana Mr. He Yafeie (Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs) Mr. Wang Guangya Mr. Zhang Yesui Mr. Liu Zhenmin Mr. La Yifan Mr. Li Kexin Mr. Long Zhou Mr. Du Xiaocong Mr. Kang Yong Ms. Chen Peijie Mr. Óscar Arias Sánchezf (President of Costa Rica) Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarteg Mr. Jorge Urbina Mr. Saúl Weisleder Mr. Jorge Ballestero Mr. Jairo Hernández Mr. Christian Guillermet Ms. Ana Patricia Villalobos Ms. Magda Rojas Ms. Manuela Ureña Ms. Marcela Calderón Ms. Marcela Zamora Mr. Randall González Ms. Alejandra Solano Ms. Carolina Sevilla Mr. Mauricio Artiñano Ms. Alejandra Valderrama Mr. Stjepan Mesićh (President of Croatia) Mr. Ivo Sanaderi (Prime Minister) Mr. Gordan Jandrokovićj Mr. Davor Božinovićk (State Secretary for Foreign Affairs) Mr. Neven Jurica Mr. Ranko Vilović Mr. Vice Skračić Mrs. Jasminka Dinić Ms. Irena Čačić Mr. Toma Galli Mr. Mato Škrabolo Ms. Kristina Lahovski Mr. Mario Škunca Mr. Ivan Mutavdžić Ms. Korana Došen Ms. Ivana Kožar Mr. Bernard Kouchnerl (Minister for Foreign and European Affairs) Mrs. Rama Yadem (Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Human Rights) Mr. Jean-Maurice Ripert Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix Mr. Nicolas de Rivière Mr. Hubert Renié Mr. Nicolas Kassianides Mr. Jean-Baptiste Faivre Indonesia** Mr. Hassan Wirajudan Mr. R. M. Marty M. Natalegawa Mrs. Adiyatwidi Adiwoso Asmady Mr. Hasan Kleib Mr. Rachmat Budiman Mr. Yayan G. H. Mulyana Mr. Sidharto Reza Suryo-di-Puro Mr. Abdul Kadir Jailani Mr. Odo R. M. Manuhutu Mr. Rolliansyah Soemirat Mr. Muhammad Anshor Mr. Witjaksono Adji Mr. Daniel T. S. Simanjuntak Mrs. Adhyanti S. W. Suryana Mr. I. Putu Yuli Adnyana Mr. Triyogo Jatmiko Italy** Mr. Franco Frattininn Mr. Giulio Terzi di Sant'Agata Mr. Aldo Mantovani Mr. Francesco Azzarello Mr. Amedeo Trambajolo Mr. Massimo Riccardo Japan* Mr. Shintaro Itoo Mr. Yukio Takasu Mr. Norihiro Okuda Mr. Shigeki Sumi Mr. Akio Miyajima Mr. Takashi Ashiki Mr. Tetsuya Kimura Mr. Tomohiro Mikanagi Mr. Yutaka Arima Mr. Naoki Kumagai Mr. Jun Miura Mr. Giadalla A. Ettalhi Mr. Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham Mr. Ibrahim O. A. Dabbashi Mr. Attia Omar Mubarak Mr. Abdelrazag E. Gouider Mr. Mohamed A. A. Alahraf Mr. Mohamed F. F. Elkrekshi Mr. Mohamed ElShakshuki Mr. Ahmed H. M. Gebreel Mr. Abdurrahman A. H. Elgannas Mr. Esam A. M. Ganbour Mr. Emad M. B. Ben-Shaban Mr. Sofian A. A. Belkheir Mexico* Ms. Patricia Espinosa Cantellanop Mr. Claude Heller Mr. Juan Manuel Gómez Robledo Mr. Pablo Macedo Ms. Socorro Rovirosa Mr. Guillermo Alejandro Puente Ordorica Mr. Fernando González Saiffe Mr. Victor Manuel Sánchez Colin Mr. Marco Antonio Morales Barba Mr. Alejandro Rodiles Bretón Mr. Enrique Ochoa Martinez Mr. Alejandro Alday González Mr. Roberto Armando de León Huerta Mr. Noel González Segura Mr. David Alejandro Olvera Ayes Mr. Carlos Gabriel Ruiz-Massieu Aguirre Mr. Rodrigo Pintado Collet Mr. Raúl Vargas Juárez Panama** Mr. Martín Torrijosq (President of Panama) Mr. Samuel Lewis Navarror (Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs) Mr. Ricardo Alberto Arias Mr. Giancarlo Soler Torrijos Mr. Nils Castro Mr. Alfredo Suescum Ms. Angélica Jácome Mr. Andrés de Vengoechea Mr. Sergey V. Lavrovs Mr. Alexander Yakovenkot (Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs) Mr. Mikhail Margelovu (Special Representative of the President of the Russian Federation on the Sudan and Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Federation Council and the Federal Assembly) Mr. Vitaly I. Churkin Mr. Igor N. Shcherbak Mr. Konstantin K. Dolgov Mr. Nikolay V. Chulkov Mr. Ilya I. Rogachev Mr. Vadim S. Smirnov Mr. Pavel R. Knyazev Mr. Gleb F. Desyatnikov Mr. Dmitry V. Feoktistov Mr. Oleg I. Kravchenko Mr. Denis Y. Paletskiy Mr. Andrei V. Demin Mr. Grigory E. Lukyantsev Mr. Gennady V. Kuzmin Mr. Vladimir P. Salov Mr. Vladimir Y. Zheglov Mr. Andrey M. Lisovoy Mr. Andrei A. Artasov Mr. Vladimir K. Safronkov Mr. Albert V. Sitnikov Mr. Oleg A. Demekhin Mr. Boris V. Chernenko South Africa** Mrs. Nkosazana C. Dlamini Zuman Mr. Dumisani Shadrack Kumalo Mr. Baso Sangqu Mr. Abdul Samad Minty Ms. Bongiwe Qwabe Mr. Sabelo Sivuyile Maqungo Mr. Zaheer Laher Mr. Wayne Malgas Mr. Johann Paschalis Ms. Lulama Rulumeni Mr. Petrus Sipho Seakamela Mr. Cedrick Crowley Ms. Moné Dye Turkey* Mr. Ali Babacanv Mr. Ahmet Davutoğluw Mr. Baki İlkin Mr. Fazli Çorman Mr. Hüseyin Müftüoğlu Mr. Zeki Levent Gümrükçü Ms. Gülin Dinç Mr. Can Dizdar Mr. Selçuk Ünal Mrs. Zeynep Kiziltan Mr. Timur Söylemez Mrs. Çağla Tansu Seçkin Mr. Aziz Sevi Mr. Aydan Karamanoğlu Mr. Ismail Çobanoğlu Mr. Ramis Şen Ms. Emriye Bağdagül Ormanci Ms. Burcu Keriman Erdoğdu Mrs. İlknur Bademli Angel Uganda* Mr. Sam Kutesax Mr. Francis K. Butagira Mr. Ruhakana Rugunday Mr. Patrick S. Mugoya Ms. Rhoda Kaisho-Sinani Mr. Isaac Biruma Sebulime Mr. Benedict Lukwiya Mr. Arthur Kafeero Mr. Denis Manana Mr. Elly Kamahungye Mr. Fred Tolit Mr. John Leonard Mugerwa Mr. George Maiteki Baitera Mr. Duncan Laki Muhumuza Mr. Stephen Nkayivu Ssenabulya Mrs. Margaret Awino Kafeero Mr. Nasanairi Kamudoli Mr. David Miliband, M.P.z (Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs) Lord Malloch-Brown, K.C.M.G., P.C.aa (Minister for Africa, Asia and the United Nations) Sir John Sawers Ms. Karen Pierce Mr. Philip John Parham Mr. Paul Johnston Mr. Ian Collard Mr. Justin McKenzie Smith Ms. Samantha Job Mr. David Whineray Mr. Nicholas Williams Lieutenant Colonel Nick Slinger Ms. Ann Thompson Mr. Michael Hoare Mr. Gareth Bayley Mr. Chanaka Wickremasinghe Mr. Richard Etherington Ms. Catherine Adams Mr. Philip Saltonstall Ms. Harriet Cross Ms. Nicola Freedman Ms. Philippa Steele Ms. Jonna Jeurlink Mr. David Quarrey Mr. James Roscoe Ms. Condoleezza Ricebb (Secretary of State) Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad Ms. Susan Ricecc Mr. Alejandro D. Wolff Ms. Jackie Wolcott Sanders Mr. Jeffrey DeLaurentis Ms. Carolyn L. Willson Mr. T. Kirk McBride Mr. R. Clarke Cooper Mr. Bruce C. Raskhow Ms. Rosemary A. DiCarlo Ms. Ellen Germain Mr. Thomas Vance McMahan Mr. Salman S. Ahmed Ms. Mary E. McLeod Mr. Le Luong Minhdd Mr. Hoang Chi Trung Mr. Bui The Giang Mrs. Nguyen Thi Thanh Ha Mr. Dang Hoang Giang a Participated at the 6061st and 6123rd meetings, on 6 January and 11 May 2009. b Participated at the 5979th, 5980th, 5983rd, 6024th and 6055th meetings, on 23, 24 and 26 September, 26 November and 22 December 2008. c Presided at the 5979th meeting, on 23 September 2008. d Presided at the 5979th, 5980th, 5982nd and 5983rd meetings, on 23, 24 and 26 September 2008, and participated at the 6123rd meeting, on 11 May 2009. e Participated at the 6045th and 6046th meetings, on 16 December 2008. f Presided at the 6017th meeting, on 19 November 2008. g Participated at the 5983rd and 6123rd meetings, on 26 September 2008 and 11 May 2009. h Presided at the 6034th meeting, on 9 December 2008. i Participated at the 5979th and 6134th meetings, on 23 September 2008 and 4 June 2009, and presided at the 6044th (closed), 6045th and 6046th meetings, on 15 and 16 December 2008. j Participated at the 5983rd meeting, on 26 September 2008. k Participated at the 6123rd meeting, on 11 May 2009. l Participated at the 5979th, 5980th, 5983rd and 6123rd meetings, on 23, 24 and 26 September 2008 and 11 May 2009, and presided at the 6061st and 6063rd meetings, on 6 and 8 January 2009. m Participated at the 5982nd meeting, on 26 September 2008. n Participated at the 5979th and 5983rd meetings, on 23 and 26 September 2008. o Participated at the 6106th and 6123rd meetings, on 13 April and 11 May 2009. p Presided at the 6114th meeting, on 29 April 2009. q Participated at the 5979th meeting, on 23 September 2008. r Participated at the 6017th meeting, on 19 November 2008. s Participated at the 6045th and 6046th meetings, on 16 December 2008, and presided at the 6123rd meeting, on 11 May 2009. t Participated at the 5979th, 6061st and 6063rd meetings, on 23 September 2008 and 6, 7 and 8 January 2009. u Participated at the 6170th meeting, on 24 July 2009. v Participated at the 6061st and 6063rd meetings, on 6 and 8 January 2009. w Participated at the 6123rd meeting, on 11 May 2009, and presided at the 6134th and 6145th meetings, on 4 and 18 June 2009. x Presided at the 6165th meeting, on 22 July 2009. y Participated in his capacity as Cabinet Minister at the 6123rd meeting, on 11 May 2009. z Participated at the 5983rd, 6044th (closed), 6045th, 6046th, 6061st, 6063rd and 6123rd meetings, on 26 September and 15 and 16 December 2008 and 6 and 8 January and 11 May 2009. aa Participated at the 5979th and 6165th meetings, on 23 September 2008 and 22 July 2009. bb Participated at the 5983rd, 6044th (closed), 6045th, 6046th, 6061st and 6063rd meetings, on 26 September and 15 and 16 December 2008 and 6 and 8 January 2009. cc Participated in her capacity as a member of President Obama's Cabinet at the 6123rd meeting, on 11 May 2009. dd Participated in his capacity as Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam at the 6061st and 6123rd meetings, on 6 January and 11 May 2009. III The following representatives served as President of the Security Council during the period from 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2009: 1-31 August 2008 1-30 September 2008a 1-31 October 2008 1-30 November 2008b 1-31 December 2008c 1-31 January 2009d 1-28 February 2009 1-31 March 2009 1-30 April 2009e 1-31 May 2009f 1-30 June 2009g Mr. Ruhakana Rugunda 1-31 July 2009h a Mr. Blaise Compaoré, President of Burkina Faso, presided at the 5979th meeting, on 23 September 2008, and Mr. Bedouma Alain Yoda, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, presided at the 5979th, 5980th, 5982nd and 5983rd meetings, on 23, 24 and 26 September 2008. b Mr. Óscar Arias Sánchez, President of Costa Rica, presided at the 6017th meeting, on 19 November 2008. c Mr. Stjepan Mesić, President of Croatia, presided at the 6034th meeting, on 9 December 2008, and Mr. Ivo Sanader, Prime Minister of Croatia, presided at the 6044th (closed), 6045th and 6046th meetings, on 15 and 16 December 2008. d Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of France, presided at the 6061st and 6063rd meetings, on 6 and 8 January 2009. e Ms. Patricia Espinosa Cantellano, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, presided at the 6114th meeting, on 29 April 2009. f Mr. Sergey V. Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, presided at the 6123rd meeting, on 11 May 2009. g Mr. Ahmet Davutoğlu, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, presided at the 6134th and 6145th meetings, on 4 and 18 June 2009. h Mr. Sam Kutesa, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda, presided at the 6165th meeting, on 22 July 2009. IV United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994 Letter dated 22 November 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council* The India-Pakistan question The situation between Iraq and Kuwait The situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia Relations between Cameroon and Nigeria Request of Pakistan for the establishment of a commission of inquiry in connection with the assassination of the former Prime Minister, Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto The Caribbean Community 