%%%DESERTIFICATION|DROUGHT CONTROL|ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Convention to Combat Desertification Distr. GENERAL ICCD/COP(2)/13 10 December 1998 Original: English CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES Second session Dakar, 30 November-11 December 1998 Agenda item 4 CREDENTIALS OF DELEGATIONS Report of the Bureau to the Conference of the Parties Introduction 1. In accordance with rule 19 of the rules of procedure, “(t)he credentials of representatives as well as the names of alternate representatives and advisers shall be submitted to the Permanent Secretariat if possible not later than 24 hours after the opening of the session. Any later change in the composition of the delegation shall also be submitted to the Permanent Secretariat. The credentials shall be issued either by a Head of State or Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs or, in the case of a regional economic integration organization, by the competent authority of that organization.” 2. Furthermore, rule 20 of the rules of procedure provides that “(t)he Bureau of any session shall examine the credentials and submit its report to the Conference of the Parties for decision”. 3. The present report is submitted to the Conference of the Parties in the light of the foregoing. Credentials of Parties to the second session of the Conference of the Parties 4. On 10 December 1998, the Bureau met to examine the credentials submitted by Parties to the Convention. 5. The Bureau had before it a memorandum dated 9 December 1998 from the Executive Secretary on the status of credentials of representatives participating in the Conference. The information in this memorandum is reflected below. 6. As noted in the memorandum of the Executive Secretary, formal credentials issued by the Head of State or Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, as provided for in rule 19 of the rules of procedure, have been received by the Permanent Secretariat of the Convention for the representatives of the following 71 Parties participating in the Conference: Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, China, Cook Islands, Costa GE.98-73501 Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, European Community, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Honduras, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Niue, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Nothern Ireland, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam and Zambia. 7. As of 9 December 1998, credentials issued by the Head of State or Government or by the Minister for Foreign Affairs as provided for in rule 19 of the rules of procedure of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification have been submitted by facsimile for the representatives of the following 10 Parties participating in the Conference: Bangladesh, Canada, Djibouti, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Paraguay, Romania, Tunisia, andTurkey. 8. As noted further in the memorandum, information concerning the appointment of representatives participating in the Conference has been communicated to the secretariat by means of facsimile in the form of letters or notes verbales from ministries, embassies, permanent missions to the United Nations or other Government offices or authorities, or through local United Nations ofices, by the following 29 Parties participating in the Conference: Angola, Argentina, Bolivia, Burundi, Cape Verde, Chile, Comoros, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Mexico, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Oeru, Sao Tome and Principe, Sudan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Yemen and Zimbabwe. 9. The President proposed that the Bureau should accept the credentials of all the representatives mentioned in the memorandum of the Executive Secretary, on the understanding that formal credentials for the representatives referred to in paragraphs 7 and 8 above would be communicated to the Permanent Secretariat as soon as possible. The Bureau accepted the proposal and agreed to submit the present report to the Conference. Credentials of representatives of Parties to the second session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification Draft decision submitted by the Bureau The Conference of the Parties, Having considered the report on credentials of the Bureau of the second session of the Conference of the Parties and the recommendation contained therein, Approves the report on credentials submitted by the Bureau of the second session of the Conference of the Parties. 