%%%CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|CONFERENCE FACILITIES|DOCUMENTATION|TRANSLATION|INTERPRETING|PUBLICATIONS|BUILDINGS MANAGEMENT|SPACE UTILIZATION|INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|DUTY STATIONS|LANGUAGE SERVICES|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|

United Nations Report of the Committee on Conferences for 2009 General Assembly Official Records Sixty-fourth Session Supplement No. 32 United Nations * New York, 2009 Report of the Committee on Conferences for 2009 ISSN 0255-1535 Note Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. [25 September 2009] Contents Chapter Page Organizational matters A. Membership B. Officers C. Organization of work D. Programme of work E. Participation of observers Calendar of conferences and meetings A. Requests for exceptions to section I, paragraph 7, of General Assembly resolution 40/243 B. Conclusions and recommendations C. Adoption of the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings for 2010 and 2011 Meetings management/improved utilization of conference-servicing resources and facilities A. Matters related to and intersessional departures from the approved calendar for 2009 B. Improved utilization of conference services and facilities: meeting statistics of United Nations organs and consultations with/letters to bodies concerning utilization of conference services available to them C. Provision of interpretation services to meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States D. Improved utilization of conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi E. Improved utilization of the conference centre at the Economic Commission for Africa Impact of the capital master plan, accelerated strategy IV (phased approach) on meetings held at Headquarters and other issues during its implementation Integrated global management Documentation and publication-related matters Translation and interpretation-related matters Adoption of the report Annexes I. Draft resolution II. Draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations and of the principal organs of the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and treaty bodies established under the auspices of the United Nations for 2010 and 2011 A. Draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations, 2010 B. List of bodies whose mandates are to be presented for renewal to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session C. Draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations, 2011 D. Draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the principal organs of the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and treaty bodies established under the auspices of the United Nations, 2010 E. Draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the principal organs of the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and treaty bodies established under the auspices of the United Nations, 2011 Chapter I 1. In its resolution 43/222 B, the General Assembly decided to retain the Committee on Conferences as a permanent subsidiary organ. Pursuant to the provisions of that resolution, in 2009 the Committee was composed of the following Member States: Argentina, Austria, Belarus, China, the Congo, France, Germany, Grenada, Honduras, Japan, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and the United States of America. 2. At its organizational session for 2009 (497th meeting), held on 7 April 2009, the Committee elected the following officers to serve in 2009: Chair: Barbara Kaudel (Austria) Vice-Chairs: Claudia Corti (Argentina) Yuri G. Yaroshevich (Belarus) Saidu Mohammed Dodo (Nigeria) Rapporteur: Jun Yamada (Japan) 3. At the same session, the Committee agreed in principle that the Chair would undertake informal consultations with a view to determining the composition of its 2010 Bureau and that the outgoing Chair and members of the Bureau would continue in their capacity until the 2010 Bureau was elected. 4. Also at its organizational session on 7 April 2009, the Committee agreed to follow the guidelines adopted in 1994 and 1995 with regard to its consideration of intersessional departures from the approved calendar of conferences and to meet, as required, to review proposals affecting the schedule of conferences and meetings during sessions of the General Assembly. 5. At the same meeting, the Chair proposed that an additional meeting be held to review the provisional calendar of conferences and meetings in the economic, social and related fields for 2010 and 2011 (E/2009/L.10). 6. The Committee convened its substantive session from 8 to 14 September 2009 (499th to 503rd meetings). 7. At the opening of the organizational session the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management addressed the Committee and introduced the report of the Secretary-General on action taken to improve the timely submission of documents for the Fifth Committee (A/63/735). The report of the Committee on Conferences on the report of the Secretary-General is contained in document A/63/32/Add.1. At the substantive session, the Under-Secretary-General introduced the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences (A/64/136). 8. At the substantive session, an observer delegation requested that the information provided by the Secretariat to the Committee at its current session and to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session be more consistent and less contradictory than had been the case the previous year. The delegation condemned the continued use of United Nations premises by some States to carry out activities that were blatantly hostile to other Member States and the direct involvement of some senior Secretariat officials in defamatory campaigns against Member States. Lastly, it expressed its dissatisfaction at the status of publication of the reports generated by the universal periodic review process of the Human Rights Council, which had been established expressly to replace the discredited Commission on Human Rights, and stressed that the use of the Secretariat's resources should be determined by the requirements of intergovernmental debate not the other way round. 9. At its organizational session for 2008, held on 7 April 2008, the Committee requested that the Secretariat submit the draft agenda for 2009 to the Committee at its organizational session for 2009. At its organizational session for 2009, the Committee adopted the agenda (see A/AC.172/2009/L.1) and requested that the Secretariat submit the draft agenda for 2010 to the Committee at its organizational session for 2010. 10. The following Member States were represented as observers at the organizational and substantive sessions of the Committee: Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Pakistan, Singapore, South Africa, Sweden, Portugal and the Republic of Korea. A. Requests for exceptions to section I, paragraph 7, of General Assembly resolution 40/243 11. At its 499th meeting, on 8 September 2009, the Committee on Conferences considered the section of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences (A/64/136, annex II) containing requests for exceptions, including an additional request from the United Nations Dispute Tribunal, to section I, paragraph 7, of General Assembly resolution 40/243, by which the Assembly had decided that no subsidiary organ of the Assembly might meet at United Nations Headquarters during a regular session of the Assembly unless explicitly authorized by the Assembly. 12. The Committee on Conferences recommended that the General Assembly explicitly authorize the following bodies to meet in New York during the main part of its sixty-fourth session, on the understanding that all such meetings would be allocated conference services on an "as available" basis, in such a way that the work of the Assembly and its Main Committees would not be impeded: (a) Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People; (b) Committee on Relations with the Host Country; (c) Disarmament Commission; (d) Executive Board of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women; (e) Executive Board of the United Nations Children's Fund; (f) Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East; (g) United Nations Dispute Tribunal. C. Adoption of the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings for 2010 and 2011 13. At its 499th meeting, on 8 September 2009, and the 503rd meeting on 14 September 2009, the Committee reviewed the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings for 2010 and 2011 (A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1). Discussion 14. The lack of provision of interpretation from and into Chinese for meetings of the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC) was noted with concern. A representative of the Secretariat explained that, like other mandated expert groups, the Commission would be entitled to interpretation services in all six official languages. However, for planning purposes, interpretation services provided to the meeting would be based on the actual membership of the body. In future, required interpretation services would be provided in consultation with the ICSC secretariat. 15. Various proposals had been made on the rescheduling of the resumed sessions of the Fifth Committee and in conjunction with that of the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Economic and Social Council owing to the lack of time for informal consultations during the second resumed session of the Fifth Committee. Some delegations suggested that one or two weeks be added to the second resumed session of the Fifth Committee in April, before its traditional start in the first week of May, and the current scheduling of the session of the Committee for Programme and Coordination be left unchanged. Other delegations suggested that one or two weeks be added after the traditional ending of the second resumed session of the Fifth Committee in June and that, accordingly, the start of the annual session of the Committee for Programme and Coordination be delayed by one or two weeks. Delegations agreed that if one or two weeks were to be added to the second resumed session of the Fifth Committee they would be taken from the main part of the Fifth Committee session, as a result of which the start of its session in October should accordingly be delayed by one or two weeks. One delegation also suggested delaying the start of the first and second resumed sessions of the Fifth Committee by one week. The Committee invited its Chair to hold informal consultations with the Chairs of the Fifth Committee, the Committee for Programme and Coordination, and the President of the Economic and Social Council, to which the Committee for Programme and Coordination reports, in order to discuss the above possible changes to the official calendar of conferences and meetings and to report thereon as soon as possible. 16. With regard to the fact that the meetings of some working groups of the General Assembly, for example the Working Group on Revitalization, had been included in the calendar of conferences, and those of others, for example the Working Group on the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, were not, the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management reported that, henceforth, it will include the meetings of all mandated working groups of the General Assembly with "dates to be determined" and conference services to be provided from those allocated to the Assembly in the calendar. Meetings management/improved utilization of conference-servicing resources and facilities 17. The General Assembly, in its resolution 63/248, approved the draft revised calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 2009, as submitted by the Committee on Conferences, and authorized the Committee to make any adjustments that might become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by the Assembly at its sixty-third session. The calendar was issued as document A/63/119/Add.1. 18. At its 373rd meeting, on 26 August 1994, the Committee decided that, in future, requests for intersessional departures submitted to the Committee should be reviewed by the Bureau, in consultation with the Secretariat, for subsequent action. 19. At its 379th meeting, on 23 March 1995, the Committee agreed that proposed changes to the calendar that did not have programme budget implications could be dealt with by the Secretariat, in consultation with the Bureau of the Committee. 20. At its substantive session of 1995, the Committee decided that requests for intersessional departures submitted to the Committee that involved a change of venue should be referred to the members for approval. Departures that involved other types of changes, as decided upon by the Committee at its substantive session of 1994, should be reviewed by the Bureau, in consultation with the Secretariat, for subsequent action. 21. Requests submitted in 2009 for changes of venue or additional sessions/meetings and the action taken by the Committee are set out below. Organ Request Action taken Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations To convene one additional meeting during the week of 2-6 February 2009 in order to conclude its 2009 regular session. Conference services to be provided on an "as available" basis. Request approved on an exceptional basis Fifth Committee To meet in April and June 2009 in order to conclude its work at its first and second resumed sessions. Conference services to be provided from within existing resources. Request noted Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters To convene the fifty-second session of the Board from 1 to 3 July 2009 in Geneva rather than in New York in order to give members the opportunity to confer with participants in the Conference on Disarmament. Since the Board also serves as the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, the Geneva venue enables the Board members to be in close contact with the staff of the Institute. Request approved Independent Audit Advisory Committee To meet in Geneva from 2 to 4 December 2009, in accordance with paragraphs 13 and 14 of its Rules of Procedure, in order to facilitate meetings with the Office of Internal Oversight Services and the Joint Inspection Unit. Conference services to be provided from within existing resources. Introduction and overview 22. At its 499th meeting, on 8 September 2009, the Committee considered the section of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences containing statistical data and analysis of the planned and actual utilization of conference resources allocated to a core sample of bodies that met in New York, Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi in 2008 (see A/64/136, paras. 21-32 and annex III). The overall utilization factor at the four duty stations in 2008 had improved to 85 per cent, or two percentage points, compared with 2007 (83 per cent). In New York, the utilization factor had improved by four percentage points in 2008 (83 per cent) over 2007 (79 per cent). 23. The Committee also heard an oral report by the Chair on her consultations with intergovernmental bodies that had utilized less than the applicable benchmark of 80 per cent of their allocated resources during 2008. She was pleased to report that three of the main committees of the General Assembly had reached and/or surpassed the established benchmark of 80 per cent. Better discipline in starting meetings on time, together with better advance coordination with conference planners with regard to abbreviated meetings with interpretation and possible cancellations had helped the committees to reach the established benchmark. Consultations had been held with two intergovernmental bodies that had underutilized conference resources during the period from 2006 to 2008. 24. Suggestions for improvement offered during the consultations included reducing the impact of foreseeable cancellations by: providing at least one-week advance notice to the conference planners; starting meetings in a timely manner even without a quorum; reducing meetings blocks to two hours when it was anticipated that less time would be required, thus releasing some of the resources, and transmitting that intention to the Meetings Management Section no later than the day before the meeting; and reducing the number of meetings with conference services but maintaining the established entitlements to conference services. 25. At the same meeting, the Committee also considered the section of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences concerning the provision of interpretation services to meetings of "as required" bodies (see A/64/136, paras. 33-36 and annex IV). The Department had continued the practice of maintaining a reserve of up to three meetings a week, when possible, in order to accommodate meetings of the bodies entitled to meet "as required", which had enabled it to meet 90 per cent of such requests for meetings in 2008. 26. The establishment of the "strategic reserve" of interpretation and other conference services was viewed as a positive initiative, yet it had not met the needs and expectations of all "as required" bodies. Information was needed as to why the Secretariat had been unable to meet some requests and the impact of the lack of services on the functioning of the bodies whose requests could not be accommodated. Consideration should be given to increasing the strategic reserve from three to four meetings per week. 27. A representative of the Secretariat said that resource constraints, especially at times of high activity in the General Assembly and Security Council, which took priority over "as required" bodies, had made it necessary to deny some requests for services. The percentage of requests met had improved, however, and efforts to redeploy services from cancelled meetings were ongoing. Meetings were programmed on a weekly basis with daily adjustments. The lack of qualified freelance interpreters would make it difficult to expand the number of reserved meetings without compromising quality. 28. Also at its 499th meeting, the Committee considered the section of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences concerning the provision of interpretation services to meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States (see A/64/136, paras. 37-42, table 5 and annex V). 29. Concern was expressed at the decrease in demand for interpretation services for meetings of regional and other groupings along with a decline in the services provided. Furthermore, as shown in annex V of the report, 50 per cent of the requests for services by the Group of African States in New York had not been met; and the figure for the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States in Geneva was even lower. The concern was expressed that regional groups might even have given up asking for services because their requests had been denied so often. A more detailed breakdown of requests from regional groups and how the strategic reserve could best be used to meet them was needed. An analysis of the reasons that requests for services from certain groups had been denied was also requested so that the situation could be corrected. Delegations drew attention to meetings of the Group of 77 and China at the ambassadorial level, for which interpretation services had been promised, but which, at the last moment, were not provided because of unforeseen meetings. It might be useful to refine communications with Member States regarding the availability of services in order to avoid such occurrences in the future. 30. A representative of the Secretariat said that specific information on the reasons for denial of services to the meetings of certain regional groups would be provided to the Committee. D. Improved utilization of conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi 31. At the same meeting, the Committee considered the section of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences concerning the improved utilization of conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi (see A/64/136, paras. 43 and 44). It was noted with satisfaction that in 2008 all Nairobi-based bodies had adhered to the headquarters rule, holding all their meetings in Nairobi. E. Improved utilization of the conference centre at the Economic Commission for Africa 32. At the same meeting, the Committee considered the section of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences concerning the conference centre at the Economic Commission for Africa (see A/64/136, paras. 45 to 51). The General Assembly in section II.A, paragraph 11, of its resolution 63/248, requested the Secretary-General to continue to explore means to increase the utilization of the conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa, bearing in mind the headquarters minimum operating security standards. In 2008, the utilization rate of the conference centre rose to 76 per cent (compared with 70 per cent in 2007 and 60 per cent in 2006) owing, to a large extent, to continued promotional efforts undertaken by the management of the centre. The centre's marketing activities included participation in high-profile international conventions and exhibitions. It had also initiated the process of contracting specialized assistance in business development. Over the past few years the centre had faced new challenges, however, as the local conference industry had become increasingly competitive, and the increase in the centre's utilization rate might not realistically be sustainable over the next few years. 33. An update was requested on the situation regarding the headquarters minimum operating security standards in 2009 compared with previous years, progress in the utilization rate and measures taken to address the challenges of competition in the local conference market. Elaboration on the efforts in marketing and specialized assistance in business development was also requested. 34. A representative of the Secretariat said that the information requested would be provided to the Committee in writing. 35. At its 499th meeting, on 8 September 2009, the Committee on Conferences considered section IV.C of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences concerning the impact on meetings held at Headquarters during the implementation of the capital master plan, accelerated strategy IV (A/64/136, paras. 53-59). It was reported that the accelerated strategy, which will compress the total period for the renovation of the Headquarters complex from seven years to five years, was solidly in its implementation phase. Sufficient conference room space would be available for all calendar meetings during the renovation period, while availability for non-core activities, including parallel meetings and additional events, would be limited during certain phases of the project. 36. A total of 750 staff had moved to the Albano Building in three stages in July 2009. The Department now faced the challenge of moving some of its staff during the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, which, although undesirable, had become unavoidable. Once all the moves had taken place, staff directly involved in servicing meetings would be located up to nine blocks away from conference rooms in the complex. The Publishing Section was continuing its work in the third basement under the temporary North Lawn Building while major construction was taking place. 37. As part of its forward planning, redundancies, including additional LAN connections in various locations, had been added to Department swing spaces to allow mission-critical functions and staff to be moved at short notice. Although it was not possible to state definitively that there would be no disruptions to the workflow, the Department had contingency plans in place. In that connection, the Committee was urged to emphasize to the General Assembly the importance of adequate resources for all temporary arrangements, including move support, information technology and space, as well as design features and appropriate amenities, so that staff of the Department could continue to provide services without interruption during the capital master plan process. 38. Delegations requested clarification of the financial implications of the moves into swing spaces, including the budget impact of the additional information technology needs. An overview of the locations of various sections of the Department would also be useful. The working relationship between the Department and the Office of Information and Communications Technology should be explained. Concern was expressed about the availability of a medium-sized conference room for informal consultations of the Fifth Committee during the next phase of the renovation of the Conference Building. Delegations also wanted more information on plans to mitigate risks and respond to contingencies. 39. A representative of the Secretariat said that additional requirements for information and communications technology (ICT) had already been reported on in a paper on the associated costs of the capital master plan; no additional requests for resources were anticipated. The need for a consultation room located near the main meeting room for the Fifth Committee was being taken into consideration. Updated information on the availability of meeting rooms would be provided as the project went forward. 40. Staff of the Department now located in the Albano Building (305 East 46th Street) included the entire documents processing chain, from entry point into the Department through editing, reference, translation and text processing. The main computer equipment storage area and the ICT help desk were also located in that building. Remaining moves to swing spaces were currently scheduled for mid-to-late October. Some members of the staff were moving to 300 East 42nd Street, including the Office of the Under-Secretary-General. Verbatim reporters would be located in the UNITAR Building, while interpreters would remain in the Secretariat. In addition, a "touchdown" area would be provided for staff in the temporary North Lawn Building. The units within the Department currently located in the DC-1 and DC-2 Buildings would remain in their current offices. It would be necessary to establish an on-site help desk function in each of the Department locations. 41. There was not enough space to house all of the temporary staff required at periods of increased demand; therefore, as part of the contingency plans, additional LAN outlets had been installed in the nine conference rooms in the Albano Building to allow those rooms to be used for temporary staff and trainees. Increased use of offsite translation and telecommuting were also planned. The Department maintained an area for rapid processing of documents, known as forward echelon, within the Secretariat, and planned to expand that corresponding area in the temporary North Lawn Building in order to provide additional space for the use of verbatim reporters and précis-writers. 42. From the earliest stages of the planning for the capital master plan, the relationship between the Department and the Office of Information and Communications Technology had been cooperative and collaborative. Because information technology applications were the production tools of the Department, there was intensive interaction with the Office of Information and Communications Technology. As an example, the Department supplied the content for the Official Document System, one of its core systems, while the Office of Information and Communications Technology maintained the system. 43. At its 499th and 501st meetings, on 8 and 9 September 2009, the Committee considered the section of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences concerning integrated global management (see A/64/136, "Status report" (paras. 8-10) and "Performance management" (paras. 11-12)). In introducing the report, the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management said that integrated global management, as a process of fundamental reform, was yielding incremental results. Achievements to date included the optimization of work processes across duty stations through the compendium of administrative policies, practices and procedures; the harmonization of slotting procedures and waiver management; and workload sharing. Significant progress had also been made on the three projects comprising the global information technology initiative. More fundamentally, the Under-Secretary-General was now directly exercising his authority in matters relating to the elaboration of the biennial budget and the allocation of resources across all duty stations, pursuant to paragraph 3.3 of the Secretary-General's bulletin on the organization of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (ST/SGB/2005/9). 44. The Under-Secretary-General concurred with many of the findings set out in the report on the evaluation of the integrated global management initiative carried out at his request by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) (A/64/166). In particular, the report highlighted the continued existence of dual reporting lines that led to ambiguity regarding the exact extent of the authority of the Under-Secretary-General, which consequently hindered the reform process. While the Department differed from OIOS in its acknowledgement of the initial achievements of integrated global management and the potential for future results, it stood ready to revisit the overall strategy and to prepare a renewed articulation of the overarching objective, as recommended by the Office. Although some of the potential benefits of integrated global management certainly pointed to greater efficiency, significant financial savings had never been its main objective; many benefits were not easy to quantify in financial terms. Progress in applying integrated global management was, in the view of the Department, furthermore constrained by the lack of dedicated financial and human resources made available for that purpose. Evaluation by Member States of the quality of conference services 45. While there had been some improvement in the level of response by Member States to the survey on conference services, it was not clear that their collective level of satisfaction with the work of the Department was being fully captured. Members of the Committee were invited to make suggestions to improve the quality of the survey, which was in the process of being reviewed and standardized for all duty stations. The low level of attendance by Member States at the periodic informational meetings held to obtain feedback on the quality of language services had led the Department to propose holding one such meeting per year in future. 46. Representatives of conference services at the United Nations Offices at Geneva, Nairobi and Vienna participated via videoconference in a discussion on integrated global management at the 501st meeting of the Committee. 47. A representative of the Secretariat in Vienna, speaking on behalf of the four duty stations, made an introductory statement about the integrated global management process. 48. A question and answer period followed the introductory statement. The Department was asked to comment, with specific examples, on the opening words of the OIOS report (A/64/166): "[Integrated global management] is still a work in progress; to date its major anticipated organization-wide benefits have not materialized". Clarification was also sought on whether the objectives of the initiative had been articulated, on who was in charge of its overall vision and on whether the caveat mentioned in paragraph 18 of the OIOS report was likely to help or hinder progress under the initiative. 49. A representative of the Secretariat in Nairobi said that while integrated global management was certainly a work in progress, it had already yielded many benefits, which were hard to quantify in financial terms. The United Nations Office at Nairobi had benefited extensively from the exchange of information with other duty stations, as well as from workload-sharing and lateral transfers. The objectives of the integrated global management initiative certainly needed to be better articulated, but that would not have been possible at the start of the process. The vision for the integrated global management initiative was driven by all duty stations, with the support of senior management at Headquarters. 50. A representative of the Secretariat in Vienna highlighted a number of benefits deriving from the integrated global management initiative, including the global document slotting system, global waiver management, the editorial toolbar and the development of an online report writing course. The responsibility of Member States for the vision and objectives of the initiative was exercised through the General Assembly and the Committee on Conferences, while within the Secretariat the information technology governance board, the coordination meeting and the quarterly videoconferences with the four duty stations were its main drivers. 51. OIOS was requested to clarify its view of the prerogative of the Under-Secretary-General to reallocate resources across duty stations, while the Secretariat was asked to explain what concrete outputs it was seeking from the initiative and how it intended to close the gap between OIOS expectations and current realities. 52. A representative of the Secretariat in Vienna clarified that the Under-Secretary-General was now exercising authority in budgetary matters and that the reallocation of budgetary resources was taking place. 53. The Secretariat was asked to spell out clearly the progress achieved in integrated global management and its remaining objectives, along with the support required from Member States in order to meet those objectives. 54. A representative of the Secretariat at Headquarters listed the following achievements of integrated global management: compilation of the compendium of practice, the common roster for contractors, proactive document management and waiver management, facilitation of lateral transfers of staff between duty stations, staff exchanges, the achievement of International Organization for Standardization (ISO) environmental standards in publishing operations and workload sharing. A representative of the Secretariat in Vienna added outreach initiatives to universities, language institutes and staff training, which were the building blocks for the future of the Department, to that list. With regard to what the Department required from Member States, approval of its budget proposal for the biennium 2010-2011 would provide the resources to meet the remaining challenges. Much of the cost of integrated global management was staff salaries, which were fixed and high, yet those costs would most likely have been even higher if the integrated global management initiatives had not been taken. 55. Members of the Committee, echoing the view expressed in the report of OIOS (A/64/166), were yet to be convinced that the achievements mentioned, while commendable, would not have taken place without integrated global management. The need for concrete objectives to be defined, also mentioned in that report, was supported by delegations. In paragraph 18 of its report (A/64/166), OIOS had noted the imperatives of equitable distribution or burden-sharing among duty stations while also noting the "pivotal caveat" that integrated global management must be implemented "taking into account the specificities of the various duty stations". This concern raised the question of how to reconcile the specificities of the individual duty stations with the objective of harmonizing working procedures between duty stations. It was also unclear why workload sharing had not been applied to the situation of Human Rights Council documentation in Geneva. More explanation was needed as to why the United Nations Office at Vienna had taken the lead in information technology Project 2, meetings planning and management, when the meetings servicing function was concentrated mainly in New York and Geneva. Ways to ensure greater precision of data on integrated global management must be explored. It was surprising to read that although the working group that had compiled the compendium of practice had been in operation since 2004, some Department staff were still unaware of its existence. 56. A representative of the Secretariat at Headquarters said that inconsistency in data arose because, prior to integrated global management initiatives, data had been collected locally for local application and was, therefore, inconsistent when used globally. Efforts are under way to harmonize data across duty stations in connection with Project 1, data warehouse, and results are expected by the end of 2009. Regarding the processing of Human Rights Council documents, the transfer of human and financial resources to Geneva to address the situation could be viewed as a form of workload sharing. Lateral transfers of staff between duty stations had resulted in some financial savings and had led to increased flexibility in the Department by avoiding the time-consuming human resources machinery. A representative of the Secretariat in Nairobi said that lateral transfers had helped bring down the vacancy rate at that duty station and had attracted new staff because of the increased flexibility and mobility now possible. 57. Referring to the statistics on interpretation services provided to regional and other groupings (see A/64/136, annex V), one delegation noted that no requests for such services had been made in Vienna or Nairobi and wondered whether this indicated that there was no need for the services at those duty stations or whether there were other obstacles. A representative of the Secretariat in Nairobi said that such requests had indeed been received and had been fully met; updated statistics would be provided. A representative of the Secretariat in Vienna said that limited in-house capacity, with only one team of interpreters, had never allowed for such requests to be met. 58. A member of the Committee said that it was difficult to calculate the savings realized from integrated global management and that, although it had been represented as an initiative that had been conducted within existing resources, budget proposals had been mentioned; a clearer picture of the associated costs and savings was needed. More detailed information on the common roster for contractors was also required. It would be interesting to hear whether integrated global management could help to address the situation regarding the documents arising from the universal periodic review process in Geneva without transferring posts. A delegation emphasized the fact that the Committee expected the Department and the Under-Secretary-General to address the budgetary issues surrounding the universal periodic review process. 59. A representative of the Secretariat at Headquarters said that integrated global management could bring an element of rationality and better use of capacity to the situation regarding the universal periodic review documents. Conference servicing capacity could not be stored, however, and increased predictability of the workload would result in greater efficiency. The slotting system for documents instituted as part of the initiative had led to the use of the authority of the Under-Secretary-General to transfer necessary resources to Geneva to cope with the increased workload. Before that system had been put in place, Geneva would have been left to solve the problem on its own without the possibility of looking to the Department for help. A representative of the Secretariat in Vienna said that the common roster for contractors had clearly been developed because of integrated global management. Its development had been decided at the 2007 coordination meeting. A common database was available to all four duty stations, with all information on contractors now visible, including quality control reports. 60. On the subject of lateral transfers among duty stations, a delegation requested information on the effect of lateral transfers to Nairobi on the vacancy rate. More information was sought on coordination between the United Nations Office at Nairobi and the Economic Commission for Africa. A representative of the Secretariat in Nairobi said that the possibility of lateral transfers was a positive element in considering Nairobi as a duty station because lateral movement to another duty station would be easier. Among examples of cooperation between the United Nations Office at Nairobi and the Economic Commission for Africa were the regular provision of interpreters to supplement local staff and support for training initiatives on the African continent. 61. At its 499th and 500th meetings, on 8 September, the Committee considered the section of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences concerning documents management (A/64/136, paras. 60-71 and annex VII). The Committee's attention was drawn to a significant improvement in the number and percentage of Secretariat documents issued within the mandated time frame. The main issue faced by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management in the past year had been the servicing of the Human Rights Council and its machinery; while it was fully committed to servicing that body, it could only plan for the workload it generates and summon the required financial and human resources to manage its conferences within the applicable rules, processes and procedures. In view of the unexpected flood of documents exceeding the allowable length that had been generated by the universal periodic review process, and the decision of the Third Committee during the sixty-third session of the General Assembly not to endorse the report on the work of the Human Rights Council, leading to the withdrawal of the statement of programme budget implications, the Under-Secretary-General had been obliged to decline requests for waivers for documents that were over the page limit. The Committee had been asked to endorse the legal opinion provided by the Office of Legal Affairs, to the effect that the rules of the General Assembly, including those relating to document length and timeliness of submission, were applicable to the Human Rights Council. If, however, the General Assembly wished to allow an exception to the existing rules, a precise description of the case must be provided, with the necessary statement of programme budget implications. Even then, the Department would still be unable to process documents that were not submitted on time or exceeded word limits, since it was not possible to recruit freelance translators at short notice. Overall timely submission and issuance of documentation 62. A number of delegations expressed serious concern about the servicing of the Human Rights Council and its universal periodic review mechanism. Clarification was sought on: the specific word limit applied to the reports and the potential financial implications of any increase in that limit; the reasons why the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review had exceeded the word limit; the reports that remained to be translated; and the outcome of the meeting of the task force comprising representatives of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the Division of Conference Management of the United Nations Office at Geneva and the Human Rights Council, held on 31 August 2009. A number of delegations considered that the important work of the universal periodic review mechanism should not be constrained by word limits; in their view, the legal opinion issued by the Office of Legal Affairs ran counter to the rules of the General Assembly, which established word limits for reports issued by the Secretariat, but not for reports by intergovernmental bodies. The Secretariat was therefore requested to provide details of the specific Assembly resolutions on which the legal opinion was based. Another delegation expressed its support in principle for the legal opinion, but wondered whether the Department had reviewed its allocation of resources to the various functions in Geneva in order to take account of the rising conference servicing needs associated with the universal periodic review mechanism. 63. Some delegations pointed out inconsistencies in the Department's explanation of the reasons for the situation and expressed dissatisfaction with the content of paragraph 71 of the report of the Secretary-General (A/64/136). One delegation suggested that the establishment of a coordination mechanism between the Human Rights Council and the Department would enable the Department to follow up the submission of documents and thereby ensure that additional resources could be provided, as appropriate. 64. A representative of the Secretariat clarified that the United Nations Office at Geneva had translated all the universal periodic review outcome documents that had been submitted on time and within the established word limits; only those reports submitted after the slotting deadline and in excess of the allowable length had not been translated, since capacity was planned in accordance with the document submission schedule. Capacity had also been affected by the fact that the request for resources had not been met when the universal periodic review mechanism was established. 65. In response to the question about the allocation of resources to the United Nations Office at Geneva, a representative of the Secretariat reiterated that the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management was exercising his authority to allocate resources to the four duty stations as needs arose; some resources were already being allocated in the context of the programme budget proposal for 2010-2011. Due consideration would be given to the suggestion regarding the establishment of a coordination mechanism between the Human Rights Council and the Secretariat; in that connection, the recent establishment of the task force to address the need for additional resources for Human Rights Council-related documentation should be noted. 66. Delegations also made a number of more general points regarding the timely submission and issuance of documentation. It was suggested that stronger measures to ensure compliance by author departments with their document submission obligations should be considered, on the basis of the document management statistics set out in annex VII to the report of the Secretary-General (A/64/136). Documentation for the second resumed session of the Fifth Committee 67. Several delegations expressed their appreciation for the progress made by the Department in speeding up the issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee and for the positive work of the interdepartmental task force in that regard. It was suggested that the task force should be institutionalized as a standing mechanism for coordination among author departments on document management issues. Some delegations expressed concern that a comprehensive report on the work of the task force had not yet been provided in accordance with General Assembly resolution 63/248. Further information was therefore requested on the number of meetings that had been convened by the task force, whether it had met since the 2009 organizational session of the Committee on Conferences and whether any coordination meetings had been held in preparation for the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly. Clarification was also sought on the extent of the coordination between the relevant departments. 68. One delegation proposed that regular meetings should be held between the Chairs of the Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as part of a multipronged approach to finding a solution to the problem of the late issuance of documents. Information was also requested on practical measures that could be taken to address the problems arising from the limited interval between scheduled meetings of the Advisory Committee and those of the Fifth Committee. Several delegations suggested that the Committee on Conferences should consider adjusting the dates on which the Fifth Committee met during the first and second parts of the resumed session of the General Assembly in order to provide adequate time for consideration of the relevant documents. 69. Representatives of the Secretariat explained that, in order to gain a comprehensive picture of the work of the interdepartmental task force, delegations should read the interim report on action taken to improve the timely submission of documents for the Fifth Committee (A/63/735), together with the report of the Secretary-General on pattern of conferences (A/64/136) and the updated information provided to the Committee in a note by the Secretariat (A/AC.172/2009/CRP.2). A total of three coordination meetings had been held by the task force, two of them in September 2008 to set targets and one in January 2009 to monitor those targets. Since the task force had proved to be an effective mechanism within the Secretariat, its work would be continued and, in that sense, it would be institutionalized. It would be reconvened for the sixty-fourth session in late September or early October 2009. The timeline for submission of documents would, in principle, be agreed with the author departments at the first meeting with the aim of considering documentation for the first and second parts of the resumed session as well as for the main part of the session. The Secretariat could only flag the problems associated with the limited interval between scheduled meetings of the Advisory Committee and the Fifth Committee; the spacing of those meetings was a matter for the Committees themselves. 70. At its 499th, 500th and 502nd meetings, on 8 and 9 September 2009, the Committee on Conferences considered section VI of the report of the Secretary-General on pattern of conferences, concerning matters related to translation and interpretation (see A/64/136, "Demographic transition in the language services" (paras. 72-75), "Contractual translation and quality control" (paras. 76-80), "Impact of freelance recruitment on the quality of interpretation at all duty stations" (paras. 81-86) and "Current and future vacancies at the United Nations Office at Nairobi" (paras. 87-89)). In introducing the report, the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management said that the Department was seeking to respond to rapid demographic change in its language services by organizing competitive language examinations at an accelerated pace, in conjunction with the Office of Human Resources Management, and by intensifying its outreach to major universities with a view to increasing the pool of qualified conference translators and interpreters. Such efforts would not, however, yield the desired results if the general conditions of service offered by the United Nations continued to lag behind those of other international organizations. The Committee's support was therefore sought for a possible forward-looking review of the rules and guidelines governing entry-level language posts and the level at which individual candidates were recruited. 71. The demographic transition within the Department, combined with the financial constraints and continuing improvements in information technology, made a compelling case for increased use of freelance and contractual language staff. All four duty stations were currently using the common roster for contractual translation and the Department was studying the possibility of providing qualified external translators with remote access to existing terminology databases and translation memories; however, in view of the very high quality requirements, such developments also called for more robust quality assurance and control structures. Implementation of recommendations provided by the Office of Internal Oversight Services 72. Information on the implementation of the recommendations provided by OIOS set out in the report of the Secretary-General (A/63/94) was contained in the supplementary information circulated to members of the Committee. It would also be provided in the report of OIOS to the General Assembly (A/64/326 (Part I)/ Add.1). 73. A delegation expressed disappointment that the information on implementation of the recommendations had been included as supplementary information rather than being included in the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences. Provision of conference services at the United Nations Office at Geneva 74. Although most freelance interpreters could perform up to standard, quality issues sometimes arose in Geneva. Competition from the many international organizations in Geneva, which recruited freelance interpreters as much as one year ahead of their annual general conferences, made the situation difficult. The high demand for certain categories of interpreters in such entities as the Economic Commission for Europe had a further impact on availability of servicing. 75. A delegation requested clarification as to whether freelance interpreters in Geneva preferred the type of assignments offered at the Economic Commission for Europe to the work available at the United Nations Office at Geneva or whether they were attracted to the former by better rates. A representative of the Secretariat said that the timing of the programme of meetings at the Economic Commission for Europe was a factor. Vacancy rates at all duty stations 76. The Department, together with its partners in the Examination and Tests Section of the Office of Human Resources Management, had scheduled an unprecedented 13 language examinations for 2009. Given the high vacancy rate in language services and the severe depletion of the rosters, which in some languages were fully exhausted, there might be a need to increase the capacity of the Section on a temporary basis in order to ensure that the examination needs of the Department were met. The Department's outreach and training programme had two major elements: (a) the outreach programme to universities; and (b) an enhanced training programme for serving language staff. Given the continuing high number of retirements anticipated in the coming years, the issue of raising or waiving the mandatory age of separation for language staff was, in the view of the Department, worthy of consideration. 77. The view was expressed that addressing the demographic transition in the language services was a broader issue that required more than a focus on a very specific part of the Secretariat workforce. Rather than raising or waiving the age of separation, an idea that had already been discussed and rejected by the Fifth Committee, efforts should be focused on finding ways to bring new staff members on board more quickly. More elaboration was needed on the increase in resources required to expand the capacity of the Examination and Tests Section. Interest was expressed in the outreach programme to universities, particularly to African and to Arabic-language universities. More information on the participating universities and any incentives they were offered to participate was requested and provided, as was information on the modalities for involving staff from across the four duty stations in the outreach programme. Detailed information was sought and provided on staff training programmes, including the number of courses offered in each language, whether they were internal or external and at which duty stations they were held. Measures needed to be taken to address the competition for freelance interpreters through action with ICSC to raise rates in New York. It would be important to have clear time frames for reductions in vacancy rates. 78. A representative of the Secretariat said that raising the retirement age was seen as a potential resort if it were not possible to attract sufficient numbers of new staff through existing modalities. In response, a member of the Committee stated that raising the retirement age should not be considered in a narrow context of addressing the demographic transition of language staff, but should be viewed in a broader context, including staff in other fields as well. Examinations were one step in the process of addressing the vacancy rate. A thorough review of the examination process was overdue, including a review of the entry level for language staff, which sometimes made it difficult to attract experienced candidates. That review, which would be led by the Assistant Secretary-General for General Assembly and Conference Management, would begin by the end of 2009. The possibility of Internet-based testing would be pursued in the review, which could have the advantage of allowing more frequent examinations. 79. The United Nations Office at Nairobi had taken the lead in the outreach to African universities. The programme would have many benefits, including increasing the value of and respect for the language professions. Through participation of staff members in such activities as exchanges of information and material and sitting on university examination juries, a relationship was developed with candidates that provided an advantage in possible future recruitment. It was hoped that memorandums of understanding with universities using all six official languages would soon be in place. One had recently been signed with St. Joseph University and others were pending, including with universities in Cairo and Damascus. The up-to-date list providing the status of the memorandums of understanding with universities was provided to the Committee. 80. The competition for freelance interpreters had become more intense owing to the fact that United Nations activities were increasing, the number of professionals on the market was not growing and there were many bodies outside the United Nations currently in the market as well. The situation in North America was very difficult, in particular because the daily freelance rate for New York was about $100 lower than in Geneva owing to cost-of-living and exchange rate fluctuations. The pay gaps with Rome and Paris had been closed, and efforts would be made to remedy the gap with Geneva when the new contract for New York was negotiated in 2010. 81. In reply to a question from a delegation, a representative of the Secretariat said that both translators and interpreters alike were required to work from two other official languages into their mother tongue. The entry level for successful candidates on both the translation and interpretation examinations was either P-2 or P-3, with the step determined by experience. Quality of translation and interpretation and performance measurement 82. The excellent performance of the German Translation Service at Headquarters was highlighted. A representative of the Secretariat said that participation at information meetings by language services had been consistently low, as had been the response to surveys of Member States soliciting feedback on the quality of services. Other methods to capture that information would be explored. 83. At its 503rd meeting, on 14 September 2009, before the adoption of the draft resolution on pattern of conferences for recommendation to the General Assembly, the Chair stated that it was the understanding of the Committee that the adoption of operative paragraph 1 in section IV of the draft resolution would not trigger any programme budget implications as priorities would be shifted by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management and the production of summary records at the United Nations Office at Geneva delayed. Draft resolution The Committee on Conferences recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Pattern of conferences The General Assembly, Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December 1985, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December 1988, 51/211 A to E of 18 December 1996, 52/214 of 22 December 1997, 53/208 A to E of 18 December 1998, 54/248 of 23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December 2000, 56/242 of 24 December 2001, 56/254 D of 27 March 2002, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 56/287 of 27 June 2002, 57/283 A of 20 December 2002, 57/283 B of 15 April 2003, 58/250 of 23 December 2003, 59/265 of 23 December 2004, 60/236 A of 23 December 2005, 60/236 B of 8 May 2006, 61/236 of 22 December 2006, 62/225 of 22 December 2007, 63/248 of 24 December 2008 and 63/284 of 30 June 2009, Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it requested the Secretary-General to ensure the equal treatment of the official languages of the United Nations, Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2009, the relevant reports of the Secretary-General and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the evaluation of the integrated global management initiative of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, Reaffirming the pertinent provisions relating to conference services in its resolutions on multilingualism, in particular in resolution 63/307 of 9 September 2009, Bearing in mind its resolutions 60/251 of 15 March 2006 and 62/219 of 22 December 2007, Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 8/1 of 18 June 2008 and decision 9/103 of 24 September 2008 and the Council President's statements 8/1 of 9 April 2008 and 9/2 of 24 September 2008, Stressing that the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council adopted reports on the review of thirty-two Member States at its fourth and fifth sessions, Noting that thirteen of the reports adopted at the fourth session of the Working Group were not issued as documents of the United Nations in the six official languages prior to their consideration and adoption by the Council at its eleventh session, and that the processing and issuance of two of the reports adopted by the Working Group at its fifth session remains delayed, Recalling the importance of multilingualism in the work of the United Nations and the need to issue all of the reports of the Working Group in all official languages of the Organization, I. 1. Approves the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for 2010 and 2011, as submitted by the Committee on Conferences, taking into account the observations of the Committee and subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 2. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make any adjustments to the calendar of conferences and meetings for 2010 and 2011 that may become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session; 3. Notes with satisfaction that the Secretariat has taken into account the arrangements referred to in General Assembly resolutions 53/208 A, 54/248, 55/222, 56/242, 57/283 B, 58/250, 59/265, 60/236 A, 61/236, 62/225 and 63/248 concerning Orthodox Good Friday and the official holidays of Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, and requests all intergovernmental bodies to observe those decisions when planning their meetings; 4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that any modification to the calendar of conferences and meetings is implemented strictly in accordance with the mandate of the Committee on Conferences and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly; 5. Notes that accurate, timely and consistent information provided to the Fifth Committee during its informal consultations facilitates the decision-making process in the Committee; II. A. Utilization of conference-servicing resources 1. Reaffirms the practice that, in the use of conference rooms, priority must be given to the meetings of Member States; 2. Notes that the overall utilization factor at the four main duty stations in 2008 was 85 per cent as compared with 83 per cent in 2007 and 2006, which is above the established benchmark of 80 per cent; 3. Welcomes the steps taken by those bodies that have adjusted their programmes of work in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources, and requests the Committee on Conferences to continue consultations with the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their conference-servicing resources; 4. Recognizes that late starts and unplanned early endings seriously affect the bodies' utilization factor owing to the amount of time lost, and invites the secretariats and bureaux of bodies to pay adequate attention to avoiding late starts and unplanned early endings; 5. Notes that the percentage of meetings held by the bodies entitled to meet "as required" that were provided with interpretation services in New York in 2008 was 90 per cent, as compared with 88 per cent in 2007, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the provision of conference services to these bodies through the Committee on Conferences; 6. Recognizes the importance of meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States for the smooth functioning of the sessions of intergovernmental bodies, requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far as possible, all requests for conference services for the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States are met, and requests the Secretariat to inform the requestors as early as possible about the availability of conference services, including interpretation, as well as about any changes that might occur before the meeting; 7. Regrets that the percentage of meetings held by regional and other major groupings of Member States that were provided with interpretation services at the four main duty stations was 77 per cent in 2008 as compared to 84 per cent in 2007, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to employ innovative means to address the difficulties experienced by Member States owing to the lack of conference services for some meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the Committee on Conferences; 8. Once again urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the planning stage to take into account the meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their programmes of work and to notify conference services, well in advance, of any cancellations so that unutilized conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be reassigned to meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States; 9. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with several General Assembly resolutions, including resolution 61/236, section II.A, paragraph 9, in conformity with the headquarters rule, all meetings of Nairobi-based United Nations bodies were held in Nairobi in 2008, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session through the Committee on Conferences; 10. Notes with appreciation ongoing promotional efforts and initiatives undertaken by the management of the conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa, which led to a continued upward trend in utilization of the premises in 2008; 11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore means to increase the utilization of the conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa, bearing in mind the headquarters minimum operating security standards, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session; 12. Calls upon the Secretary-General and Member States to adhere to the guidelines and procedures contained in the administrative instruction for the authorization of the use of United Nations premises for meetings, conferences, special events and exhibits; 13. Emphasizes that such meetings, conferences, special events and exhibits must be consistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations; B. Impact of the capital master plan, strategy IV (phased approach), on meetings held at Headquarters during its implementation 1. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that implementation of the capital master plan, including the temporary relocation of conference-servicing staff to a swing space, will not compromise the quality of conference services provided to Member States in the six official languages and the equal treatment of the language services, which should be provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to receiving the maximum quality of services; 2. Requests all meeting requesters and organizers to liaise closely with the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat on all matters related to the scheduling of meetings to allow maximum predictability in coordinating activities at Headquarters during the construction period; 3. Requests the Committee on Conferences to keep the matter under constant review, and requests the Secretary-General to report regularly to the Committee on matters pertaining to the calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations during the construction period; 4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide adequate information technology support for conference services, within the existing resources of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management, in order to ensure their seamless operation throughout the implementation of the capital master plan; 5. Notes that during the implementation of the capital master plan, a part of the conference-servicing staff and information technology resources of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management will be temporarily relocated to a swing space, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide adequate support, within the existing resources of the Department, to ensure continued maintenance of the information technology facilities of the Department, implementation of the global information technology initiative and delivery of quality conference services; 6. Requests the Secretary-General to consult Member States on initiatives that affect the utilization of conference services and conference facilities; III. 1. Notes the progress achieved in the implementation of the global information technology project, aimed at integrating, across duty stations, information technology into meetings management and documentation-processing systems, and the global approach to harmonizing standards and information technology and sharing good practices and technological achievements among conference services at the four main duty stations; 2. Also notes the initiatives undertaken in the context of integrated global management aimed at streamlining procedures, achieving economies of scale and improving the quality of conference services, and in this regard stresses the importance of ensuring equal treatment of conference-servicing staff as well as the principle of equal grade for equal work at the four main duty stations; 3. Emphasizes that the major goals of the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management are to provide high-quality documents in a timely manner in all official languages in accordance with established regulations, as well as high-quality conference services to Member States at all duty stations, and to achieve those aims as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible, in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly; 4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of services, with full respect for the specificities of the six official languages and taking into account their respective workloads; 5. Reiterates the need for the Secretary-General to ensure the compatibility of technologies used in all duty stations and to ensure that they are user-friendly in all official languages; 6. Requests the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all important older United Nations documents onto the United Nations website in all six official languages on a priority basis, so that these archives are also available to Member States through that medium; 7. Reiterates that the satisfaction of Member States is a key performance indicator in conference management and conference services; 8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that measures taken by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to seek the evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to them, as a key performance indicator of the Department, provide equal opportunities to Member States to present their evaluations in the six official languages of the United Nations and are in full compliance with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly, through the Committee on Conferences, on progress made in this regard; 9. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore best practices and techniques in client satisfaction evaluations and to report on a regular basis to the General Assembly on the results achieved; 10. Welcomes the efforts made by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management to seek the evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to them, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore innovative ways to systematically capture and analyse feedback from Member States and committee chairs and secretaries on the quality of conference services and to report thereon to the General Assembly through the Committee on Conferences; 11. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly apprised of progress made in integrated global management; 12. Notes with concern that the Secretary-General did not include in his report on the pattern of conferences information about the financial savings achieved through implementation of the integrated global management projects as requested in section III, paragraph 4, of its resolution 63/248, and requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to include this information in his next report on the pattern of conferences; 13. Takes note of the recommendations provided by the Office of the Internal Oversight Services in its report,3 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session through the Committee on Conferences; IV. 1. Decides that all the reports adopted by the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council at its fourth and fifth sessions and the additional information submitted by the States under review before the adoption of the outcome by the Council shall be issued as documents in all official languages of the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to undertake the necessary measures to that effect; 2. Decides that all reports adopted by the Working Group shall be issued as documents in all official languages of the United Nations in a timely manner before their consideration by the Council, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 36/117 A of 10 December 1981, 51/211 A to E, 52/214, 53/208 A to E and 59/265, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the necessary support to that effect; 3. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of the United Nations; 4. Reiterates the importance of the timely issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee; 5. Stresses that matters related to conference management, including documentation, fall within the purview of the Fifth Committee; 6. Reiterates with concern its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the rules concerning the simultaneous distribution of documents in all six official languages are strictly respected as regards both the distribution of printed copies and the posting of parliamentary documentation on the Official Document System and the United Nations website, in keeping with section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222; 7. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters; 8. Reaffirms its decision in section III, paragraph 9, of its resolution 59/265 that the issuance of documents in all six official languages on planning, budgetary and administrative matters requiring urgent consideration by the General Assembly shall be accorded priority; 9. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to direct all departments of the Secretariat to include the following elements in their reports: (a) Summary of the report; (b) Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions; (c) Relevant background information; 10. Reiterates its request that all documents submitted to legislative organs by the Secretariat and intergovernmental and expert bodies for consideration and action have conclusions and recommendations in bold print; 11. Recognizes the work done by the task force chaired by the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management in positively addressing the problem of issuance of documents for the Fifth Committee; 12. Welcomes the continued efforts of the task force to shepherd the submissions of documents by the author departments of the Secretariat; 13. Expresses its deep concern at the unprecedented high level of late submission of documentation, which, in turn, has a negative impact on the functioning of intergovernmental bodies, and urges author departments to fully adhere to deadlines in meeting the goal of 90 per cent submission compliance; 14. Decides to review, at its sixty-sixth session, the work of the task force and to consider, where necessary, additional measures to ensure compliance of submission deadlines by author departments if the goal of 90 per cent submission compliance is not met; 15. Acknowledges that a multi-pronged approach is required to find a solution to the perennial difficulties of late issuance of documents in the Fifth Committee; 16. Encourages the Chairs of the Fifth Committee and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to promote cooperation between the two bodies in the sphere of documentation; V. 1. Requests the Secretary-General to redouble his efforts to ensure the highest quality of interpretation and translation services in all six official languages; 2. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to seek evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to them, including through the language-specific informational meetings held twice a year, and to ensure that such measures provide equal opportunities to Member States to present their evaluations in the six official languages of the United Nations and are in full compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly; 3. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General make sure that the terminology used in the translation and interpretation services reflects the latest linguistic norms and terminology of the official languages in order to ensure the highest quality; 4. Reaffirms section V, paragraph 3, of its resolution 61/236, section V, paragraph 3, of its resolution 62/225 and section V, paragraph 5, of its resolution 63/248, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General, when recruiting temporary assistance in the language services, ensure that all language services are given equal treatment and are provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of their services, with full respect for the specificities of each of the six official languages and taking into account their respective workloads; 5. Notes with appreciation the measures taken by the Secretariat to fill current and future vacancies at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and the information contained in paragraphs 87 to 89 of the report of the Secretary-General on the pattern of conferences, and requests the Secretary-General to consider further measures aimed at decreasing the vacancy rates in Nairobi and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session; 6. Acknowledges the measures undertaken by the Secretary-General, in accordance with its resolutions, to address the issue of the replacement of retiring staff in the language services, and requests the Secretary-General to maintain and intensify those efforts, including the strengthening of cooperation with institutions that train language specialists to meet the need in the six official languages of the United Nations; 7. Requests the Secretary-General to hold competitive examinations for the recruitment of language staff sufficiently in advance, in order to fill current and future vacancies in language services in a timely manner, and to inform the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session of efforts in this regard; 8. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the accuracy of translation of documents into the six official languages, giving particular significance to the quality of translation; 9. Further requests the Secretary-General to take the steps necessary to enhance translation quality in all six official languages, in particular for contractual translation, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session; 10. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, at all duty stations, adequate staff at the appropriate level, with a view to ensuring appropriate quality control for external translation, with due consideration of the principle of equal grade for equal work; 11. Takes note of the information on the impact of freelance recruitment on the quality of interpretation at all duty stations contained in paragraphs 81 to 86 of the report of the Secretary-General,6 and requests the Secretary-General to report on the issue to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session through the Committee on Conferences; 12. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the experience, lessons learned and best practices of the main duty stations in performing quality control of contractual translations, including on requirements relating to the number and appropriate level of the staff needed to carry out this function. Draft calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations and of the principal organs of the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency and treaty bodies established under the auspices of the United Nations for 2010 and 2011 The following abbreviations are used in the present annex: In the column headed "Organ" ECA ECE Economic Commission for Europe ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ESCAP Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific ESCWA Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ICSC International Civil Service Commission IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development ILO International Labour Organization IMF International Monetary Fund IMO International Maritime Organization INSTRAW International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women ITU International Telecommunication Union UNCCD United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification UNCITRAL United Nations Commission on International Trade Law UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change UNFPA United Nations Population Fund UN-Habitat United Nations Human Settlements Programme UNHCR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization UNITAR United Nations Institute for Training and Research UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East UNU United Nations University UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization UPU Universal Postal Union WFP World Food Programme WHO World Health Organization WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization WMO World Meteorological Organization In the column headed "Membership" G Governments E Experts ST Secretariat or secretariats In the column headed "Servicing" I Interpretation T Translation PV Verbatim records SR Summary records A Arabic C Chinese English F French R Russian S Spanish (as at 25 September 2009) Dates (2010) Location Membership Servicinga Periodicity Military Staff Committee [Charter] 8 January, once every fortnight thereafter New York 5 G (CEFR) Every second Friday Committee on the Rights of the Child, fifty-third session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] 11-29 January Geneva 18 E (ACEFRS) Three sessions per year Group of governmental experts to continue to study existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security and possible cooperative measures to address them, second session [General Assembly resolutions 61/54, 62/17 and 63/37] 11-15 January 15 E UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, election of Bureau [General Assembly resolutions 2029 (XX) and 48/162, and Economic and Social Council decision 2007/221] 11 January 36 G One session per year UNICEF, Executive Board, first regular session [General Assembly resolutions 48/162 and 57 (I)] 12-14 January Two sessions per year Human Rights Council, high-level task force on the implementation of the right to development, sixth session [Human Rights Council resolution 4/4] [see paragraph 4 (a) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] 13-22 January 5 E Joint Meeting of the Executive Boards of UNDP/UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP [General Assembly resolution 52/12 B] 15 and 18 January 36 G/36 G/ Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, forty-fifth session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 62/218] 18 January-5 February 23 E Economic and Social Council, election of Bureau [Charter] 19 January 54 G UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, first regular session [General Assembly resolutions 2029 (XX) and 48/162] 19-22 January States Parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, twenty-third meeting [General Assembly resolution 2106 (XX)] 21 January 155 G One session every two years Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working Group on Marine Biological Diversity [General Assembly resolution 63/111] 25-29 January 192 G Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, regular session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 3 (II) and 1296 (XLIV) and decisions 1995/304 and 1997/297] 25 January-3 February 19 G Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, fourth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Human Rights Council, Working Group on Situations, fifth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Conference on Disarmament, first part [General Assembly resolutions 1722 (XVI), S-10/2 and 34/83 L] January-March (10 weeks) 61 G One session in three parts per year Committee on the Rights of the Child, pre-sessional working group, fifty-fourth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] 1-5 February International Narcotics Control Board, ninety-seventh session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11] Vienna 13 E Two or three sessions per year UNCITRAL, Working Group on Arbitration, fifty-second session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 60 G Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions [General Assembly resolutions 14 (I), 173 (II) and 32/103] 2 February-23 Aprilb 16 E Commission for Social Development, forty-eighth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 10 (II), 1139 (XLI) and 1996/7] 3-12 February 46 G Committee for the United Nations Population Award [General Assembly resolution 36/201] 8 February (1 meeting) 10 G (EFS) Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, pre-sessional working group [General Assembly resolutions 45/124, 47/94 and 62/218] 8-12 February 4 E Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Working Group on Communications under the Optional Protocol to the Convention, forty-fifth session [General Assembly resolutions 55/70 and 62/218] Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, forty-seventh session [General Assembly resolution 1472 A (XIV)] 8-19 February 69 G Human Rights Council, Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, seventh session [Human Rights Council decision 1/103 and resolution 5/1] 47 G Investments Committee [General Assembly resolution 248 (III)] 8 February 11-12 E Four or five meetings per year United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations, Board of Trustees, twenty-third session [General Assembly resolution 40/131] (EFRS) UNCITRAL, Working Group on Security Interests, seventeenth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] Economic and Social Council, organizational session [Charter] 9-12 February Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, seventy-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX)]c 15 February-12 March INSTRAW, Executive Board, seventh session [General Assembly resolution 59/260 and Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/57]c 16-17 February 10 E Independent Audit Advisory Committee, ninth session [General Assembly resolution 61/275] 17-19 February (ER) Four sessions per year Committee against Torture, Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, tenth session [Part I, article 2, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and report of the Human Rights Council (A/61/53)] 22-26 February Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, third session [General Assembly resolution 61/106 and article 34 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities] 12 E ICSC, seventieth session [General Assembly resolution 3357 (XXIX)] 22 February-5 March Santiago Open-ended Working Group towards an Arms Trade Treaty: establishing common international standards for the import, export and transfer of conventional arms, third session [General Assembly resolution 63/240] Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and its Working Group, substantive session [General Assembly resolution 2006 (XIX)] 22 February-19 March 144 G United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, Board of Trustees, thirty-second session [General Assembly resolution 36/151] 22-24 February Voluntary Fund for Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights, Board of Trustees, thirty-second session [Economic and Social Council decision 1993/283] 22-25 February (EF) Statistical Commission, forty-first session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/8] 23-26 February 24 G Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters, fifty-third session [General Assembly resolution 37/99 K] February (3 days) Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [General Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI)] February/March 28 G SRd Special high-level meetings of the Economic and Social Council with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organization and UNCTAD [General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 61/16 and Economic and Social Council decision 2005/211] (2 days) UNCTAD, expert meeting of the Investment, Enterprise and Development Commission [part IV, section B of the Accra Accord, adopted at the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008] To be determined UNCTAD, expert meeting of the Trade and Development Commission [part IV, section B of the Accra Accord, adopted at the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008] United Nations Seminar on Assistance to the Palestinian People [General Assembly resolutions 63/27 and 63/28] February (2 days) WFP, Executive Board, first regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]c February Rome Commission on the Status of Women, fifty-fourth session [Economic and Social Council decision 1999/257] 1-12 March 45 G Human Rights Committee, pre-sessional Working Group on Communications, ninety-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)] 1-5 March 9 E Human Rights Council, thirteenth session [General Assembly resolution 60/251] 1-26 March No fewer than three sessions per year Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat, continuation of 36th meeting [General Assembly resolution 56/206] 3 March Nairobi 58 G Four meetings per year Human Rights Committee, ninety-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)]c 8-26 March (AEFRS) Human Rights Council, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, ninetieth session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/12] 8-12 March (AEFS) UNEP, Committee of Permanent Representatives, 110th meeting [Governing Council decision 19/32] 17 March e Committee for Development Policy, twelfth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1998/46] 22-26 March 24 E Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Legal Subcommittee, forty-ninth session [General Assembly resolution 1472 (XIV)] 22 March- 1 April ECA, Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, forty-third session of the Commission [Economic and Social Council resolution 671 (XXV)] Addis Ababa 53 G (AEF) Disarmament Commission [General Assembly resolution S-10/2] 29 March- 16 Aprilb Human Rights Council, Working Group on the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, ninth session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/21] 2 Aprilb (AERS) Commission on Narcotic Drugs, fifty-third session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 9 (I) and 1991/39] March Consultative Committee on the United Nations Development Fund for Women, fiftieth session [General Assembly resolutions 31/133 and 39/125] ECA, Committee of Experts of the Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 29th meeting [Economic and Social Council resolution 671 (XXV)] March/April General Assembly, Fifth Committee, resumed session [Charter] March (4 weeks) United Nations African Meeting on the Question of Palestine [General Assembly resolutions 63/27 and 63/28] March (3 days) Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, twenty-fifth session [annex II, article 2 (5), of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea] 5-9 April 21 E Human Rights Council, working group of experts on people of African descent, tenth session [Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 9/14] Commission on Population and Development, forty-third session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 150 (VII), 87 (LVII) and 1995/55] 12-16 April Group of governmental experts to continue to study existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security and possible cooperative measures to address them, third session [General Assembly resolutions 61/54, 62/17 and 63/37] Human Rights Council, Working Group on Communications, sixth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice [General Assembly resolution 62/173] 12-19 April Salvador, Brazil 195 G One session every five years UNCITRAL, Working Group on Procurement, eighteenth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] Committee of Experts on Public Administration, ninth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 2001/45 and 2003/60] 19-23 April Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, twelfth session [General Assembly resolution 45/158] 19-30 April Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, ninth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2000/22] UNCITRAL, Working Group on Insolvency Law, thirty-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, fifty-seventh session [General Assembly resolution 913 (X)] 21 G (CEFRS) Committee against Torture, forty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 39/46] 26 April-14 May Committee on Information, thirty-second session [General Assembly resolution 33/115 C] 26 April-7 May 112 G Human Rights Council, open-ended Working Group on the Right to Development, eleventh session [Human Rights Council resolution 4/4] [see paragraph 4 (a) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] 26-30 April UNCTAD, Investment, Enterprise and Development Commission, second session [part IV, section B of the Accra Accord, adopted at the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008] f Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), sixty-ninth session 27-28 April 15 G Economic and Social Council, resumed organizational session [Charter] 28-29 April ECLAC, thirty-third session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 106 (VI) and 2006/40 and decision 1985/188] April/May 42 G Group of experts of the States Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [Decision of the States parties at its Tenth Annual Conference]c April (2 days) Independent Audit Advisory Committee, tenth session [General Assembly resolution 61/275] April (3 days) Meeting of experts of the States Parties to Protocol V to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [Decision of the States parties at its First Annual Conference]c United Nations Staff Pension Committee [General Assembly resolution 248 (III)] April/Mayb (1 meeting) Two sessions of one meeting each per year United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, first regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 2001/321] 26 ST 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [General Assembly resolution 61/70] 3-28 May 188 G Commission on Sustainable Development, eighteenth session [Economic and Social Council decisions 1993/207 and 2005/228] 3-14 May Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, forty-fourth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39] 3-21 May Human Rights Council, working group on arbitrary detention, fifty-seventh session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/4] 3-7 May Human Rights Council, Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, eighth session [Human Rights Council decision 1/103 and resolution 5/1] International Law Commission, sixty-second session, first part [General Assembly resolution 174 (II)] 3 May-4 June 34 E International Narcotics Control Board, ninety-eighth session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11] UNCTAD, Trade and Development Commission, second session [part IV, section B of the Accra Accord, adopted at the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008] 10 May Beijing 11 May-2 July New York and other United Nations duty stations ESCAP, sixty-sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 37 (IV), 69 (V) and 723 B (XXVIII)] 13-19 May Incheon, Republic of Korea Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, nineteenth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1992/1] 17-21 May 40 G Commission on Science and Technology for Development, thirteenth session [General Assembly resolution 46/235 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2002/37 and 2006/46 and decision 2003/291] 43 G Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, pre-sessional working group, forty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39] 24-28 May Committee on the Rights of the Child, fifty-fourth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] 24 May-11 June Review Conference on United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement [General Assembly resolution 63/112] UNCITRAL, Working Group on Transport Law, twenty-second session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, resumed session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 3 (II) and 1296 (XLIV) and decisions 1995/304 and 1997/297] 26 May-4 June UNCITRAL, Working Group on Electronic Commerce, forty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] Human Rights Council, fourteenth session 31 May-18 June Committee for Programme and Coordination, organizational session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) and General Assembly resolution 31/93] May (1 day) 34 G Conference on Disarmament, second part [General Assembly resolutions 1722 (XVI), S-10/2 and 34/83 L] May-July (7 weeks) ESCWA, twenty-sixth Ministerial session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1818 (LV), 2089 (LXIII) and 1994/26] May Beirut 13 G May (4 weeks) Regional seminar to review the situation in Non-Self-Governing Territories under the Second Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism [General Assembly resolutions 54/91 and 63/110] May (3 days) United Nations International Meeting in Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace [General Assembly resolutions 63/27 and 63/28] May (2 days) UNICEF, Executive Board, annual session [General Assembly resolutions 57 (I) and 48/162] 1-4 June Committee for Programme and Coordination, fiftieth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) and General Assembly resolution 31/93] 7 June-2 July Committee on Contributions, seventieth session [General Assembly resolution 14 (I) A] 7-25 June UNCTAD, Working Party on the Strategic Framework and the Programme Budget (Strategic Framework), fifty-fourth session [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] 7-11 June Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, fifty-third session [General Assembly resolution 1472 A (XIV)] 9-18 June PVg United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, Committee of Actuaries [General Assembly resolution 1561 (XV), article XXIX] 9-11 June Committee on the Rights of the Child, pre-sessional working group, fifty-fifth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] 14-18 June Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to consider the national, regional and global implementation of the Programme of Action on Small Arms [General Assembly resolution 63/72] States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, twentieth meeting [General Assembly resolutions 37/66 and 49/28] 14-25 June 138 G One or two sessions per year UNEP, Committee of Permanent Representatives, 111th meeting [Governing Council decision 19/32] 15 June Committee against Torture, Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, eleventh session [Part I, article 2, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and report of the Human Rights Council (A/61/53)] 21-25 June Human Rights Council, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, ninety-first session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/12] Human Rights Council, Working Group on Situations, sixth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods, thirty-seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 21-30 June 23 G UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, annual session [General Assembly resolutions 2029 (XX) and 48/162] 21 June-2 July United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, forty-third session [General Assembly resolution 2205 (XXI)] 21 June-9 July Economic and Social Council, substantive session [Charter] 28 June-23 July Meeting of Chairpersons of the Human Rights Treaty Bodies, twenty-second session [General Assembly resolutions 46/111 and 49/178] 28 June-2 July 8 E Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, eleventh meeting [General Assembly resolutions 60/30 and 63/111] Sixteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women [General Assembly resolution 34/180] 28 June 163 G Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals, nineteenth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 30 June-2 July Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat, 37th meeting [General Assembly resolution 56/206] June June/July (up to 20 meetings) WFP, Executive Board, annual session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8] Human Rights Committee, pre-sessional Working Group on Communications, ninety-ninth session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)] 5-9 July International Law Commission, sixty-second session, second part [General Assembly resolution 174 (II)] 5 July-6 August Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Working Group on Communications under the Optional Protocol to the Convention [General Assembly resolutions 55/70 and 62/218] 7-9 July Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, forty-sixth session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 62/218] 12-30 July Group of governmental experts to continue to study existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security and possible cooperative measures to address them, fourth session [General Assembly resolutions 61/54, 62/17 and 63/37] 12-16 July Human Rights Committee, ninety-ninth session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)] Open-ended Working Group towards an Arms Trade Treaty: establishing common international standards for the import, export and transfer of conventional arms, fourth session [General Assembly resolution 63/240] 15-23 July (1 day) London United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, fifty-seventh session [General Assembly resolutions 248 (III), 46/200 and 61/240] 33 E United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, Standing Committee [General Assembly resolutions 248 (III) and 61/9] Human Rights Council, Working Group on the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, tenth session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/21] 26-30 July ICSC, seventy-first session [General Assembly resolution 3357 (XXIX)] 26 July-6 August Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters, fifty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 37/99 K] July (3-4 days) Conference on Disarmament, third part [General Assembly resolutions 1722 (XVI), S-10/2 and 34/83 L] July-September (7 weeks) Independent Audit Advisory Committee, eleventh session [General Assembly resolution 61/275] July (3 days) International Law Seminar [General Assembly resolution 49/51] July/August (3 weeks) 30 E United Nations Board of Auditors, sixty-fourth regular session [General Assembly resolution 74 (I)] 3 E (CEF) United Nations International Conference of Civil Society in Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace [General Assembly resolutions 63/27 and 63/28] Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, pre-sessional working group for the forty-eighth session [General Assembly resolutions 45/124, 47/94 and 62/218] 2-6 August Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, seventy-seventh session [General Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX)] 2-27 August Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, fifth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Human Rights Council, Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, third session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/36] 9-13 August Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, twenty-sixth session [annex II, article 2 (5), of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea] 16-20 August Human Rights Council, Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, fifty-eighth session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/4] 30 August-3 September Human Rights Council, Working Group on Communications, seventh session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Meeting of experts of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction [Decision of the States parties at the Sixth Review Conference]c August (5 days) Human Rights Council, Forum on Minority Issues, third session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/15] 2-3 September Twenty-ninth Meeting of States Parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)] 2 September 145 G Human Rights Council, intersessional forum on economic, social and cultural rights (Social Forum), third session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/13] 6-8 September UNCTAD, Working Party on the Strategic Framework and the Programme Budget (Technical Cooperation), fifty-fifth session [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, Board of Trustees, fifteenth session [General Assembly resolution 46/122] 6-10 September Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions [General Assembly resolutions 14 (I), 173 (II), and 32/103] 7 September-22 December Conference of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Elections [General Assembly resolution 61/106 and article 34 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities] 7-9 Septemberc UNICEF, Executive Board, second regular session [General Assembly resolutions 57 (I) and 48/162] 7-9 September Committee on the Rights of the Child, fifty-fifth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]c 13 September-1 October Human Rights Council, fifteenth session 13 September-October UNCTAD, Trade and Development Board, fifty-seventh session [General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) and UNCTAD resolution 114 (V)] 148 G UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, second regular session [General Assembly resolutions 2029 (XX) and 48/162] 13-16 Septemberh General Assembly, sixty-fifth session [Charter] 14 September-Decemberi PV/ UNEP, Committee of Permanent Representatives, 112th meeting [Governing Council decision 19/32] 14 September 2010 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly [General Assembly resolution 63/302] [see paragraph 4 (f) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] September Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat, 38th meeting [General Assembly resolution 56/206] Committee on Conferences, substantive session [General Assembly resolution 43/222 B] (5 days) High-level review meeting on the follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States [General Assembly resolution 63/213] [see paragraph 4 (g) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] To be deter-mined UNRWA, Advisory Commission [General Assembly resolution 302 (IV)] Amman Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, forty-seventh session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 62/218] 4-22 October Committee on the Rights of the Child, pre-sessional working group, fifty-sixth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] 4-8 October Human Rights Committee, pre-sessional Working Group on Communications, one hundredth session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)] UNCITRAL, Working Group on Arbitration, fifty-third session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] Ad Hoc Committee of the Human Rights Council on the Elaboration of Complementary Standards in the Field of Racism [Human Rights Council decision 3/103 and resolution 6/21] 11-22 October Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, thirteenth session [General Assembly resolution 45/158] 11-15 October Human Rights Committee, one hundredth session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)] 11-29 October UNCITRAL, Working Group on Procurement, nineteenth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] UNCTAD, Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting, twenty-seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/67] 12-15 October Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, fifth session [General Assembly resolution 55/25] 18-22 October 129 G United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, Board of Trustees, thirty-third session [General Assembly resolution 36/151] Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, pre-sessional working group for the forty-ninth session [General Assembly resolutions 45/124, 47/94 and 62/218] 25-29 October Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Working Group on Communications under the Optional Protocol to the Convention, forty-seventh session [General Assembly resolutions 55/70 and 62/218] 25-27 October Human Rights Council, Intergovernmental Working Group on Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, eighth session [Human Rights Council resolution 1/5] 25 October-5 November Human Rights Council, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, ninety-second session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/12] International Narcotics Control Board, ninety-ninth session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11] 27 October-12 November Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters, sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1273 (XLIII), 1765 (LIV) and 2004/69] October/November (1 week) 25 E Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, fourth session [General Assembly resolution 61/106 and article 34 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities] October (1 week) UNHCR, Executive Committee, sixty-first session [General Assembly resolutions 1166 (XII) and 62/123] 78 G October/November (1 meeting) United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, second regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 2001/321] WFP, Executive Board, second regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]c Committee against Torture, forty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 39/46] 1-19 November Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, forty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39] UNCITRAL, Working Group on Insolvency Law, thirty-ninth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 1-5 November Group of governmental experts to review the operation and further development of the Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military Expenditures, first session [General Assembly resolution 62/13] 8-12 November 8 November UNCITRAL, Working Group on Security Interests, eighteenth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] UNCTAD, Sixth United Nations Conference to Review all Aspects of the Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive Business Practices [General Assembly resolution 61/186] 193 G Voluntary Fund for Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights, Board of Trustees, thirty-third session [Economic and Social Council decision 1993/283] Committee against Torture, Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, twelfth session [Part I, article 2, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and report of the Human Rights Council (A/61/53)] 15-19 November Human Rights Council, working group on arbitrary detention, fifty-ninth session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/4] 17-26 November Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, pre-sessional working group, forty-sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39] 22-26 November Human Rights Council, working group on the Universal Periodic Review, ninth session [Human Rights Council decision 1/103 and resolution 5/1] 22 November-3 December Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Special Meeting in Observance of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People [General Assembly resolutions 32/40 B and 33/28] 29 November 25 G Human Rights Council, Working Group on the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, eleventh session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/21] 29 November-3 December States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, tenth session [article 11, paragraph 2, of the Convention]c 29 November-3 December (1 week) Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods, thirty-eighth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 29 November-7 December 22 G Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, forty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 2099 (XX)] November (2 days)h Annual meeting of States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [Convention]c (3 days) 109 G Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [article 10 of the Amended Protocol]c 29 G Disarmament Commission, organizational session [General Assembly resolution S-10/2] November/ December (1 or 2 days)h Panel of External Auditors of the United Nations, the Specialized Agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency [General Assembly resolutions 347 (IV) and 1438 (XIV)] Twelfth Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [article 13, paragraph 1, of the Amended Protocol]c United Nations Board of Auditors, special session [General Assembly resolution 74 (I)] United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities [General Assembly resolution 32/197] Independent Audit Advisory Committee, twelfth session [General Assembly resolution 61/275] 1-3 Decemberh UNCITRAL, Working Group on Electronic Commerce, forty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 6-10 December Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals, twentieth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 7-9 December Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals, fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 10 December UNCITRAL, Working Group on Transport Law, twenty-third session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 13-17 December UNEP, Committee of Permanent Representatives, 113th meeting [Governing Council decision 19/32] 15 December Thirteenth Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child [General Assembly resolution 44/25]e 21 December Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly for the Announcement of Voluntary Contributions to the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees [General Assembly resolution 55/75] One meeting per year Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly for the Announcement of Voluntary Contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East [General Assembly resolution 1729 (XVI)] (1 meeting) Annual meeting of the States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction [Decision of the States parties at the Sixth Review Conference]c 159 G Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat, 39th meeting [General Assembly resolution 56/206] UNU, Council, fifty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 3081 (XXVIII)] Tokyo 28 E Committee on Conferences [General Assembly resolution 43/222 B] As required Committee on Relations with the Host Country [General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI)] Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People [General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX)] ECE, committees and working groups [Economic and Social Council resolution 36 (IV)] 55 G Economic and Social Council, formal/informal meetings [Charter and General Assembly resolutions 50/227 and 61/16] Human Rights Council, organizational and intersessional meetings and special sessions [General Assembly resolution 60/251] International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 [Security Council resolution 955 (1994)] Arusha 11 E International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 [Security Council resolution 808 (1993) and General Assembly resolution 47/235] The Hague Security Council [Charter] Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997) concerning Sierra Leone Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1636 (2005) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia Security Council, Committee of Experts [decision taken by the Security Council at its 1st meeting, 1946] Security Council, Committee on Council Meetings away from Headquarters [decision taken by the Security Council at its 1625th meeting] Security Council, Committee on the Admission of New Members [decision taken by the Security Council at its 42nd meeting, 1946] Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991) Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and its Working Group [General Assembly resolution 2006 (XIX)] Trusteeship Council (and drafting committees) [Charter] PVd UNCTAD, consultations of the Secretary-General and of the President of the Trade and Development Board [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] As required (up to 30 meetings) UNCTAD, executive sessions of the Trade and Development Board [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] UNCTAD, other commodity conferences and commodity meetings [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] UNCTAD, seminars and study groups [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] As required (up to 20 meetings) UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, briefings and informal consultations [General Assembly resolutions 2020 (XX) and 48/162] UNICEF, Executive Board, briefings and informal consultations [General Assembly resolutions 57 (I) and 48/162] United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine [General Assembly resolution 194 (III)] 3 G Ad Hoc Working Group on the revitalization of the General Assembly [General Assembly resolution 63/309]j Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development [General Assembly resolution 63/305]j Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, African region, twentieth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/11] Addis Ababa or a capital in the region Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, Asia and the Pacific region, thirty-fourth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1985/11 and 1988/15] Bangkok or a capital in the region 51 G Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, Latin America and Caribbean region, twentieth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1987/34 and 1988/15] Santiago or a capital in the region 41 G Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East, forty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1776 (LIV)] A capital in the region (AER) Committee on Conferences, organizational session [General Assembly resolution 43/222 B] Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations, organizational session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 3 (II) and 1296 (XLIV) and decisions 1995/304 and 1997/297] General meeting of the organization and agencies of the United Nations system and the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its subsidiary organs [General Assembly resolution 61/49] General meeting on cooperation between the representatives of the secretariats of the United Nations system and the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States and its specialized organizations [General Assembly resolution 61/14] High-level Open-ended Working Group on the Financial Situation of the United Nations [General Assembly resolution 49/143]j Human Rights Council, working group of experts on people of African descent, eleventh session [Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 9/14] Informal Open-ended Working Group on an Agenda for Peace and/or its subgroups [General Assembly resolution 47/120]j Peacebuilding Commission [General Assembly resolution 60/180 and Security Council resolution 1645 (2005)] 31 G Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), seventieth session Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), seventy-first session Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), seventy-second session UNCCD, Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention, eighth session [General Assembly resolution 62/193] To be determined (8 days) 185 G UNEP, Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum, eleventh special session [General Assembly resolutions 2997 (XXVII), 42/185 and 53/242] One regular session and one special session alternately every year UNFCCC, Conference of the Parties to the Convention, sixteenth session, and meetings of subsidiary bodies [General Assembly resolution 62/86] To be determined (2 weeks) 189 G UNFCCC, meetings of subsidiary bodies of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention [General Assembly resolution 62/86] Bonn UNITAR, Board of Trustees, forty-ninth session [General Assembly resolutions 1934 (XVIII) and 47/227] To be determined (2-3 days) United Nations Appeals Tribunal [General Assembly resolutions 61/261, 62/228 and 63/253] [see paragraph 4(h) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] United Nations Dispute Tribunal [General Assembly resolutions 61/261, 62/228 and 63/253] [see paragraph 4(h) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] Group of governmental experts of the States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [Decision of the States parties, December 2001]c Up to 20-25 days of meetings throughout the year 90 G Intergovernmental preparatory committee for the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries [General Assembly resolution 63/227] [see paragraph 4(m) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] Towards the end of 2010 and/or early in 2011 a The languages in which interpretation will be provided are indicated. Languages in which translation and meeting records will be provided vary according to the rules of procedure applicable to the body concerned and, in the case of some working groups and similar bodies, according to the actual requirements when these are less than would be provided under the rules of procedure. b Pursuant to paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 53/208 A, and as decided by the Assembly previously, United Nations intergovernmental bodies are requested to avoid holding meetings on Orthodox Good Friday, which falls on 2 April 2010. c Conference services are funded from outside the regular budget of the United Nations. d For plenary meetings only. e In accordance with paragraph (h) of Governing Council decision 19/32, the Committee of Permanent Representatives shall consist of the representatives of all States Members of the United Nations and members of its specialized agencies, and the European Community, accredited to the United Nations Environment Programme, whether based in Nairobi or outside. f Open to the participation of all interested States members of UNCTAD (UNCTAD resolution 80 (III), para. 9). g For oral hearings only. h Subject to the approval of the General Assembly. i Verbatim records are provided for plenary meetings of the General Assembly and First Committee. j Conference services will be provided from those allocated to the General Assembly. Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 [General Assembly resolution 63/129] Ad Hoc Committee on the Administration of Justice at the United Nations [General Assembly decision 63/531] Ad Hoc Committee on Criminal Accountability of United Nations Officials and Experts on Mission [General Assembly resolution 62/63] Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the Security Council [General Assembly resolution 48/26]c Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories [General Assembly resolution 2443 (XXIII) and 63/95] PVb Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization [General Assembly resolution 3349 (XXIX)] Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East [General Assembly resolution 2656 (XXV) and 63/93] 9 G b For oral hearings only. c Conference services will be provided from those allocated to the General Assembly. (as at 14 August 2009) Dates (2011) 7 January, once every fortnight thereafter UNDP and UNFPA, Executive Board, election of Bureau [General Assembly resolutions 2029 (XX) and 48/162 and Economic and Social Council decision 2007/221] 7 January Open-ended meeting of governmental experts to address key implementation issues and themes, including international cooperation and assistance [General Assembly resolution 63/72] 10-14 January Working Group on reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment [General Assembly resolution 59/298]b 17-28 January 17-20 January 20 January 21 and 24 January 36 G/36 G/36 G 24 January- 2 February UNCTAD, Working Party on the Strategic Framework and the Programme Budget, fifty-sixth session (programme budget) [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] 24-28 January c United Nations Forum on Forests [Economic and Social Council resolution 2006/49] 4 February 25-27 January International Narcotics Control Board, one hundredth session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11]b 31 January- Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, forty-eighth session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 62/218] January/February (3 weeks) Committee on the Rights of the Child, fifty-sixth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] January (3 weeks) Committee on the Rights of the Child, pre-sessional working group, fifty-seventh session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] Conference on Disarmament, first part [General Assembly resolutions 1722 (XVI), S-10/2 and 34/83 L] January-March (10 weeks) Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, sixth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] January (1 week) Human Rights Council, Working Group on Situations, seventh session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] 1 February- 22 April Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, forty-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 1472 A (XIV)] 7-18 February Group of governmental experts to review the operation and further development of the Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military Expenditures, second session [General Assembly resolution 62/13] 7-11 February UNCITRAL, Working Group on Arbitration, fifty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] Commission for Social Development, forty-ninth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 10 (II), 1139 (XLI) and 1996/7] 9-18 February UNCITRAL, Working Group on Security Interests, nineteenth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 14-18 February 15-18 February Commission on the Status of Women, fifty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council decision 1999/257] 22 February- 4 March 18 March Statistical Commission, forty-second session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/8] Intergovernmental preparatory meeting for the nineteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development [Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/61] 28 February- Open-ended Working Group towards an Arms Trade Treaty: establishing common international standards for the import, export and transfer of conventional arms, fifth session [General Assembly resolution 63/240] Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters, fifty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 37/99 K] Committee against Torture, Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, thirteenth session [Part I, article 2, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and report of the Human Rights Council (A/61/53)] February (1 week) Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, Working Group on Communications under the Optional Protocol to the Convention [General Assembly resolutions 55/70 and 62/218]b Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, seventy-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX)] (4 weeks) Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, fifth session [General Assembly resolution 61/106 and article 34 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities] Human Rights Council, Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, tenth session [Human Rights Council decision 1/103 and resolution 5/1] February (2 weeks) Independent Audit Advisory Committee, thirteenth session [General Assembly resolution 61/275] February (1 day) Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [General Assembly resolution 1654 (XVI)] UNEP, Governing Council/Global Ministerial Environment Forum, twenty-sixth session [General Assembly resolutions 2997 (XXVII), 42/185 and 53/242] United Nations Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations, Board of Trustees, twenty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 40/131] United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, Board of Trustees, thirty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 36/151] WFP, Executive Board, first regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]b Human Rights Committee, pre-sessional working group on communications, one hundred and fourth session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)] 7-11 March Human Rights Committee, one hundred and fourth session [General Assembly resolution 14 March-1 April UNCITRAL, Working Group on Electronic Commerce, forty seventh session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 14-18 March Committee for Development Policy, thirteenth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1998/46] 21-25 March ECA, Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, forty-fourth session of the Commission [Economic and Social Council resolution 671 (XXV)]b Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, twenty-seventh session [annex II, article 2 (5), of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea] 28 March-1 April Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Legal Subcommittee, fiftieth session [General Assembly resolution 1472 (XIV)] 28 March-8 April Commission on Narcotic Drugs, fifty-fourth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 9 (I) and 1991/39] Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat, 40th meeting [General Assembly resolution 56/206] Consultative Committee on the United Nations Development Fund for Women, fifty-first session [General Assembly resolutions 31/133 and 39/125] ECA, Committee of Experts of the Conference of African Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 30th meeting [Economic and Social Council resolution 671 (XXV)] March/Aprilb ECE, sixty-third session [Economic and Social Council resolution 36 (IV) and 2006/38] 56 G (EFR) Human Rights Council, sixteenth session [General Assembly resolution 60/251] Human Rights Council, Working Group on Communications, eighth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Human Rights Council, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, ninety-third session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/12] March (1 week) Human Rights Council, Working Group on the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, twelfth session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/21] March/April (1 week) ICSC, seventy-second session [General Assembly resolution 3357 (XXIX)] UNEP, Committee of Permanent Representatives, 114th meeting [Governing Council decision 19/32] United Nations Latin American and Caribbean Meetings on the Question of Palestine [General Assembly resolutions 63/27 and 63/28] Committee of Experts on Public Administration, tenth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 2001/45 and 2003/60] 4-8 April Commission on Population and Development, forty-fourth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 150 (VII), 87 (LVII) and 1995/55] 4-22 Aprilf UNCITRAL, Working Group on Procurement, twentieth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 11-15 April Governing Council of UN-Habitat, twenty-third session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/1 and General Assembly resolution 56/206] Committee on Information, thirty-third session [General Assembly resolution 33/115 C] 25 April-6 May 27 and 28 April Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, twentieth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1992/1] Aprilf Committee against Torture, forty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution 39/46]b April/Mayf Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, fourteenth session [General Assembly resolution 45/158] April (2 weeks)f ESCAP, sixty-seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 37 (IV), 69 (V) and 723 B (XXVIII)] Human Rights Council, working group of experts on people of African descent, twelfth session [Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 9/14] April (1 week)f Independent Audit Advisory Committee, fourteenth session [General Assembly resolution 61/275] April (3 days)f Preparatory Committee for the Seventh Review Conference of the States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction [Decision of the States parties at the Sixth Review Conference]b April (1 day)f April/Mayf (1 meeting) Commission on Sustainable Development, nineteenth session [Economic and Social Council decisions 1993/207 and 2005/228] 2-13 May International Narcotics Control Board, one hundred and first session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11]b UNCTAD, Investment, Enterprise and Development Commission, third session [part IV, section B of the Accra Accord, adopted at the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in Accra, from 20 to 25 April 2008] 2-6 May Group of governmental experts to review the operation and further development of the Standardized Instrument for Reporting Military Expenditures, third session [General Assembly resolution 62/13] 9-13 May UNCTAD, Trade and Development Commission, third session [part IV, section B of the Accra Accord, adopted at the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in Accra from 20 to 25 April 2008] 10 May-22 July UNCITRAL, Working Group on Insolvency Law, fortieth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 16-20 May 16-24 May Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, tenth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2000/22] 16-27 May UNCITRAL, Working Group on Transport Law, twenty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 23-27 May 23-26 May United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation, fifty-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 913 (X)] 31 May-10 June Commission on Science and Technology for Development, fourteenth session [General Assembly resolution 46/235 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2002/37 and 2006/46 and decision 2003/291] May (1 week) Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, forty-sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39] May (3 weeks) Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, pre-sessional working group, forty-seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39] Committee on the Rights of the Child, fifty-seventh session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] May/June (3 weeks) May-July (7 weeks) Human Rights Council, working group on arbitrary detention, sixtieth session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/4] Human Rights Council, Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, eleventh session [Human Rights Council decision 1/103 and resolution 5/1] May (2 weeks) International Law Commission, sixty-third session, first part [General Assembly resolution 174 (II)] May-June Voluntary Fund for Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights, Board of Trustees, thirty-fourth session [Economic and Social Council decision 1993/283] Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, fifty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 1472 A (XIV)] 1-10 June Committee for Programme and Coordination, fifty-first session [Economic and Social Council resolution 2008 (LX) and General Assembly resolution 31/93] 6 June-1 July Committee on Contributions, seventy-first session [General Assembly resolution 14 (I) A] 6-24 June UNCTAD, Working Party on the Strategic Framework and the Programme Budget, fifty-sixth resumed session (Programme budget) [UNCTAD resolution 114 (V) and Trade and Development Board decision 156 (XVII)] 6-10 June Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, 12th meeting [General Assembly resolutions 60/30 and 63/111] 13-17 June States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 21st meeting [General Assembly resolutions 37/66 and 49/28] 20 June-1 July Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods, thirty-ninth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 20-24 June Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals, twenty-first session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 27-29 June Committee against Torture, Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, fourteenth session [Part I, article 2, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and report of the Human Rights Council (A/61/53)]b June (1 week) Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat, 41st meeting [General Assembly resolution 56/206] Committee on the Rights of the Child, pre-sessional working group, fifty-eighth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211]b Human Rights Council, seventeenth session [General Assembly resolution 60/251] Human Rights Council, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, ninety-fourth session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/12] Human Rights Council, Working Group on Situations, eighth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Meeting of Chairpersons of the Human Rights Treaty Bodies, twenty-third session [General Assembly resolutions 46/111 and 49/178] June-July (1 week) June/July (up to 20 meetings) UNEP, Committee of Permanent Representatives, 115th meeting [Governing Council decision 19/32] June (2 weeks) United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, forty-fourth session [General Assembly resolution 2205 (XXI)] WFP, Executive Board, annual session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]b 4-29 July UNCTAD, Intergovernmental Group of Experts on Competition Law and Policy, eleventh session [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] 5-8 July 6-8 July 11-29 July Open-ended Working Group towards an Arms Trade Treaty: establishing common international standards for the import, export and transfer of conventional arms, sixth session [General Assembly resolution 63/240] 11-15 July Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters, fifty-sixth session [General Assembly resolution Human Rights Committee, one hundred and second session [General Assembly resolution July (3 weeks) Human Rights Committee, pre-sessional Working Group on Communications, one hundred and second session [General Assembly resolution July (1 week) ICSC, seventy-third session [General Assembly resolution 3357 (XXIX)] July Independent Audit Advisory Committee, fifteenth session [General Assembly resolution 61/275] International Law Commission, sixty-third session, second part [General Assembly resolution 174 (II)] July-August July (1 day) United Nations Board of Auditors, sixty-fifth regular session [General Assembly resolution 74 (I)] United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, fifty-eighth session [General Assembly resolutions 248 (III), 46/200 and 61/240] United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board, Standing Committee [General Assembly resolution 248 (III)] July (1 meeting) 1-5 August Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, twenty-eighth session [annex II, article 2 (5), of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea] 8-12 August Human Rights Council, Working Group on the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, thirteenth session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/21] 22-26 August Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, seventy-ninth session [General Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX)] August (4 weeks) August-September Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, seventh session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] August (1 week) Human Rights Council, Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, fourth session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/36] Human Rights Council, intersessional forum on economic, social and cultural rights (Social Forum), tenth session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/13] August/September (3 days) Human Rights Council, working group on arbitrary detention, sixty-first session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/4] August/September (1 week) UNCITRAL, Working Group on Arbitration, fifty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 5-9 September 6 September-23 December 6-9 September Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, third session [General Assembly resolution 61/106 and article 40 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities]b 12-15 Septemberg General Assembly, sixty-sixth session [Charter] 13 September-December SRh Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat, 42nd meeting [General Assembly resolution 56/206] September (5 days) Committee on the Rights of the Child, fifty-eighth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] September (3 weeks) Human Rights Council, eighteenth session [General Assembly resolution 60/251] Human Rights Council, Forum on Minority Issues, fourth session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/15] September (2 days) UNCITRAL, Working Group on Security Interests, twentieth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 12-16 September UNCTAD, Trade and Development Board, fifty-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) and UNCTAD resolution 114 (V)] September/October 153 G UNEP, Committee of Permanent Representatives, 116th meeting [Governing Council decision 19/32] g United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, Board of Trustees, sixteenth session [General Assembly resolution 46/122] September (1 week) One session per year UNCITRAL, Working Group on Electronic Commerce, forty-eighth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 10-14 October Two sessions UNCITRAL, Working Group on Procurement, twenty-first session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 17-21 October International Narcotics Control Board, one hundred and second session [Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, article 11] 24 October-11 November UNCITRAL, Working Group on Insolvency Law, forty-first session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 31 October-4 November Committee against Torture, forty-seventh session [General Assembly resolution 39/46] October/November Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters, seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1273 (XLIII), 1765 (LIV) and 2004/69] Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, fiftieth session [General Assembly resolutions 34/180 and 62/218] Three sessions Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, fifteenth session [General Assembly resolution 45/158] Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, sixth session [General Assembly resolution 61/106 and article 34 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities]b Committee on the Rights of the Child, pre-sessional working group, fifty-ninth session [General Assembly resolutions 44/25, 47/112 and 49/211] General Assembly, high-level dialogue on financing for development [General Assembly resolution 57/250] (2 or 3 days) Human Rights Committee, one hundred and third session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)] Human Rights Committee, Pre-sessional Working Group on Communications, one hundred and third session [General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI)]b Human Rights Council, Intergovernmental Working Group on Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, ninth session [Human Rights Council resolution 1/5] (2 weeks) Human Rights Council, Working Group on Communications, ninth session [Human Rights Council resolution 5/1] Thirteenth Meeting of States Parties to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment [General Assembly resolution 39/46 A] 139 G UNHCR, Executive Committee, sixty-second session [General Assembly resolutions 1166 (XII) and 62/123] United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, Board of Trustees, thirty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 36/151] WFP, Executive Board, second regular session [Economic and Social Council decision 1995/227 and General Assembly resolution 50/8]b Subcommittee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods, fortieth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] 28 November-7 December (2 days)g Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [article 13, paragraph 1, of the Amended Protocol] Committee against Torture, Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, fifteenth session [Part I, article 2, of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and report of the Human Rights Council (A/61/53)]b Novemberh Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, forty seventh session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39] November/ December (3 weeks) Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [article 10 of the Amended Protocol]b November/ December (1 or 2 days)g Human Rights Council, working group on arbitrary detention, sixty-second session [Human Rights Council resolution 6/4] (8 days) Human Rights Council, Working Group on the question of the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, fourteenth session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/21] Human Rights Council, working group on the Universal Periodic Review, twelfth session [Human Rights Council decision 1/103 and resolution 5/1] November/ December (2 weeks) November (1 day) November/December Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects [Convention]b (7 days) 89 G Seventh Review Conference of the States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction [Decision of the States parties at the Sixth Review Conference]b November- States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, eleventh session [article 11, paragraph 2, of the Convention]b Voluntary Fund for Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights, Board of Trustees, thirty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council decision 1993/283] Subcommittee of Experts on the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals, twenty-second session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1989/104 and 1999/65] Fifth meeting of the States parties to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families [General Assembly resolution 57/218]b 8 December Commission on Narcotic Drugs, resumed fifty-fourth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 9 (I) and 1991/39] 12-13 December UNCITRAL, Working Group on Transport Law, twenty-fifth session [General Assembly resolution 33/92] 12-16 December Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, resumed twentieth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1992/1] 14-15 December Committee of Permanent Representatives to UN-Habitat, 43rd meeting [General Assembly resolution 56/206] Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, pre-sessional working group, forty-eighth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/33, 1985/17 and 1995/39] Human Rights Council, Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances, ninety-fifth session [Human Rights Council resolution 7/12] Independent Audit Advisory Committee, sixteenth session [General Assembly resolution 61/275] UNEP, Committee of Permanent Representatives, 117th meeting [Governing Council decision 19/32] UNFCCC, Conference of the Parties to the Convention, seventeenth session and meetings of subsidiary bodies [General Assembly resolution 62/86] International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 [Security Council resolution 955 (1994)] (up to 30 meetings) UNCTAD, executive sessions of the Trade and Development Board [Trade and Development Board decision at its thirteenth executive session (8 July 1996) and General Assembly resolution 51/167] (10 days) Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean [General Assembly resolutions 299 (XXVIII) and 62/14] Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development [General Assembly resolution 63/305] i Ad Hoc Working Group on the revitalization of the General Assembly [General Assembly resolution 63/309]i Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, European region, ninth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1993/36] Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, African region, twenty-first session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/11] Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, Asia and the Pacific region, thirty-fifth session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1985/11 and 1988/15] Commission on Narcotic Drugs, meeting of heads of national drug law enforcement agencies, Latin America and Caribbean region, twenty-first session [Economic and Social Council resolutions 1987/34 and 1988/15] Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East, forty-sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 1776 (LIV)] Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, fourth session [General Assembly resolution 58/4] 117 G Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries [General Assembly resolution 63/227] [see paragraph 4 (m) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation, organizational session [General Assembly resolutions 33/134 and 58/220] High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation, sixteenth session [General Assembly resolutions 33/134 and 58/220] High-level Open-ended Working Group on the Financial Situation of the United Nations [General Assembly resolution 49/143]i Human Rights Council, working group of experts on people of African descent, thirteenth session [Human Rights Council resolutions 5/1 and 9/14] Informal Open-ended Working Group on an Agenda for Peace and/or its subgroups [General Assembly resolution 47/120]i INSTRAW, Executive Board, eighth session [General Assembly resolution 59/260 and Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/57]b Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), seventy-fourth session Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), seventy-sixth session Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), seventy-third session Security Council, Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991), seventy-fifth session UNCCD, Conference of the Parties to the Convention, tenth session, and meetings of subsidiary bodies [General Assembly resolution 62/193] UNITAR, Board of Trustees, fiftieth session [General Assembly resolutions 1934 (XVIII) and 47/227] (2-3 days) United Nations Appeals Tribunal [General Assembly resolutions 61/261, 62/228, 63/253] [see paragraph 4 (j) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] United Nations Dispute Tribunal [General Assembly resolutions 61/261, 62/228, 63/253] [see paragraph 4 (j) of A/AC.172/2009/CRP.1] United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names, twenty-sixth session [Economic and Social Council resolution 715 A (XXVII), 1314 (XLIV)] 80 E Group of governmental experts of the States parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, fourteenth session [Decision of the States parties, December 2001] b Conference services are funded from outside the regular budget of the United Nations. c Open to the participation of all interested States members of UNCTAD (UNCTAD resolution 80 (III), para. 9). f Pursuant to paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 53/208 A, and as decided by the Assembly previously, United Nations intergovernmental bodies are requested to avoid holding meetings on Orthodox Good Friday, which falls on 22 April 2011. g Subject to the approval of the General Assembly. h Verbatim records are provided for plenary meetings of the General Assembly and First Committee. i Conference services will be provided from those allocated to the General Assembly. ICAO, Committee, 189th session Montreal UPU, Postal Operations Council 12-30 April Berne WHO, Executive Board, 126th session 18 January IFAD, Governing Council 15-19 February Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group B and informal/expert meetings, thirtieth session 18-29 February ICAO, Council, 189th session IAEA, Board of Governors ILO, Governing Body and its committees ICAO, Committee, 190th session IFAD, Executive Board UNESCO, Executive Board April Paris IAEA, Board of Governors, Programme and Budget Committee UNIDO, Industrial Development Board, thirty-seventh session 10-13 May Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group B and informal/expert meetings, thirty-first session, first part 19-30 May ICAO, Council, 190th session 17 May-18 June WHO, Sixty-third World Health Assembly WHO, Executive Board, 127th session ILO, General Conference 2-18 June Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group A and informal/expert meetings, thirty-third session 2-4 June WMO, Executive Council, sixty-second session Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, thirtieth session 24-27 June International Seabed Authority, Assembly, sixteenth session Kingston FAO, Council IMO, Council UNWTO, Executive Council, eighty-eighth session UPU, Congress, twenty-fifth session August/September Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group B and informal/expert meetings, thirty-first session, second part 18 August-5 September UNIDO, Programme and Budget Committee, twenty-sixth session 13-17 September IAEA, General Conference 20-24 September WIPO, Assemblies of Member States 27 September World Bank Group and International Monetary Fund Boards of Governors, annual meetings 13 October Washington, D.C. ICAO, Committee, 191st session 18 October-5 November UPU, Council of Administration 25 October-12 November Annual meetings of the Boards of Governors of the World Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group A and informal/expert meetings, thirty-fourth session 20-22 October ITU, Council Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, thirty-first session 17-21 November IAEA, Board of Governors, Technical Assistance and Cooperation 29-30 November IMO, Assembly UNWTO, Executive Council, eighty-ninth session Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, fifteenth session FAO, Conference UNIDO, Industrial Development Board, thirty-eighth session 1-3 December Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Budget and Finance Committee Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, resumed session ICAO, Committee, 192nd session 17 January-4 February WHO, Executive Board, 128th session January 26 April-13 May Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group B and informal/expert meetings, thirty-second session 9-27 February ICAO, Council, 192nd session 21 February-18 March 28 February-4 March ICAO, Committee, 193rd session 2-20 May UNIDO, Programme and Budget Committee, twenty-seventh session Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group B and informal/expert meetings, thirty-third session, first part 11-22 May ICAO, Council, 193rd session 6-30 June WHO, Sixty-fourth World Health Assembly WHO, Executive Board, 129th session UNWTO, Executive Council, ninetieth session Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group A and informal/expert meetings, thirty-fifth session 2-5 June UNIDO, Industrial Development Board, thirty-ninth session Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, thirty-second session 29 June-3 July WMO, Executive Council, sixty-third session May/June Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group B and informal/expert meetings, thirty-third session, second part 24 August-4 September 19-23 September 26-30 September 15-25 September 3 October Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty UNESCO, General Conference Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Working Group A and informal/expert meetings, thirty-sixth session 5-9 October ICAO, Committee, 194th session 19 September-7 October 6 October UNWTO, Executive Council, ninety-first session UNWTO, Executive Council, ninety-second session UNWTO, General Assembly, eighteenth session ICAO, Council, 194th session 24 October-18 November IAEA, Board of Governors, Technical Assistance and Cooperation Committee Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, fourteenth session UNIDO, General Conference, fourteenth session 28 November-2 December International Seabed Authority, Assembly, fifteenth session Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Executive Council Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court 