%%%FOREIGN RELATIONS|GUATEMALA|HONDURAS|FREEDOM OF THE PRESS|

Sixty-fourth session Agenda item 20 The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development Letter dated 28 September 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Guatemala to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General Because we consider it relevant to General Assembly resolution 63/301, I have the honour to transmit to you a communiqué issued today by the Government of Guatemala regarding the physical aggression against two Guatemalan journalists by the security forces of the de facto Government of Honduras (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as documents of the General Assembly under agenda item 20. (Signed) Gert Rosenthal Permanent Representative Communiqué The Government of Guatemala condemns the use of violence in Honduras against Guatemalan journalists 28 September 2009 The Government of Guatemala expresses its outrage at the acts of violence perpetrated against Guatemalan journalists Alberto Cardona and Rony Sanchez of Guatevision and Televisa, respectively, who were violently attacked by the security forces of the de facto Government of Honduras. Both were carrying out their work as journalists on Monday morning, when the security forces proceeded to close Radio Globo, located in the capital of Honduras; they were verbally and physically abused by members of the M1 34 patrol of the Honduran Police. The Government of Guatemala rejects all acts of violence that have taken place in Honduras, particularly when they have been committed by the security forces against the exercise of freedom of the press. In this regard, the Government of Guatemala expresses its solidarity with the Guatemalan press, in particular with the journalists Alberto Cardona and Rony Sanchez. This reaction was transmitted today through the Ambassador of Guatemala to the Organization of American States during a meeting of the Permanent Council, during which the authoritarian attitude and actions against the exercise of journalists covering the political events taking place in Honduras since the interruption of the institutional process last June were condemned and repudiated. The same communiqué expressing repudiation and outrage was transmitted to the Permanent Missions of Guatemala to the United Nations in New York and Geneva. The Government of the Republic of Guatemala demands respect for the physical integrity of Guatemalan journalists and for all those independently engaged in journalistic activities. It will spare no effort to denounce and condemn such acts before regional and international human rights organs and mechanisms, as well as to the Special Rapporteur on freedom of expression of the Organization of American States and of the United Nations Human Rights Council. 