%%%OBSERVER STATUS|

Sixty-fourth session Agenda item 166 Observer status for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria in the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Jean-Cédric Janssens de Bisthoven (Belgium) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled "Observer status for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria in the General Assembly" was included in the agenda of the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly at the request of the United Republic of Tanzania. 2. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 18 September 2009, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee. 3. The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 10th and 14th meetings, on 15 and 23 October 2009. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.6/64/SR.10 and 14). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it a note verbale dated 14 July 2009 from the Permanent Mission of the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (A/64/144). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/64/L.7 5. At the 10th meeting, on 15 October, the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, on behalf of Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guyana, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Senegal, Serbia, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Observer status for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria in the General Assembly" (A/C.6/64/L.7). Subsequently, Albania, Chile, Ghana, Grenada, Haiti, Israel, Japan, Liberia, Monaco, Namibia, Norway, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Tunisia and Ukraine joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 6. At its 14th meeting, on 23 October, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/64/L.7 without a vote (see para. 8). 7. The representatives of Argentina, Egypt, China, Malaysia and Iran (Islamic Republic of) spoke in explanation of position after the adoption of the draft resolution (see A/C.6/64/SR.14). 8. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, 1. Decides to invite the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria to participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer; 2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution. 