%%%DRUG CONTROL|CRIME PREVENTION|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PROGRAMME PLANNING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|STAFFING|

Sixty-fourth session Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011* Part IV International cooperation for development Section 16 International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice (Programme 13 of the strategic framework for the period 2010-2011)** Contents Page Overview A. Policymaking organs B. Executive direction and management C. Programme of work Subprogramme 1. Rule of law Subprogramme 2. Policy and trend analysis Subprogramme 3. Prevention, treatment and reintegration, and alternative development D. Programme support Annex Outputs produced in 2008-2009 not to be carried out in the biennium 2010-2011 * A summary of the approved programme budget will subsequently be issued as Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/64/6/Add.1). ** Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/63/6/Rev.1). Table 16.1 Estimates of expenditure Proposal submitted by the Secretary-General $38,258,800a Revised appropriation for 2008-2009 a At 2008-2009 rates. Table 16.2 Proposed staffing resources Posts Number Level Regular budget Proposed posts for the biennium 2010-2011 1 USG, 2 D-2, 4 D-1, 13 P-5, 26 P-4, 24 P-3, 11 P-2/1, 3 GS (PL), 29 GS (OL) New posts 1 P-5 and 1 P-3 for subprogramme 2 Approved for the biennium 2008-2009 1 USG, 2 D-2, 4 D-1, 12 P-5, 26 P-4, 23 P-3, 11 P-2/1, 3 GS (PL), 29 GS (OL) 16.1 In the United Nations Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2), the General Assembly established the achievement of sustainable development as an aim of the Organization. Sustainable development has many dimensions. It requires that the resources of the planet be shared so as to promote human dignity. It also requires good stewardship of those resources so that future generations may inherit a better world. Moreover, it is important to free individuals from the burden of uncivil behaviour in order to safeguard their survival, dignity and livelihood, and to assist in regenerating community values in order to prevent crime. This aspect is at the core of the work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), which is mandated to assist Member States in their struggle against illicit drugs, crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. In the Millennium Declaration, Member States also resolved to intensify efforts to fight transnational crime in all its dimensions, to redouble the efforts to implement the commitment to counter the world drug problem and to take concerted action against international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 16.2 Actions against the world drug problem, global criminal activity and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations are a common and shared responsibility that must be addressed in a multilateral setting and require an integrated and balanced approach. 16.3 The General Assembly, in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), clearly recognized organized crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations among the major security concerns. Drugs, crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations interact profoundly with development, peace and security, and the rule of law. Achieving security and justice for all by making the world safer from drugs, crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is at the core of the work of UNODC. 16.4 Since the adoption of the biennial programme plan for the biennium 2008 2009, the Economic and Social Council, in its resolutions 2007/12 and 2007/19, approved, on the recommendation of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, respectively, a four-year strategy for the period 2008-2011 for the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The strategy responds to the needs of its many stakeholders and grew out of extensive consultations with Member States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders (E/CN.7/2007/14-E/CN.15/2007/5). 16.5 Although the strategy of UNODC builds on three themes, namely, rule of law, policy and trend analysis, and prevention, treatment, reintegration and alternative development, it provides for continuity with the previous biennial programme plan in that its operationalization focuses on: (a) Normative services: facilitating the implementation of international legal instruments and their transformation into global norms, as well as facilitating the negotiation of international legal instruments; (b) Research and analysis: increasing knowledge and understanding of issues of drugs, crime, and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and expansion of the evidence base for policymaking and operational decisions; (c) Technical assistance: providing expertise to Member States in preparation of their signing and ratifying international legal instruments and facilitating their implementation, and providing Member States with legislative assistance and facilitating national capacity-building, inter alia, in the area of multilateral standards and norms. 16.6 These services must be consistent with, and indeed contribute, to the wider efforts of the United Nations towards development, security and human rights. 16.7 In the Millennium Declaration, Member States also resolved that the new security threats must be addressed as a common and shared responsibility in a multilateral setting and require an integrated and balanced approach. The strategy for the period 2008-2011 for UNODC sets a platform, direction and accountability framework for this approach, which has articulated clearly the strategic position of the Office within the general nexus of development, security and human rights. The strategic position is well exemplified by four development-related threats: illicit drugs; trafficking; corruption; and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 16.8 Development is a key to reducing crime as well as the world's supply of drugs. However, the rule of law, security and justice go hand in hand with development. A fair, accessible, accountable, effective and credible criminal justice system promotes long-term socio-economic and human development, and acts as a shield against the effects of crime, trafficking, corruption and instability. Development and rule of law promote licit use of resources rather than their criminal abuse: trafficking in human beings, drugs and firearms, and the smuggling of migrants. 16.9 Corruption undermines development and the rule of law. It can even pose a threat to security by facilitating all sorts of trafficking and smuggling, including facilitating terrorist acts. Anti-corruption strategies rest on a combination of public attitudes, preventive measures, effective control institutions, punishment of wrongdoers and recovery of stolen assets. 16.10 As one of the greatest international security threats, terrorism in all its forms and manifestations has many negative effects on development, security and justice, from crowding out investments to increasing feelings of insecurity and victimization among many innocent people. The rule of law is the basis for countering terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. There is thus a manifest need for comprehensive legislation in conformity with the universal anti-terrorist instruments, a strong criminal justice approach and effective international cooperation. 16.11 The policy directions of UNODC are grounded in (a) the international drug control conventions, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the universal legal instruments against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations; (b) the Millennium Declaration; (c) key resolutions of legislative organs, in particular General Assembly resolution 46/152, establishing the crime prevention and criminal justice programme, and resolutions 45/179 and 46/185 C on the drug control programme; (d) the twentieth special session of the General Assembly on countering the world drug problem; (e) the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-first Century, adopted by the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (General Assembly resolution 55/59, annex), the related plans of action (General Assembly resolution 56/261, annex) and the Bangkok Declaration on Synergies and Responses: Strategic Alliances in Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, adopted by the Eleventh United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (General Assembly resolution 60/177, annex); (f) the recommendations resulting from the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1); and (g) Economic and Social Council resolutions 2007/12 and 2007/19. 16.12 The three pillars of the work programme of UNODC, in accordance with the adopted strategy, are: (a) Rule of law: to promote, at the request of Member States, effective responses to crime, drugs and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations by facilitating the implementation of relevant international legal instruments and effective, fair and humane criminal justice systems through the use and application of United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice; (b) Policy and trend analysis: to enhance knowledge of thematic and cross-sectoral trends and use of forensic information for effective policy formulation, operational response and impact assessment in drugs and crime; (c) Prevention, treatment and reintegration: to assist in reduction of opportunities and incentives for illicit activities and gains, and in reduction of drug abuse, HIV/AIDS (as related to injecting-drug abuse, prison settings and trafficking in human beings), criminal activity and victimization, with a special focus on women and children, as well as in dissemination of information and successful practices in those areas; to promote effective prevention campaigns, care and reintegration into society of drug users and offenders, and assistance to victims of crime; and to foster and strengthen international cooperation based on the shared responsibility principle in sustainable alternative development. 16.13 Globalization has positive effects on human development, but at the same time facilitates opportunities for transnational crime. Drug control, crime deterrence and prevention of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations are essential for building safe, just, healthy and democratic societies which can cope more easily with security threats. Common and shared responsibility are required to provide for a comprehensive and efficient response to those threats. UNODC is a multilateral instrument to help pursue security and justice for all by making the world safer from crime, drugs and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 16.14 In pursuing its objectives, UNODC will make every effort to integrate the gender perspective, in particular in its projects in the areas of prevention, the provision of alternative livelihoods and human trafficking. 16.15 UNODC carries out its activities in cooperation with other departments and offices of the Secretariat and entities of the United Nations system, in particular with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the World Bank, the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the World Health Organization (WHO); and entities external to the United Nations, such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the African Union, the Organization of American States, the Economic Community of West African States, the European Union, the Southern African Development Community, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol), the Inter-American Development Bank, the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction, members of the network institutes of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme and other relevant intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. Such collaboration and cooperation include the preparation of reports, participation in meetings, briefings, technical and substantive support and the sharing of information and experience, and joint programming of technical assistance. 16.16 The issue of publications as a part of the programme of work has been reviewed in the context of each subprogramme. It is anticipated that recurrent and non-recurrent publications will be issued as summarized in table 16.3 and as described in the output information for each subprogramme. The reduction in the number of recurrent publications is due primarily to the completion of the 10-year review (1998-2008) process of the special session of the General Assembly, the integration of directories and the introduction of software to gather and report information. Table 16.3 Summary of publications Publications actual estimate Recurrent Non-recurrent Total 16.17 The overall level of resources required for the biennium 2010-2011 under this section amount to $38,258,800 before recosting, reflecting a net growth of $682,900 (or 1.8 per cent) against the revised appropriation for the biennium 2008-2009. The net growth, as reflected in table 16.5 below, can be summarized as follows: (a) The increase of $477,500 under policymaking organs relates to the one-time requirement for the preparatory work and meetings of the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention, to be held in 2010; (b) The decrease of $73,100 under executive direction and management is the result of the reduced requirement for general temporary assistance and consultants; (c) The net increase of $278,500 under programme of work relates to: (i) A net increase of $69,700 under subprogramme 1, comprising an increase of $223,300 for the delayed impact of one P-2 post and one P-3 post established in the biennium 2008-2009, partially offset by non-recurrent resources totalling $54,400 approved for the biennium 2008-2009, and a net decrease of $99,200 in requirements for consultants and experts, travel of staff and contractual services; (ii) A net increase of $214,100 under subprogramme 2 comprising an increase of $345,200 for the proposed establishment of two new posts (1 P-5 Chief, Statistics and Surveys Section, and 1 P-3 Geographical Information System Officer), partially offset by reductions totalling $131,100 in the provisions for consultants and experts, travel of staff, and other operating requirements; (iii) A net decrease of $5,300 under subprogramme 3, comprising mainly the reduced requirements totalling $105,600 for general temporary assistance, expert group meetings, and travel of staff, partially offset by the increase of $100,300 for consultancies to support expert group meetings and to develop publications. 16.18 During the biennium 2010-2011, the projected extrabudgetary resources amounting to $462,882,900 will complement resources from the regular budget to support substantive, normative and operational activities, concentrating on technical cooperation activities. The projected decrease of approximately $4.13 million over the biennium 2008-2009 reflects mainly the anticipated decrease in general purpose funding of UNODC and the current challenges caused by the global financial crisis. Extrabudgetary resources represent 92 per cent of the total resources available to this programme. The estimates for extrabudgetary resources include the core requirements (all funded from general purpose funds) of independent evaluation, advocacy, strategic planning and liaison functions, governance, human security and rule of law, health and human development functions, UNODC representatives in the field, the operation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Programme and Financial Information Management System (ProFI) project management, accounting and reporting tool. Special purpose contributions cover the three thematic areas (rule of law, policy and trend analysis, and prevention, treatment and reintegration, and alternative development), and represent the bulk of the resources available to UNODC. The report on the implementation of the consolidated budget for the biennium 2008-2009 for UNODC (E/CN.7/2009/11-E/CN.15/2009/11) provides an update on actual income and expenditures against the resources approved in the consolidated budget and explains any major deviation from the approved budget. It also provides information on programme performance. The report was reviewed by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in March and April 2009. The consolidated budget for the biennium 2010-2011 for UNODC will be submitted to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at their reconvened sessions in late 2009. 16.19 Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/269, resources identified for the conduct of monitoring and evaluation for this section are estimated to amount to $2,929,000, financed from extrabudgetary resources (reflected under executive direction and management and subprogramme 1). In addition, resources totalling approximately $197,000 (regular budget) were identified within the available capacity of the Office for the conduct of monitoring and evaluation, comprising 9.4 work months at the Professional level and 9.1 work months at the General Service level. These resources relate to the Office's activities associated with internal performance monitoring. 16.20 The estimated percentage distribution of resources under this section would be as shown in table 16.4. The distribution of resources is summarized in tables 16.5 and 16.6. Table 16.4 Percentage distribution of resources by component Component Extrabudgetary 1. Commission for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 2. Commission on Narcotic Drugs 3. International Narcotics Control Board 4. Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Subtotal A 1. Rule of law 2. Policy and trend analysis 3. Prevention, treatment and reintegration, and alternative development Subtotal C Table 16.5 Resource requirements by component (Thousands of United States dollars) (1) Regular budget expenditure appropri- ation Resource growth before recosting Recosting Amount Percentage Subtotal (2) Extrabudgetarya Source of funds (a) Services in support of: (i) United Nations organizations (ii) Extrabudgetary activities Fund of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund (b) Substantive activities Fund of the United Nations Drug Control Programme (c) Operation projects United Nations Fund for International Partnershipsb Total (1) and (2) a Includes all resources under the Fund for the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. b Project "Comprehensive Partnership, Strategies for HIV/STI Prevention among Young People" in the Russian Federation and "Developing community-based adolescent reproductive health, education and prevention activities" in India. Post requirements Established regular budget posts Temporary posts Extrabudgetarya Category Professional and above USG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4/3 P-2/1 General Service Principal level Other level Other categories National Officer Local level a Includes all temporary posts of a continuing nature, as established under the biennial support budget and the core programme budget of the Fund for the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and nonproject posts funded by the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. Temporary posts established exclusively for the execution of technical cooperation projects are not included in this summary. The level of those posts continuously fluctuate and not all posts are administered by UNODC. As at March 2009, 165 such posts are administered by UNODC. Resource requirements (before recosting): $1,991,400 Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 16.21 The Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice is a functional body of the Economic and Social Council. It is the principal policymaking body of the United Nations in crime prevention and criminal justice and has a membership of 40 Member States. In accordance with the annex to General Assembly resolution 46/152, the Commission has been entrusted with the functions of the preparatory body for United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and criminal justice. 16.22 Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 61/252, the Commission is authorized to approve, on the basis of the proposals of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, bearing in mind the comments and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, the budget of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, including its administrative and programme support costs budget, other than expenditures borne by the regular budget of the United Nations, without prejudice to the powers of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, as provided for in that Convention, and to the powers of the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, as provided for in that Convention. 16.23 The Commission holds annual sessions in Vienna for eight working days. During each session, the Commission establishes in-session working groups to consider in detail specific agenda items. In addition, by its resolution 5/3, entitled, "A strategic management by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme", the Commission requested its Bureau to meet during the periods between sessions, and to hold intersessional briefings for the permanent missions in preparation for the forthcoming session and submit a report on its intersessional work. Furthermore, in its resolution 2003/31, the Economic and Social Council decided that with effect from the year 2004, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice should, at the end of its sessions, elect its Bureau for the subsequent session and encourage it to play an active role in the preparation of the regular as well as the intersessional meetings of the Commission, so as to enable the Commission to provide continuous and effective policy guidance to the crime programme of UNODC. Further, pursuant to the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/252, the Commission will hold a biennial resumed session during odd-numbered years in order to approve the budget of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund. Commission on Narcotic Drugs 16.24 The Commission on Narcotic Drugs was established in 1946 as a functional Commission of the Economic and Social Council. The 53-member Commission is the principal policymaking body of the United Nations in international drug control and has specific mandates deriving from international drug control treaties. 16.25 The Commission holds regular annual sessions in Vienna, as well as a biennial resumed session during odd-numbered years, devoted to administrative and budgetary matters. In its resolution 1999/30, the Economic and Social Council decided that with effect from the year 2000, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs should, at the end of its session, elect its Bureau for the subsequent session and encourage it to play an active role in the preparations of the regular, as well as the intersessional, meetings of the Commission, so as to enable the Commission to provide continuous and effective policy guidance to the drug programme of UNODC. The Commission has established subsidiary bodies to coordinate the mechanisms for drug law enforcement cooperation at the regional level. These subsidiary bodies include the Subcommission on Illicit Drug Traffic and Related Matters in the Near and Middle East, to which there are 23 representatives, and the regional meetings of the operational heads of national drug law enforcement agencies for Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Europe and Latin America and the Caribbean, whose membership is based on that of the relevant regional commission. Their meetings also bring together observers from regional intergovernmental organizations that are active in support of drug law enforcement. 16.26 In the biennium 2010-2011, the Commission is expected to follow up, review and monitor the Political Declaration and other declarations that the Commission is expected to adopt at its high-level segment to be held in March 2009, pursuant to Commission resolutions 44/11, 50/12 and 51/4, to provide follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly on the world drug problem. International Narcotics Control Board 16.27 The International Narcotics Control Board is an independent technical body established by the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. It is a treaty body consisting of 13 members, 3 elected from among candidates proposed by the World Health Organization and 10 from among candidates proposed by Governments. It is the Board's responsibility to promote government compliance with the provisions of international drug control treaties and to assist them in this effort. The Board maintains ongoing discussions with Governments through regular consultations and confidential country missions in order to further the aims of the treaties. Pursuant to the 1961 Convention, the Board is required to hold at least two sessions per year. At its sixty-ninth session, held in November 2000, the Board decided, by its decision 69/57, to hold three sessions every year. When not in session, the Board depends on its secretariat to carry out its functions. 16.28 Pursuant to article 9 of the 1961 Convention, the Board shall endeavour: (a) to limit the cultivation, production, manufacture and use of drugs to an adequate amount required for medical and scientific purposes; (b) to ensure their availability for such purposes; and (c) to prevent illicit cultivation, production and manufacture of, and illicit trafficking in and use of, drugs. The 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances and the 1988 United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances assigned additional mandates to the Board with respect to the control of psychotropic substances and precursor chemicals used in illicit drug manufacture. Under the 1988 Convention, the Board evaluates chemicals for possible international control. In addition to its treaty-based responsibilities, the Board was also entrusted with additional tasks by the Economic and Social Council, as well as by the General Assembly at its special session on the world drug problem, held in 1998. 16.29 The Board examines, on an ongoing basis, the functioning of the international drug control regime, identifies shortcomings in the implementation, by Governments, of the three main international drug control treaties, and formulates recommendations for further action addressed to national drug control agencies and relevant international and regional organizations. Those recommendations, which are aimed at assisting Governments in fully complying with their treaty obligations and at further developing the international drug control regime, are included every year in the annual report of the Board, for dissemination to all Governments. In addition, the Board produces three annual technical publications. Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 16.30 The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols were adopted by the General Assembly in annexes I and II to its resolution 55/25 and the annex to its resolution 55/255. The Convention entered into force on 29 September 2003. The Protocol on Smuggling of Migrants entered into force in January 2004, the Protocol on Firearms in July 2005, and the Protocol on Trafficking in Persons in December 2003. 16.31 By article 32 of the Convention, a Conference of the Parties to the Convention was established to improve the capacity of States parties to combat transnational organized crime and to promote and review the implementation of the Convention and its Protocols. In its resolution 55/25, the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to designate UNODC to serve as the secretariat for the Conference. 16.32 Since the Convention entered into force, the Conference of the Parties has held four sessions -- two sessions during the biennium 2004-2005, the third session during the biennium 2006-2007 and the fourth session during the biennium 2008-2009. 16.33 In accordance with article 1 of each of the three Protocols to the Convention, the Conference is mandated to perform the same functions for each of the three Protocols. At its third session, the Conference passed decisions concerning various aspects on the implementation of the Convention and its Protocols, ranging from the review of the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, to the creation of a working group of government experts on extradition, mutual legal assistance and international cooperation for the purposes of confiscation, as well as a working group of government experts on technical assistance. Each working group advises the Conference on specific aspects of the Convention and makes recommendations concerning the implementation of the Convention. At its fourth session, the Conference continued with various aspects concerning the review of the implementation of the Organized Crime Convention and its Protocols. In addition to the two working groups referred to above, the fourth Conference created a working group of government experts to advise the Conference on the implementation of the Protocol on Trafficking in Persons. Conference of the States Parties to the Convention against Corruption 16.34 The United Nations Convention against Corruption entered into force on 14 December 2005. The first session of the Conference of the States Parties was held in December 2006 and its second session in January 2008. The third session of the Conference will be held in November 2009. 16.35 The Conference of the States Parties to the Convention against Corruption requires from the Secretariat even more substantive analytical and technical support than is required by the Conference of Parties to the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. 16.36 The rate of ratification since adoption of the Convention against Corruption has been 30 per cent faster than the ratification rate for the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. As of 30 October 2008, there were 126 parties to the Convention against Corruption. Ratification had accelerated even further after the entry into force, as States wished to participate in the Conference with full party status and not only as observers. 16.37 The Conference has already taken crucial decisions at its first two sessions. It established three intergovernmental working groups on the key issues to review the implementation of the Convention, on asset recovery and on technical assistance, requiring recurring secretariat and substantive services during and between sessions. There are increasing requirements to support the work of the Conference and the working groups by way of developing self-assessment checklists and guidelines on specific aspects of the Convention, in areas of prevention, criminalization, international cooperation and asset recovery and the subsequent evaluation and comparative analysis of the self-assessments received from States parties. 16.38 The Convention against Corruption contains many entirely new areas of international law, e.g., asset recovery. The Conference and its open-ended intergovernmental working group on asset recovery has requested the Secretariat, inter alia, to provide good practices and guidelines in this area, including analysis of various asset confiscation models, collection of domestic legislation, as well as the establishment of a network of national asset recovery focal points. 16.39 As the rate of ratification of the Convention against Corruption is faster than anticipated, more requests for legal advisory services for the incorporation of the provisions of the Convention into national legislation have been received. Forty additional legal assessment and advisory missions are expected to be conducted in the biennium 2010-2011. 16.40 Building on the momentum created by key political decisions taken at its first two sessions, the Conference is expected to take decisions at its third session planned in late 2009 to establish a full-fledged mechanism to assist it in the review of the implementation of the Convention. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that significantly new and additional tasks will be entrusted to the secretariat in relation to the new mechanism for review of implementation of the Convention during 2010-2011. United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 16.41 The United Nations Congresses on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice are held every five years and provide a forum for: (a) the exchange of views among States, intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental organizations and individual experts representing various professions and disciplines; (b) the exchange of experience in research, law and policy development; (c) the identification of emerging trends and issues in crime prevention and criminal justice; (d) the provision of advice and comments on selected matters submitted to it by the Commission; and (e) the submission of suggestions for the consideration of the Commission regarding possible subjects for the programme of work. 16.42 The General Assembly, in its resolution 62/173, endorsed the conclusions and recommendations of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts on Lessons Learned from United Nations Congresses on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and by its resolution 63/193, decided to hold the Twelfth Congress in Salvador, Brazil, from 12 to 19 April 2010, with pre-Congress consultations to be held on 11 April 2010. It also decided that the high-level segment of the Twelfth Congress will be held during the last two days of the Congress, and that the main theme will be "Comprehensive strategies for global challenges: crime prevention and criminal justice systems and their development in a changing world", and approved the provisional agenda for the Congress. The Division for Treaty Affairs will be responsible for the organization and servicing of the four regional preparatory meetings to be held in 2009 and the Twelfth Congress. 16.43 Under a multi-year programme, the first session of the Commission following the Twelfth Congress would transmit to the General Assembly the outcomes and recommendations of the Congress, begin consultations on preparation for the next congress, and consider any other follow-up measures that might be required. In 2011, at the second session following the Congress, the Commission, through consultations among Member States, would develop the theme and a list of substantive agenda items and topics for workshops, to be adopted at the third session of the Commission following the Congress. Regional input would be sought thereafter. Table 16.7 Resource requirements Resources (thousands of United States dollars) (before recosting) Non-post 16.44 Non-post resources totalling $1,991,400, reflecting an increase of $477,500, would provide for the travel costs of the members of the two Commissions, the subsidiary bodies of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, and the International Narcotics Control Board to attend their meetings. It will also provide for Board members to conduct local inquiries in accordance with article 14 of the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, as amended by the 1972 Protocol. The increased requirement relates broadly to a combination of the non-recurrent activities pertaining to the preparatory work and servicing of the Twelfth Congress, and the travel of representatives of the least development countries to attend the Twelfth Congress. Resource requirements (before recosting): $674,200 16.45 The Executive Director is responsible for coordinating and providing effective leadership for all United Nations drug control and crime prevention activities to ensure the coherence of actions within the programme and the coordination, complementarity and non-duplication of such activities across the United Nations system. In that capacity, the Executive Director participates in the work of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB). The Executive Director acts on behalf of the Secretary-General in fulfilling the responsibility that devolves upon him under the terms of international treaties and resolutions of United Nations organs relating to international drug control or crime prevention. The responsibilities are combined with those of the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Vienna. The Office of the Executive Director is integrated with that of the Director-General and is supported with resources from the regular budget under part C of section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination. 16.46 The core functions of the Office of the Executive Director are: (a) to assist the Executive Director in the overall executive direction and management of UNODC; (b) to facilitate inter-office cooperation in the implementation of workplans and administrative matters; and (c) to ensure the timely implementation of decisions and coordination of inputs from all organizational units to the activities of the Office. 16.47 The Office of the Executive Director also comprises the Independent Evaluation Unit, administered by the Division for Management, UNODC, with substantive guidance by the Executive Director, responsible for planning and coordinating the evaluation activities for UNODC. Table 16.8 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures Objective of the Organization: To ensure full implementation of legislative mandates and compliance with United Nations policies and procedures with respect to the management of the programme of work and of staff and financial resources. Expected accomplishments of the Secretariat Indicators of achievement (a) Programme of work is effectively managed (a) Timely delivery of outputs and services Performance measures: (Percentage of the Office's workplan implemented in a timely manner) 2006-2007: 100 per cent Estimate 2008-2009: 98 per cent Target 2010-2011: 98 per cent (b) Timely recruitment and placement of staff (b) Reduction in the average number of days a Professional post remains vacant 2006-2007: 134 days Estimate 2008-2009: 129 days Target 2010-2011: 120 days (c) Improved geographical representation and gender balance of staff (c) (i) Increased percentage of recruitments of candidates from unrepresented or underrepresented Member States to geographical posts 2006-2007: 5 per cent Estimate 2008-2009: 6 per cent Target 2010-2011: 20 per cent (ii) Attain or maintain gender parity in the Professional and higher categories a. Percentage of women with appointments of one year or more in the following categories: Professional category, Director category, experts (L1-L7) 2006-2007: 45 per cent Estimate 2008-2009: 50 per cent Target 2010-2011: 50 per cent b. If the representation of women with appointments of one year or more in the Professional category, Director category or experts (L1-L7) is below 50 per cent, then percentage point increase over the baseline) 2006-2007: 0 per cent Estimate 2008-2009: 2 per cent Target 2010-2011: 2 per cent (d) Identification of emerging issues that require attention by Member States (d) Constant number of occasions whereby Member States address issues that have been brought to their attention (Number of meetings at which issues have been brought to the attention of Member States) Estimate 2008-2009: 25 Target 2010-2011: 25 External factors 16.48 The Office is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) there are no delays in the recruitment of staff; (b) collaborating partners facilitate the timely delivery of outputs; and (c) sufficient extrabudgetary resources are made available to implement the programme of technical cooperation. 16.49 During the biennium 2010-2011, the following final outputs will be delivered: (a) Effective management of UNODC; (b) Implementation of the mandates of UNODC; (c) Substantive input and contribution, including political advice and analysis, to the Secretary-General on drug control, crime prevention, anti-corruption and terrorism prevention issues in the form of briefing material, statements and talking points; (d) Advocacy of drug control, crime prevention, anti-corruption and terrorism prevention issues with Member States and civil society through speaking engagements, conferences, information dissemination, raising public awareness and representation of the Secretary-General at international events and forums as appropriate; (e) Regular monitoring of the Divisions of the Office to ensure continued timely preparation and submission of documentation to the governing bodies; (f) Provision of support to multilateral efforts in the field of drug control, crime prevention, anti-corruption and terrorism prevention, and cooperation with Member States, intergovernmental organizations and civil society, including at the regional level; (g) Preparation, organization and substantive servicing of meetings and/or activities related to relevant governing bodies, conferences and meetings, such as the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption, and the Congress Crime Prevention. Table 16.9 Resource requirements Post 16.50 The amount of $674,200 provides for the post of the Executive Director (USG) ($531,400) and non-post resources ($142,800) to enable the Office to carry out its functions. The decrease of $73,100 for non-post resources is due to the reduced requirements for general temporary assistance and consultants. 16.51 The Office of the Executive Director is integrated with that of the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Vienna. Resources for direct support of the combined offices are provided under part C of section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, while administrative support is provided under section 28F, United Nations Office at Vienna. 16.52 Extrabudgetary resources totalling $3,075,800 will provide for some posts in the Office of the Executive Director and in the Independent Evaluation Unit, as well as non-post resources in these areas. Table 16.10 Resource requirements by subprogramme Regular budget resource requirements by subprogramme Subprogramme 1 Rule of law Resource requirements (before recosting): $19,628,100 16.53 Substantive responsibility for the subprogramme is vested in the Division for Treaty Affairs. The subprogramme will be implemented in accordance with the strategy detailed under subprogramme 1 of programme 13 of the strategic framework for the period 2010-2011. Table 16.11 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement Objective of the Organization: To promote effective responses to crime, drugs and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations by facilitating policymaking and the implementation of relevant international legal instruments and to promote effective, fair and humane criminal justice systems through the use and application of United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice. (a) Improved national capacity for the ratification of the international drug control conventions, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the relevant international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and for the enactment of domestic legislation in line with these instruments (a) (i) Increased number of Member States ratifying the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, drawing on the assistance of UNODC 2006-2007: 40 additional Member States Estimate 2008-2009: 40 additional Member States Target 2010-2011: 40 additional Member States (ii) Increased number of Member States ratifying the United Nations Convention against Corruption, drawing on the assistance of UNODC 2006-2007: 40 Member States Estimate 2008-2009: 80 Member States Target 2010-2011: 120 Member States (iii) Increase in the total number of ratifications of the international conventions and protocols related to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations (since 2003) by countries which received counter-terrorism technical assistance from UNODC 2006-2007: 395 ratifications Estimate 2008-2009: 470 ratifications Target 2010-2011: 510 ratifications (iv) Increased number of Member States adopting national legislation for implementing the provisions of the legal instruments relating to drugs, crime, and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, drawing on the assistance of UNODC a. Number of additional national legislations adopted implementing drug-related legal instruments Estimate 2008-2009: 80 Target 2010-2011: 70 b. Number of additional national legislations implementing the instruments against transnational organized crime Estimate 2008-2009: 15 Target 2010-2011: 17 c. Number of additional national legislations implementing the instruments against corruption adopted Target 2010-2011: 20 d. Number of additional national legislations adopted implementing the instruments against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations Target 2010-2011: 30 (b) Improved capacity of national criminal justice systems to implement the provisions of the international drug control conventions, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the relevant international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including the provisions related to international cooperation in criminal matters (b) (i) Increased number of criminal justice institutions that have received legal advisory services and other substantive input for the implementation of the drug and crime conventions Target 2010-2011: 15 (ii) Increased number of criminal justice officials trained/briefed by UNODC on the application of international drug control conventions, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the United Nations Convention against Corruption and the relevant international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including the provisions related to international cooperation in criminal matters Estimate 2008-2009: 3,000 Target 2010-2011: 3,500 (iii) Increased number of Member States that have received training by UNODC on international cooperation in criminal matters Estimate 2008-2009: 10 (iv) Increased number of Member States that have received specialized briefing/training by UNODC of criminal justice officials on international cooperation in counter-terrorism, crime, drug trafficking, corruption and human trafficking Estimate 2008-2009: 82 Target 2010-2011: 85 (v) Increased number UNODC legal tools and good practices used by Member States to implement the crime conventions Estimate 2008-2009: 5 Target 2010-2011: 7 (c) Enhanced capacity of Member States, in particular States in post-conflict or transitional stages, to develop and maintain accessible and accountable domestic criminal justice systems in accordance with the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice (c) Increased number of States, in particular States in post-conflict or transitional situations, in receipt of legal advisory services for the development of criminal justice systems (d) Enhanced quality of services provided for decision-making and policy direction by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto and the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention against Corruption as well as for the implementation of the work of the International Narcotics Control Board (d) (i) Increased number of members of the extended bureaux of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto and the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention against Corruption expressing full satisfaction with the quality and timeliness of technical and substantive services provided by the Secretariat a. Commission on Narcotic Drugs 2006-2007: 9 out of 12 members Estimate 2008-2009: 9 out of 12 members Target 2010-2011: 10 out of 12 members b. Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice c. Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto 2006-2007: 10 out of 17 members Estimate 2008-2009: 12 out of 17 members Target 2010-2011: 14 out of 17 members d. Conference of the States Parties to the Convention against Corruption 2006-2007: 7 out of 12 members Estimate 2008-2009: 8 out of 12 members Target 2010-2011: 9 out of 12 members (ii) Increased number of members of the International Narcotics Control Board expressing full satisfaction with the quality and timeliness of substantive services provided by the Secretariat to the Board 2006-2007: 9 out of 13 members Estimate 2008-2009: 9 out of 13 members Target 2010-2011: 11 out of 13 members 16.54 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) Member States are ready to accede to the United Nations conventions and treaties (drug control treaties, the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, the Convention against Corruption and the 12 international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism) and to undertake criminal justice reform; (b) Member States are capable of complying with the provisions of treaties and conventions on drugs, crime, corruption and the prevention of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as well as to apply United Nations standards and norms, and fulfil their relevant reporting obligations, including treaty mandated data; (c) Member States are willing to strengthen judicial cooperation among themselves, especially in matters involving extradition and mutual legal assistance, including money-laundering and confiscation procedures; (d) Governments are willing to collaborate with each other; (e) There are no significant shortfalls in extrabudgetary resources and specialized expertise is available for timely delivery of assistance. Outputs 16.55 During the biennium, the following final outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (regular budget): (i) General Assembly: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: the Third Committee (12); the Second Committee for matters relating to corruption (2); the Sixth Committee for matters relating to terrorism (2); b. Parliamentary documentation: contribution to the annual report on measures to eliminate international terrorism (2); contribution to the annual report on the implementation of the United Nations counter-terrorism strategy (1); reports on: international cooperation against the world drug problem (2); annual report on preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such funds to the countries of origin (2); annual report on the African Institute for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (2); reports on the work of the Conference of States Parties to the Convention against Corruption (2); reports on specific issues pertaining to technical assistance for combating terrorism (2); report on strengthening international cooperation and technical assistance in preventing and combating terrorism (1); annual report on strengthening the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, in particular its technical cooperation capacity (2); annual report on the work of the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (2); (ii) Economic and Social Council: a. Substantive servicing of meetings of the Economic and Social Council (12); b. Parliamentary documentation: annual report of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (2); annual report of the International Narcotics Control Board (2); annual report on the work of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (2); (iii) Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: meetings of the Commission (32); parallel meetings of the Committee of the Whole (24); intersessional meetings of the Bureau of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (12); intersessional meetings of the Commission for permanent missions (10); plenary meetings in the reconvened session of the Commission (4); b. Parliamentary documentation: reports on information-gathering instruments on selected categories of standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice (2); annual report on the activities of the institutes comprising the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme network (2); annual report on the use and application of the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice (2); and annual report on strengthening international cooperation and technical assistance in preventing and combating terrorism (2); (iv) Commission on Narcotic Drugs: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: meetings of the Committee of the Whole (16); plenary meetings (32); plenary meetings and working group sessions of subsidiary bodies of the Commission (90); plenary meetings in the reconvened session of the Commission (4); intersessional meetings of the Bureau of the Commission (12); intersessional meetings of the Commission for permanent missions (10); b. Parliamentary documentation: annual report of the Executive Director on the activities of the Office (2); annual report on the meetings of the five subsidiary bodies of the Commission (2); annual report on changes in the scope of control of substances (2); (v) International Narcotics Control Board: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: International Narcotics Control Board and its Standing Committee on Estimates (120); b. Parliamentary documentation: reports and documentation on the functioning of the international control over the licit supply of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including the estimates system for narcotic drugs and the assessment system (8); reports on the monitoring of precursors (4), on intersessional developments (4), and on Board missions and specific studies (20); technical reports on narcotics drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors and supplements, such as estimates of narcotic drugs, as well as any other reports the Board may decide to publish (6); reports on articles 14, 19 and 22 of the 1961, 1971 and 1988 Conventions (4); reports on evaluation of overall treaty compliance by Governments (4); reports on evaluation of follow-up actions by Governments to Board missions (4); reports and alerts of activities under Project Cohesion and Prism (8); (vi) Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and Protocols thereto: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (16 plenary and 4 parallel meetings, including meetings of the working group on international cooperation and meetings of the working group on technical assistance) (20); the working group on trafficking in human beings (12); the working group on review of the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (5); b. Parliamentary documentation: report on the work of the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (1); background documents for the fifth session (25); reports on selected issues on the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols for the Conference of the Parties (4); report on the work of the working group on trafficking in human beings (1); report on the work of the working group on international cooperation (1); report on the work of the working group on technical assistance (1); report on the work of the working group on review of the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (1); report on the work of the working group on smuggling of migrants (1); background documents for the working groups (24); (vii) Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption: a. Substantive servicing of meetings: Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption (16); meetings of the review mechanism subsidiary body (40); meetings of the working group on asset recovery (20); meetings of the working group on technical assistance (20); b. Parliamentary documentation: report of the meeting of the fourth session of the Conference of the States Parties (1) and related background documents (18); reports of the meetings of the review mechanism subsidiary body (4) and related background documents (36); reports of the meetings of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group on Asset Recovery (2) and related background documents (12); reports of the meetings of the Open-ended Intergovernmental Working Group on technical assistance (2) and related background documents (12); (viii) Other services provided: a. Substantive services to intergovernmental organizations and other regional or international organizations with a drug control mandate, such as the International Criminal Police Organization-Interpol, the Council of Europe (Pompidou Group), the Organization of American States (CICAD) or Europol (6); providing substantive services to the Steering Committee of Operation Cohesion and the Project Prism Task Force, all of which are intensive international tracking programmes for chemicals used in the manufacture of illicit drugs (10); b. Ad hoc expert groups: expert group meeting to develop model legislative provisions to implement the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (1); expert group meeting on ensuring compliance with the rule of law and fundamental guarantees in a criminal justice response to terrorism: the emerging legal issues (1); expert group meeting to develop best practices on criminal justice reform in line with relevant United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice (1); expert group meeting to improve and strengthen access to justice in the criminal justice system (1); expert group meeting on global meeting of central authorities in international judicial cooperation (1); regional expert group meetings on technical issues of common regional concern on the implementation of the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols (3); workshops on identity-related crime (3); workshops on specific areas of asset recovery (3); ad hoc expert group meetings to advise the International Narcotics Control Board on matters concerning implementation of articles 12, 13 and 22 of the 1988 Convention as it relates to precursor control (1); ad hoc expert group meetings to assist the Board in its review of matters related to the implementation of international drug control treaties (2); intergovernmental expert group meeting to review drug control-related information-gathering instruments (1); intergovernmental expert group meeting to present proposals at the fifty-third session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on the mechanisms for the follow-up to the 10-year review of the goals and targets by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, on drugs; (b) Other substantive activities (regular budget): (i) Recurrent publications: ad hoc publications prepared pursuant to requests by the International Narcotics Control Board (2); laws and regulations adopted by States parties to the drug control and organized crime conventions to implement those conventions (120); Manufacture of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and their precursors (1); Narcotic drugs: estimated world requirements and statistics (2); quarterly update of assessments of medical and scientific requirements for substances included in schedules II, III and IV (8); report of the International Narcotics Control Board on the implementation of article 12 of the 1988 Convention (2); supplement to Narcotic drugs: estimated world requirements and statistics and two advance estimated world requirements (10); reports of the International Narcotics Control Board in accordance with article 15 of the 1961 Convention and article 18 of the 1971 Convention (2); directories of competent national authorities under the international drug control and organized crime treaties (2); directories on manufacturers of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and their precursors under the international drug control treaties (2); psychotropic substances statistics (assessments of medical and scientific requirements for substances in schedule II, requirements for import authorizations for substances in schedules III and IV) (2); printing of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto (1); printing of the international drug control conventions in one volume (1961 Single Convention, 1971 Convention, and the 1988 Convention) (1); (ii) Non-recurrent publications booklets on guidelines on giving evidence by video link (1); model law on the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (1); model law on migrants (1); model regulations and procedures on international legal cooperation (1); brochures on "Delivering counter-terrorism assistance" (2); combating illegal trafficking in firearms (1); the work of the Organized Crime and Criminal Justice Section (1); publications on specific areas of asset recovery (3); regional analytical studies on specific issues of counter-terrorism legislation and capacity-building of the criminal justice system for implementing counter-terrorism legislative provisions (2); technical publication on specific thematic issues, such as civil aviation and terrorism, and/or international cooperation in criminal matters (1); technical publication on specific thematic issues, such as nuclear terrorism, maritime terrorism, financing of terrorism (1); (iii) Press releases, press conferences: liaison maintained with United Nations information centres, participation in press conferences, responses to requests of media, contribution to speeches and interventions of members of the Board at international meetings, including the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the Economic and Social Council; wide dissemination of the International Narcotics Control Board findings and reports to decision-makers and the general public; (iv) Technical material: a. Annual update of the list of narcotic drugs under international control ("yellow list"); b. Annual update of the list of psychotropic substances under international control ("green list"); c. Annual updates of the list of substances frequently used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances under international control ("red list"); d. Annual update of training materials on the control of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors; e. Biannual updates of the table reflecting countries' requirements of import authorizations for psychotropic substances in schedules III and IV of the 1971 Convention; f. Annual updates of form D used by Governments to furnish data required under article 12 of the 1988 Convention and related Economic and Social Council resolutions; g. Annual updates of forms A, B and C for use by Governments to furnish the Board with statistical data and estimates required under the 1961 Convention; h. Annual updates of forms P, A/P and B/P for use by Governments to furnish data required under the 1971 Convention and related Economic and Social Council resolutions; i. Four updates of the information package relevant to the control of precursors and chemicals frequently used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances; j. Update of two limited international special surveillance lists of chemicals frequently used in illicit drug manufacture; k. Development and maintenance of databases on national legislation pertaining to drug control and crime; l. Expanded coverage and regular updating of the database on counter-terrorism laws with relevant source materials; m. Maintenance and development of two comprehensive databases on licit activities related to narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors; n. Setting up and maintaining a secure website for competent authorities for judicial cooperation under the international drug and crime treaties, to access information on other competent authorities; o. Further development and thematic specialization of online training courses on legal aspects of counter-terrorism, covering maritime terrorism, nuclear terrorism, civil aviation and terrorism, humanitarian law, etc.; maintenance and development of database providing online assistance for extradition and mutual legal assistance; (v) Promotion of legal instruments: a. Issuance of approximately 35 notes verbales as notifications under the drug control treaties; b. Provision of legal and other related advisory services for the ratification and implementation of international legal instruments relating to the prevention and suppression of international terrorism; c. Proposals to Governments, the Board and the Commission on additional or alternative measures relating to treaty compliance; d. Provision of legal information and advice to States on becoming parties to the conventions and towards their full implementation; e. Promoting the ratification and implementation of the universal legal instruments against terrorism; f. Data and analyses of information to establish and maintain a special international surveillance list of non-scheduled chemicals to prevent their use by traffickers; g. Data and analyses of information on licit manufacture, trade and use patterns of precursors to facilitate identification of suspicious transactions and develop and maintain database; h. Data and analyses on relevant indicators to assist Governments to better evaluate their needs for narcotic drugs; i. Studies and analyses of data to identify new developments in and comparative analyses on the licit supply of and demand for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances such as amphetamine-type stimulants and prepare comparative analyses; j. Studies on the availability of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances for medical needs; (vi) Substantive servicing of inter-agency meetings: coordination and participation in meetings of relevant international, regional and subregional organizations active in the area of counter-terrorism; inter-agency coordination and liaison on the implementation of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy, including participation in meetings of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and meetings with member entities of the Task Force; participation in governance structure of the Global Compact and in the inter-agency meetings of the Global Compact; participation in meetings on improving judicial cooperation with the Commonwealth Secretariat, the International Maritime Organization, EUROJUST, the European Judicial Network, the Council of Europe, and the International Criminal Court; (vii) Contribution to joint outputs: inter-agency coordination and liaison through participation in relevant coordination meetings of the specialized agencies of the United Nations system, the World Bank, and the network of crime prevention and criminal justice institutes; partnership with academic institutions to promote professional legal training on counter-terrorism issues for building up legal counter-terrorism expertise; (c) Technical cooperation (regular budget/extrabudgetary): (i) Advisory services: provision of advisory services, upon request, on the ratification and implementation of the international legal instruments relating to the prevention of terrorism and for strengthening the capacity of the national criminal justice systems; provision of advisory services to countries on accession to and implementation of the Convention against Corruption; provision of advisory services to countries on accession to and implementation of the drug control conventions and the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols; provision of advisory services to countries on combating trafficking in human beings, organized crime, and corruption, and on promoting criminal justice reform, including juvenile justice and prison reform; legal advice and services relating to memorandums of understanding, contracts and working arrangements with the Office's partners inside and outside the United Nations system; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: national, subregional and interregional workshops on selected technical issues in combating terrorism; organization and participation in international training activities, workshops and consultations on international cooperation in criminal matters; training courses on the United Nations Convention against Corruption; training courses and workshops on international terrorism; on the implementation of the drugs, crime and corruption conventions and the relevant domestic legislation and arrangements; (iii) Field projects: expanded level of activities under the rolling Global Project on Strengthening the Legal Regime against Terrorism to build expertise, reinforce institutional capacity and train criminal justice officials; provision of legal advice and training on the implementation of the drug control conventions by legal advisers in the field (global project); projects at the national, regional and/or international levels to support the ratification of the Convention against Corruption. Table 16.12 Resource requirements: subprogramme 1 16.56 The amount of $19,628,100, representing a net growth of $69,700, will provide for 65 posts (44 Professional and above and 21 General Service) ($17,018,300) and non-post resources ($2,609,800) relating to temporary assistance and overtime, consultants and experts, travel of staff and contractual services. The net increase of $223,300 under posts reflects the delayed impact of one P-2 post and one P-3 post established in the biennium 2008-2009. The net decrease of $153,600 in non-post resources relates to decreased requirements for consultants and experts, travel and contractual services resulting from a reduction in the number of meetings and reduced requirements for external printing resulting from measures undertaken such as the use of new technologies for the publication and distribution of informational material. 16.57 Extrabudgetary resources in the amount of $48,455,800 would provide for legal advisory services and other technical cooperation activities in support of the ratification and implementation of the United Nations drug control conventions, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, the United Nations Convention against Corruption, and the legal instruments against terrorism, as well as the promotion of United Nations Standards and Norms in Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. Subprogramme 2 Policy and trend analysis Resource requirements (before recosting): $7,588,600 16.58 Substantive responsibility for this subprogramme is vested within the Division for Policy Analysis and Public Affairs. The subprogramme will be implemented in accordance with the strategy detailed under subprogramme 2 of programme 13 of the strategic framework for the period 2010-2011. Table 16.13 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement Objective of the Organization: To enhance knowledge of thematic and cross-sectoral trends for effective policy formulation, operational response and impact assessment in order to increase support for the prevention and reduction of illicit drugs, crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. (a) Enhanced knowledge of trends, including emerging trends in drugs and specific crime issues, available to Member States and the international community (a) (i) Increased volume/quantity of data usage by Member States through the central database on drugs and crime (Number of data elements on drugs and crime in the data warehouse) Estimate 2008-2009: 175,000 Target 2010-2011: 200,000 (ii) Increased number of publications downloaded from the website 2006-2007: 1 million downloads Estimate 2008-2009: 1.5 million downloads Target 2010-2011: 2 million downloads (iii) Increased number of scientific references to UNODC research publications (Number of citations of UNODC research publications in Lexis Nexis) Estimate 2008-2009: 1,200 Target 2010-2011: 2,000 (Number of links to the UNODC website) Estimate 2008-2009: 30,000 Target 2010-2011: 40,000 (b) Improved scientific and forensic capacity of Member States to meet internationally accepted standards, including increased use of scientific information and laboratory data for inter-agency cooperation activities and in strategic operations and policy and decision-making (b) (i) Increased percentage of institutions in receipt of UNODC assistance reporting enhanced scientific and forensic capacity 2006-2007: 78 per cent Estimate 2008-2009: 80 per cent Target 2010-2011: 82 per cent (ii) Increased number of laboratories participating actively in the international collaborative exercise Estimate 2008-2009: 65 (iii) Increased number of laboratories in receipt of UNODC assistance reporting participation in, and/or use of forensic data for, inter-agency activities with law enforcement, regulatory, judicial and health authorities, and/or trend analyses (Number of laboratories reporting participation per every 10 respondents to the UNODC questionnaire on the impact of technical cooperation activities in the forensic sector) Estimate 2008-2009: 7 Target 2010-2011: 7.5 (c) Increased public awareness of issues related to drugs, crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as well as of the relevant United Nations legal instruments, standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice (c) (i) Increased number of stations that broadcast UNODC-generated information on drugs, crime and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations (Television and radio stations that broadcast UNODC public service announcements, news releases, features and interviews) Estimate 2008-2009: 145 Target 2010-2011: 150 (ii) Issues effectively projected outside the United Nations as evidenced by the number of press articles published covering the work of UNODC (Press articles that are published covering the work of UNODC) 2006-2007: Not available Estimate 2008-2009: 6,000 Target 2010-2011: 6,500 16.59 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) There are no significant shortfalls in extrabudgetary resources; (b) Sufficient statistics on drugs and crime at the country level are available and reported by Member States; (c) Governments have the establishment or improvement of forensic support facilities high on their list of priorities, appreciate the value of scientific support and forensic evidence to the judicial system and integrate forensic laboratories into the national drug control and crime prevention framework; (d) National laboratories cooperate with each other and with relevant authorities (e.g., law enforcement, regulatory and health) within and between countries and with UNODC; (e) Radio and television stations or networks are willing to provide free air time for the broadcast of UNODC public service announcements. 16.60 During the biennium, the following final outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (regular budget/extrabudgetary): (i) Commission on Narcotic Drugs: parliamentary documentation: annual report on the world situation with regard to drug abuse, based on responses to annual reports questionnaire and supplemental information provided by Governments (2); (ii) Ad hoc expert groups: annual meetings of the International Standing Panel on Forensics (2); expert group meeting on threat and risk analysis (1); expert group meeting on drugs and crime statistics (1); expert group meetings related to drug-precursor analysis and forensic support in drug control and crime prevention (1); (b) Other substantive activities (regular budget/extrabudgetary): (i) Recurrent publications: bi-annual Seizure Reports (4); Bulletin on Narcotics (annual) (2); Forum on Crime and Society (annual) (2); manuals/guidelines on procedural approaches and analytical methods for identification and analysis of controlled substances/forensic analysis, and practical laboratory procedures and best practices (3); online catalogue of promotional videos (1); online database of non-governmental organizations working on drug prevention, treatment and rehabilitation, alternative development, crime prevention and criminal justice, anti-corruption and anti-human-trafficking activities (1); reprint/revised manuals/guidelines on methods for the identification and analysis of controlled drugs/forensic analysis (2); revised Multilingual Dictionary/Addendum to cover newly scheduled substances (1); technical publications on the state of crime and justice in the world (2); UNODC newsletter (quarterly) (8); World Drug Report (2); (ii) Booklets, fact sheets, wallcharts, information kits: booklets, public awareness television and radio spots, interviews and other promotional material (10); (iii) Special events: development of new resource mobilization (fund-raising) initiatives and strategic partnerships with donors, United Nations agencies, international financial institutions and private and/or corporate foundations (1); observance of the International Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking and the International AntiCorruption Day (4); conferences or public events involving parliamentarians, government agencies and non-governmental organizations on major drug control issues, such as follow-up to the General Assembly twentieth special session, and/or relative to implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention against Corruption (2); United Nations Vienna Civil Society Award (2); (iv) Technical material: design, maintenance and improvement of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime website; implementation of National Monitoring Systems and publication of Illicit Crop Monitoring Surveys; implementation of quality assurance programme and publication of related reports; provision of approximately 1,000 reference samples to national drug testing laboratories; provision of approximately 400 drug and precursor testing kits to national competent authorities; scientific and technical notes; selected bibliographies and articles on the identification and analysis of controlled drugs, chemicals and precursors; studies and briefing notes on drugs and crime threat and risk analysis; studies and technical notes on specific crime issues (trafficking in persons, smuggling of migrants, corruption, etc.); training modules on drug/precursor analysis and forensic support in drug control and crime prevention; maintenance and further enhancement of a database for analysis and dissemination on drug abuse and demand reduction to Governments, research organizations, other international agencies and the general public; (v) Audio-visual resources: issuance of promotional videos; maintenance and enhancement of photographic, slide and film/video lending library; photographs related to the topics of drugs, crime and terrorism; (vi) Substantive servicing of inter-agency meetings: inter-agency coordination and liaison through the participation in the High-Level Committee on Programmes and inter-agency meetings within the United Nations system; (i) Advisory services: provision of expert advice to Member States on drugs and crime surveys and other data-collection mechanisms (drug use data, illicit crop monitoring, crime victim surveys, etc.); high-quality scientific support, information and advice to Governments, national and international organizations and institutions on a wide range of scientific and technical issues; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: regional and subregional workshops or meetings of heads of forensic laboratories, law enforcement officers and judicial authorities to promote collaboration between laboratory services and agencies involved in drug control and crime prevention; training courses/study tours for forensic scientists; (iii) Field projects: national and regional projects related to strengthening and/or establishment of national forensic laboratories. Table 16.14 Resource requirements: subprogramme 2 16.61 The amount of $7,588,600 provides for 25 posts (19 Professional and above and 6 General Service) ($6,848,900) and non-post resources ($739,700) covering, inter alia, temporary assistance, consultants and experts, travel of staff, and maintenance and supplies for laboratory equipment. The increase for posts ($345,200) relates to the proposed establishment of two new posts: one P-5 Chief, Statistics and Surveys Section, and one P-3 Geographical Information System Officer. 16.62 The Chief, Statistics and Surveys Section, will head the team dedicated to drugs and crime statistics and will lead the work on the development and maintenance of UNODC central drugs and crime statistical databases and data warehouse, the development of indicators, statistical standards and reporting on drugs and crime, the compilation and processing of statistics reported by Governments, the preparation of sets of data and estimates for the World Drug Report and reports to Governments on drugs and crime trends. 16.63 The establishment of a new post for the Geographical Information System Officer will improve the analysis of trends in various forms, and map transnational trafficking routes and flows involving organized crime, which requires increasing use of cartographic material and geospatial analysis. The establishment of this new post would enable the office to implement more effectively its Trends Monitoring and Analysis Programme, a central component of the UNODC strategy for the period 2008-2011. 16.64 The reduction in non-post requirements ($131,100) is the net result of reductions in consultants and experts, travel of staff, contractual services, general operating expenses and supplies and materials due primarily to the reduction of expert meetings and to measures such as the use of new technologies for the publication and distribution of informational material. 16.65 The subprogramme is supported by 35 posts (14 Professional and above and 21 General Service) funded by extrabudgetary resources. Extrabudgetary resources enable the subprogramme to supplement and expand core activities funded from the regular budget for research and analysis and scientific support, as well as participation in inter-agency meetings, the organization of special events to mobilize policymakers and civil society organizations, fund-raising from Governments and the private sector and the production and dissemination of public information materials for advocacy and public awareness on drug abuse, trafficking, organized crime and corruption issues and the measures undertaken to address the challenge. Subprogramme 3 Prevention, treatment and reintegration, and alternative development Resource requirements (before recosting): $7,234,800 16.66 Substantive responsibility for this subprogramme is vested within the Division for Operations. The subprogramme will be implemented in accordance with the strategy detailed under subprogramme 3 of programme 13 of the strategic framework for the period 2010-2011. Table 16.15 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement Objective of the Organization: To sustainably reduce drug abuse, illicit drug production and drug trafficking, trafficking in human beings, money-laundering, corruption, terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and other forms of transnational crime, and to assist Member States, upon request, with the prevention and treatment of drug abuse, and HIV/AIDS as related to injecting-drug users, human trafficking and in prison settings, and with domestic criminal justice issues, including criminal justice reform. (a) Improved capacity of national criminal justice systems to implement the provisions of the conventions and protocols (a) (i) Increased number of countries utilizing tools, manuals and training material for improving criminal justice procedures and practices, in particular in relation to vulnerable groups, such as women and children a. Criminal justice reform 2006-2007: 15 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 20 countries Target 2010-2011: 30 countries b. Combating corruption 2006-2007: 20 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 30 countries Target 2010-2011: 35 countries c. Combating organized crime 2006-2007: 30 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 45 countries Target 2010-2011: 50 countries d. Combating human trafficking and migrant smuggling Estimate 2008-2009: 50 countries Target 2010-2011: 80 countries e. Combating money-laundering 2006-2007: 25 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 40 countries Target 2010-2011: 55 countries (ii) Increased number of countries with improved anti-corruption mechanisms in both the justice and public sectors 2006-2007: 8 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 15 countries Target 2010-2011: 20 countries (iii) Increased number of post-conflict and transitional countries utilizing tools, manuals, and training material for improving criminal justice procedures and practices 2006-2007: 5 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 7 countries Target 2010-2011: 10 countries (b) Improved capacity of Member States to prevent crime, and to prevent and treat drug abuse as well as HIV/AIDS as related to injecting-drug users, human trafficking and prisons (b) (i) Increased number of countries that have developed, adopted and implemented, with the assistance of UNODC, strategies and programmes for crime prevention 2006-2007: 10 countries and regional organizations Estimate 2008-2009: 15 countries and regional organizations Target 2010-2011: 25 countries and regional organizations (ii) Increased number of countries that have developed, adopted and implemented, with the assistance of UNODC, strategies and programmes on HIV/AIDS as related to injecting-drug users, human trafficking and in prisons a. Countries that developed, adopted and implemented strategies and programmes on HIV/AIDS as related to injecting-drug users Target 2010-2011: 40 countries b. Countries that developed, adopted and implemented strategies and programmes on HIV/AIDS as related to human trafficking 2006-2007: 12 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 16 countries c. Countries that developed, adopted and implemented strategies and programmes on HIV/AIDS as related to prison settings 2006-2007: 10 countries (iii) Increased number of countries, in receipt of UNODC assistance, implementing sustainable alternative development programmes 2006-2007: 6 countries Target 2010-2011: 8 countries (iv) Increased number of countries, in receipt of UNODC assistance, implementing evidence-based drug abuse prevention interventions (Measured by countries, among those receiving UNODC assistance, that are implementing prevention interventions in line with principles of effectiveness identified by international academic literature) Estimate 2008-2009: 10 countries Target 2010-2011: 15 countries (v) Increased number of countries, in receipt of UNODC assistance, implementing evidence-based drug dependence, treatment and rehabilitation, including social reintegration, approaches (Measured by countries, among those receiving UNODC assistance, implementing interventions on drug dependence treatment, rehabilitation and social reintegration which are in line with principles of effectiveness identified by international academic literature) Target 2010-2011: 60 countries (c) Improved capacity of Member States to combat transnational organized crime (c) (i) Increased number of countries in receipt of UNODC assistance regarding action-oriented programmes a. Tools and training material to combat smuggling of migrants 2006-2007: 0 countries b. Tools and training material to combat trafficking in human beings 2006-2007: 60 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 70 countries Target 2010-2011: 75 countries c. Expert group meetings, training workshops, tools and training material to combat transnational organized crime, including firearms trafficking, drug trafficking, smuggling of illegal goods in containers, and other forms of organized crime d. Workshops, tools and training material to enhance the capacity of criminal justice practitioners with regard to witness protection Estimate 2008-2009: 5 countries (ii) Increased number of countries, in receipt of UNODC assistance, complying with international standards to combat money-laundering and financing of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations 2006-2007: 45 countries (iii) Increased number of countries in receipt of UNODC assistance related to the judiciary cooperation, in particular the recovery/return of assets from corruption 2006-2007: 1 country Target 2010-2011: 16 countries (iv) Increased number of countries, in receipt of UNODC assistance, adopting and implementing measures to protect victims and witnesses and to insure the social rehabilitation of offenders a. Relating to social rehabilitation of offenders 2006-2007: 3 countries Estimate 2008-2009: 6 countries Target 2010-2011: 12 countries b. Relating to victim empowerment and child victims and witnesses Estimate 2008-2009: 4 countries Target 2010-2011: 7 countries (v) Enhanced capacities of transit countries in their fight against illicit drug trafficking (Responses to requests for assistance) Estimate 2008-2009: 40 Target 2010-2011: 40 (d) Enhanced regional cooperation in dealing with problems of illicit drugs and crime (d) Increased number of regional initiatives developed through cooperation agreements brokered and/or supported by UNODC (Regional meetings to combat drug trafficking) 2006-2007: 3 regional meetings Estimate 2008-2009: 5 regional meetings Target 2010-2011: 7 regional meetings (e) Enhanced capacity of Member States to foster and strengthen international cooperation based on the principle of shared responsibility in sustainable alternative development, including, where appropriate, preventive alternative development (e) (i) Increased number of Member States, in receipt of UNODC assistance, to design and implement sustainable alternative development programmes, including, where appropriate, preventive alternative development programmes, within their broader development context, aimed at preventing, reducing and eliminating the illicit cultivation of opium poppy, coca bush and cannabis (ii) Increased awareness of and mainstreaming the issue of alternative development, including, where appropriate, preventive alternative development programmes, among international organizations, international financial institutions and development networks a. Workshops on mainstreaming 2006-2007: 1 workshop Estimate 2008-2009: 2 workshops Target 2010-2011: 2 workshops b. Meetings with the participation of international financial institutions and other international development agencies 2006-2007: 1 meeting Estimate 2008-2009: 4 meetings Target 2010-2011: 4 meetings (iii) Increased number of partnerships between United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and relevant civil society entities and the private sector that promote the capacity of Member States for collaborative activities in alternative development, including, where appropriate, preventive alternative development a. Partnership with the private sector/civil society in marketing and/or promoting alternative development products 2006-2007: 3 partnerships Estimate 2008-2009: 6 partnerships Target 2010-2011: 8 partnerships b. Projects designed or implemented with the private sector/civil society 2006-2007: 0 projects Estimate 2008-2009: 1 project Target 2010-2011: 2 projects 16.67 The subprogramme is expected to achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that: (a) timely and quality data and statistical information are provided by Member States; (b) Member States are committed to strengthening criminal justice systems; reducing crime and drug use/dependence, and related HIV and eliminating illicit crop cultivation and drug trafficking, money-laundering, human trafficking, corruption and terrorism in all its forms and manifestations; (c) sufficient extrabudgetary resources are made available; and (d) conditions on the ground do not prevent the implementation of planned activities. 16.68 During the biennium, the following final outputs will be delivered: (i) Commission on Narcotic Drugs: parliamentary documentation: official report on world drug supply and trafficking situation (2); report on regional trafficking trends in the Near and Middle East/South-West and Central Asia (2); report on regional drug trafficking trends in the American region (2); report on regional drug trafficking trends in Europe (1); report on regional drug trafficking trends in Asia and the Pacific (2); report on regional drug trafficking trends in Africa (2); (ii) Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice: parliamentary documentation: report on action to promote effective crime prevention (1); report on combating the spread of HIV/AIDS in criminal justice pre-trial and correctional facilities (1); (iii) Ad hoc expert groups: development of a set of guiding principles on alternative development based on the sharing of best practices and lessons learned (1); expert group meetings: on evidence-based indicators for the evaluation of drug prevention (1); on improving access to justice through paralegals and legal aid services (1); on the therapeutic alliance as bedrock of drug dependence treatment and rehabilitation (1); on assessment tools on criminal justice responses to address illicit trafficking in human organs (1); on best practices to assist witnesses and victims (1); on the integrity and capacity of prosecution services (1); to examine the threats of new, sophisticated and innovative money-laundering schemes such as cybercrime and "electronic money" (emoney) (1); to examine the vulnerability of the trade sector to money-laundering and the impact of trade-based money-laundering (1); to submit relevant recommendations to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on addressing responses to the threat of environmental crime (1); on tools to combat smuggling of migrants (1); on specialist law enforcement units and efforts to combat trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants (1); expert working group on good practices in integrating crime prevention and criminal justice (1); (i) Non-recurrent publications: best practices in sustainable livelihoods within drug demand reduction (1); Criminal Justice Handbook Series (3); globally agreed and evidence-based indicators for the evaluation of drug prevention (1); guidelines for competent authorities to combat illicit trafficking in organs (1); guidelines on the protection of witnesses and victims of crime (1); guiding principles on alternative development/alternative livelihoods (1); manual on making the United Nations crime prevention guidelines work (1); money-laundering with e-money (1); money-laundering -- combating trade-based fraud (1); publication "Toolkit to combat smuggling of migrants" (1); publication "Toolkit to combat trafficking in persons" (1); publication on organized crime and its interlinkages with trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants (1); technical guide on judicial integrity and capacity corruption (1); therapeutic alliance as bedrock of drug dependence treatment and rehabilitation (1); (ii) Technical material: processing of annual reports questionnaires on illicit drug supply (part III) (220); publication of studies and research on money-laundering (4); (iii) Substantive servicing of inter-agency meetings: United Nations inter-agency anticorruption coordination meeting (4); (i) Advisory services: missions to assist Member States with technical advice on law enforcement; missions to assist Member States with technical advice on alternative development; missions to assist Member States with technical advice on drafting and implementing anti-money-laundering legislation; provision of advisory services to countries on combating trafficking in human beings, organized crime, corruption and on promoting criminal justice reform, including juvenile justice and prison reform; provision of advisory services to countries on the ratification and implementation of the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols; to finalize the technical document identifying and disseminating best practices in providing sustainable livelihoods within drug demand reduction and rehabilitation programmes; (ii) Training courses, seminars and workshops: regional or subregional workshops or meetings of law enforcement, legal and/or financial sector personnel to promote best practices in anti-money-laundering; training courses, seminars and workshops on selected topics in crime prevention and criminal justice, especially transnational organized crime, trafficking in human beings and smuggling of migrants, corruption, international terrorism and criminal justice reform; (iii) Field projects: projects at the global, regional and national level to support Member States in developing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating activities for evidence-based drug prevention, treatment and rehabilitation; projects at the national, regional and/or international levels to support combating corruption, through building knowledge and expertise, reinforcing institutional capacities and training of personnel; projects at the national, regional and/or international levels to support combating trafficking in human beings and smuggling of migrants, through building knowledge and expertise, reinforcing institutional capacities and training of personnel; projects at the national, regional and/or international levels to support drug control through building knowledge and expertise, reinforcing institutional capacities and training of personnel; projects at the national, regional and/or international levels to support: (a) the ratification and implementation of the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the three Protocols thereto; and (b) combating transnational organized crime, through building knowledge and expertise, reinforcing institutional capacities and training of personnel; projects at the national, regional and/or international levels to address other specific issues in crime prevention and criminal justice. Table 16.16 Resource requirements: subprogramme 3 16.69 The amount of $7,234,800 provides for the continuation of 22 posts (17 Professional and above and 5 General Service) ($6,264,800) and non-post requirements ($970,000), including temporary assistance, consultants and experts, travel of staff, contractual services and grants and contributions. The net reduction of $5,300 in non-post resources comprises reductions for temporary assistance, expert meetings and travel of staff, partially offset by increased requirements for specialized expertise to support expert group meetings and to develop publications for which expertise is not available within the Secretariat. 16.70 Extrabudgetary resources provide the bulk of the activities under the subprogramme. A total of 166 posts are funded from extrabudgetary resources (50 Professional, 18 General Service and 98 nationally recruited Professional and General Service) to supplement the normative and technical service capacity of the subprogramme and, more significantly, to provide the entire operations support and management structure at headquarters and in the field office network. 16.71 Through core programmes in specific thematic areas and technical cooperation projects, the extrabudgetary resources support implementation of normative activities and assistance to Governments in national, regional and global capacity-building in drug abuse reduction, elimination of cultivation and trafficking of illicit drugs, combating money-laundering, organized crime and corruption and strengthening criminal justice systems and crime prevention. Resource requirements (before recosting): $1,141,700 16.72 Support for the programme is provided by the United Nations Office at Vienna for the activities carried out at its headquarters, including by the Financial Resources Management Service, Human Resources Management Service and Information Technology Service of the Division for Management, United Nations Office at Vienna, and UNODC. All regular budget posts are presented in section 28F, Administration, Vienna. Other United Nations programmes, such as UNDP, provide support for the activities carried out elsewhere. Table 16.17 Resource requirements 16.73 The amount of $1,141,700 in non-post resources will provide for the programme's information technology support needs, such as specialized services concerning systems development and implementation for substantive needs, maintenance and support for workstations and networks in use for regular budget activity, and the acquisition and replacement of information technology equipment. 16.74 Extrabudgetary resources in the amount $21,908,100 will provide for costs relating to ProFi, shared support services, external and internal audit costs, programme support functions in the Division for Management and the information technology component of technical cooperation projects. The amount also provides for 49 posts, which reflects a significant increase over the original estimate shown in the content of the proposed programme budget for 2008-2009. The change is due primarily to the conversion of general temporary assistance positions of a continuing nature to posts in order to comply with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the use of temporary assistance for specific positions and approved budgetary practice (see A/54/7/Add.5, para. 38). Table 16.18 Summary of follow-up action taken to implement relevant recommendations of the oversight bodies Brief description of the recommendation Action taken to implement the recommendation Board of Auditors (A/63/5/Add.9 (chap. II)) The Board recommended that UNODC reflect income not on the basis of the amount of the contributions but in accordance with the United Nations system accounting standards (para. 14). UNODC has revised its policy on income recognition for the United Nations International Drug Control Programme Fund from cash basis to accrual basis (consistent with the United Nations Secretariat policy governing general trust funds (and the Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund)). For both United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Funds, income deferral is contingent upon the fiscal year of the contribution and not its size. UNODC continues to ensure that the funding agreements or pledge documents from donors categorically specify the period of the contributions. UNODC also consults on a regular basis with the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts on issues regarding accounting policies. The Board recommended that UNODC continue to strengthen the checks put in place to ensure that field offices strictly respect the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations (para. 33). UNODC continues to enhance and strengthen the financial management of all field operations in order to ensure compliance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. The Board recommended that the Secretary-General make proposals to the General Assembly to improve the budgetary structure of UNODC (para. 37). UNODC is coordinating with the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts of the United Nations Secretariat on the implementation of the recommendation. The Board recommended that the Financial Resources Management Service carry out an internal audit to value contributions in kind before they are integrated into financial statements (para. 40). UNODC will review the procedures set forth in the management instructions on fund-raising policy and procedures and the applications used for the recording of contributions in kind. Additional controls within the Financial Resources Management Service of the Division for Management will be implemented in accordance with policies and methodologies established by the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts regarding asset valuation. UNODC will also seek advice from the Office of Internal Oversight Services regarding internal audit. The Board recommended UNODC specify in the mandates entrusted to external auditors that the audit of expenditure by implementing partners should also include unliquidated obligations at the period closure date (para. 46). UNODC will review the management instruction to ensure that project documents with national execution segments and grants components include an audit plan as well as instructions for implementing partners that clearly define the scope of the audit and define expenditures to include outstanding obligations and disbursements. The Board recommended that UNODC in conjunction with the United Nations Office at Vienna determine the allocation of common staff costs between them and disclose the assumptions made for that allocation (para. 49). The recommendation was not accepted. The United Nations Office at Vienna/United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Division for Management provides services to programmes and offices of the Secretariat based in Vienna. As a common service, the United Nations Office at Vienna/United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Division for Management is governed by the same cost allocation policies that are applied by other United Nations offices. The Secretariat does not currently determine and attribute common service costs to individual client programmes and, as acknowledged by the Board, there is no cost accounting system in place at the present time. The Board recommended to put the United Nations Treasury in New York and field offices in contact in order to update the information relating to bank accounts (para. 52). The recommendation has been implemented. UNODC will continue to communicate with the United Nations Treasury on a regular basis regarding bank account management and other related issues. The Treasury database has been updated. The Board recommended to take appropriate measures to ensure that bank reconciliations are prepared, reviewed and approved on a monthly basis (para. 54). The recommendation has been implemented. Bank reconciliations are performed on a monthly basis. The Board recommended that UNODC strictly comply with rule 104.4 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations regarding the opening of bank accounts (para. 59). UNODC fully complies with rule 104.4 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. The opening and closing of bank accounts is closely monitored and properly authorized by the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts. The Board recommended that UNODC strengthen the controls on monthly bank balances in order to ensure strict respect for the provisions of rule 104.7 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations (para. 61). The recommendation has been implemented. UNODC prepares financial management guidelines to support field offices and strengthen internal control, including of monthly bank balances. The current imprest level for all UNODC field office local bank accounts does not exceed the cash requirements for two and a half months. Where local government regulations do not enable the transfer of excess cash outside the country as in the case in respect of the UNODC offices in Colombia and Brazil, the cash in the amounts exceeding the imprest levels are transferred to savings accounts which are closely monitored by the Accounts Section of UNODC. The Board recommended that UNODC implement a strategy for the reorganization of the Regional Centre for East Asia and the Pacific in order to re-establish programme management and ensure that the Bangkok office remains financially sustainable (para. 71). A new strategy is currently being developed. The Board recommended that UNODC establish a more transparent and objective method for the allocation of office operating costs (para. 73). The establishment of a more transparent and objective method for the allocation of office management costs is currently under implementation. The Board recommended that UNODC set up specific funding for end-of-service and post-retirement liabilities, notably for after-service health insurance coverage (para. 77). UNODC is a programme of the United Nations Secretariat and its voluntary funds, the Fund of the United Nations Drug Control Programme and the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund are United Nations trust funds. In that regard, the mechanism for the funding of after-service health insurance and other end-of-service liabilities must be governed by consistent Secretariat-wide policies and procedures. The funding mechanism for the end-of-service and post-retirement benefits liabilities is currently under review. Two reports of the Secretary-General (A/60/450 and Corr.1 and A/61/730) were submitted to the General Assembly, the first at the main part of its sixtieth session and the second at the first resumed sixty-first session. A follow-up report, as requested in General Assembly resolution 61/264, addressing, inter alia, issues of partial and full funding of the after-service health insurance liabilities, is currently scheduled to be submitted to the General Assembly for review at its sixty-fourth session. The Board recommended that UNODC comply with section 3.6 of administrative instruction ST/AI/2003/5 regarding physical inventory of property (para. 83). UNODC has an inventory tracking system. Non-expendable property is added to the inventory system at the time of acquisition and it is removed at write-off. The Office has not taken a comprehensive physical inventory of non-expendable property because it has harboured serious doubts with regard to the practicality and utility of these comprehensive exercises. However, in view of the steps that are being taken at United Nations Headquarters to ensure International Public Sector Accounting Standards-compliant balances, UNODC will resume the physical inventory of non-expendable property. The Board recommended that Division for Management prepare the upgrading of the non-expendable property monitoring software to include a module to value depreciation (para. 85). The Office will introduce a depreciation module into its inventory application programme upon receipt of requested guidance from United Nations Headquarters regarding depreciation rates for categories of items and for depreciation calculation methods. The Board recommended that UNODC draw up and implement formalized and traceable internal control procedures to guarantee the reliability of information given on the total value of property in service at the end of the period (para. 88). The rules governing property reporting will continue to be applied. The Board recommended that UNODC field offices send periodically to the Director of the Operations Division a report on the work of consultants in order to strengthen control over recruitment and work of consultants (para. 90). A pilot exercise on the monitoring of consultants has been undertaken with one Regional Office. Based on the results of the exercise, a mechanism to facilitate the monitoring of consultants in all field offices is now in place. The Board recommended that UNODC continue its efforts to prepare for the implementation of the integrated management system required by the transition to IPSAS and take measures to reduce the risks related to transactions and consolidation and extraction of data (para. 94). The Office will actively support the implementation of the ERP system and is continuously updated by the United Nations Headquarters IPSAS Task Force regarding policies and implementation objectives under the directives issued by the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts. UNODC will take steps to reduce the risks related to transactions and to the consolidation and extraction of data. The Board recommended that UNODC adopt internal instructions on the prevention, detection and reporting of cases of fraud and alleged fraud (para. 106). The establishment of the United Nations Ethics Office and the clarification of the whistle-blower protection were announced throughout UNODC through special messages. To implement ST/SGB/2006/6 on financial disclosure and declaration of interest statements, a link to the Ethics Office Financial Disclosure Programme is provided on the UNODC Lotus Notes Applications. UNODC will coordinate with the Office of Internal Oversight Services and other relevant United Nations Secretariat offices on the adoption of policies and procedures on the detection and reporting of cases of fraud and alleged fraud. Abbreviations: RB, regular budget; XB, extrabudgetary; NO (National Officer); GS (PL), General Service (Principal level); GS (OL), General Service (Other level); LL (Local level). a Includes Financial Resources Management Service, Human Resources Management Service and Information Technology Service of the Division for Management, United Nations Office at Vienna and UNODC. All regular budget posts are presented in section 28F, Administration, Vienna. b Extrabudgetary posts exclude temporary posts funded by technical cooperation projects. c Proposed new posts. Outputs produced in 2008-2009 not to be carried out in the biennium 2010-2011 A/62/6 (Sect. 16), paragraph Output Quantity Reason for discontinuation 16.44 (a) (iv) b Reports on each action plan and set of measures adopted by Governments on the follow-up to the special session The review process has ended. 16.44 (a) (vi) b Report transmitting the questionnaire to collect information on issues related to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols UNODC is now using a comprehensive software to gather information and report on the implementation of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols. 16.44 (a) (viii) c Intergovernmental expert group meeting to review drug control-related information-gathering instruments General Assembly special session (1998-2008) review process has ended. 16.44 (b) (i) Biennial reports of questionnaire for reporting on action plans and measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, reporting cycle June 06/ June 08 The 10-year reporting cycle ended in 2008. The assessment will be conducted in 2009. Annual reports questionnaire for 2007 on the working of the international drug control treaties (black and white) The annual questionnaires for 2007 have been sent. Legislative index of national laws and regulations promulgated to give effect to international drug control treaties The index has been replaced by an electronic search function of the online legal library that fulfils the function of index while applying not only to drug control, but also to organized crime projects. Quarterly issues of the directory of competent national authorities under articles 6, 7 and 17 of the 1988 Convention The directory will be integrated into a comprehensive directory including competent authorities under the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its three Protocols. 16.49 (a) (i) Biennial report on the follow-up of the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development Biennial reports related to General Assembly special session (1998-2008) have been completed. Report on the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction, based on responses to the biennial questionnaire Completed. The mandate was for 1998 to 2008. 16.49 (b) (i) Newsletter on prevention among youth Completed. The extrabudgetary project supporting the Network that was the target of the newsletter ended. 16.49 (c) (i) Advisory services to Member States, on request, concerning the implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction The Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction was part of the Political Declaration of 1998 mandated until 2008. Technical assistance to Member States on prevention, treatment and rehabilitation will be covered by missions to consult and coordinate with other United Nations agencies and international organizations to promote and advocate evidence-based prevention and treatment. Grand total 