%%%HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE|PALESTINIANS|TERRORISM|COUNTER-TERRORISM|

President: Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) In the absence of the President, Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia), Vice-President, took the Chair. The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m. Reports of the Sixth Committee The Acting President: The General Assembly will consider the reports of the Sixth Committee on agenda items 78 to 84, 106, 118, 133, 142, 164, 165, 166, 168, 169 and 171. I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Jean-Cédric Janssens de Bisthoven of Belgium, to introduce in one intervention the reports of the Committee that are before the General Assembly. Mr. Janssens de Bisthoven (Belgium), Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee (spoke in French): I have the honour today to present the reports of the Sixth Committee on its work during the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly. The Assembly allocated to the Committee 16 substantive and three procedural agenda items. With the exception of the item relating to the election of the bureaus of the Main Committees, all of these agenda items fall under three headings corresponding to the priorities of the General Assembly, namely, "Promotion of justice and international law", "Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations", and "Organizational, administrative and other matters". I shall introduce the reports of the Sixth Committee on the various items in the order in which they fall under these three headings. I will begin with the first heading, "Promotion of justice and international law", under which the Sixth Committee considered seven agenda items and adopted eight draft resolutions. The Sixth Committee considered agenda item 78, "Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission". The report on this item is contained in document A/64/446, and the draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is contained in paragraph 10 thereof. The draft resolution reiterates the content of resolutions 62/63 and 63/119, concerning in particular steps to ensure criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts, urges Governments to continue taking the necessary measures to implement those resolutions, and preserves the reporting mechanisms provided for therein. As stated in the draft resolution, the Assembly would include this item in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fifth session, and the consideration of the report of the Group of Legal Experts, focusing on its legal aspects, would be continued during its sixty-seventh session in the framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee. The report on agenda item 79, "Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its forty-second session", is contained in document A/64/447. The Sixth Committee recommends for adoption by the General Assembly two draft resolutions, which are reproduced in paragraph 9 of the report. By adopting draft resolution I, the Assembly would, inter alia, endorse the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law. Draft resolution II pertains to the Practice Guide on Cross-Border Insolvency Cooperation, as completed and adopted by the Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to publish its text and transmit it to Governments. The Sixth Committee also considered agenda item 80, "United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law". The relevant report is contained in document A/64/448, and the draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof. Under the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly would, inter alia, approve the guidelines and recommendations regarding the implementation of the Programme in 2010 and 2011 and authorize the Secretary-General to carry out the activities specified in section III of his report (A/64/495) on this item. The report on agenda item 81, "Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-first session", is contained in document A/64/449, and the draft resolution recommended for adoption by the General Assembly is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof. The Assembly would, inter alia, express its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the work accomplished at its sixty-first session, in particular for the completion, on first reading, of the draft articles and commentaries on the topic "Responsibility of international organizations", and would invite Governments to provide their comments and observations thereon by 1 January 2011. The report on agenda item 82, entitled "Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization", is contained in document A/64/450, and the draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly for adoption appears in paragraph 10 thereof. The Assembly would, inter alia, take note of the document entitled "Introduction and implementation of sanctions imposed by the United Nations" as set out in the annex to the draft resolution. The report on agenda item 83, entitled "The rule of law at the national and international levels", is contained in document A/64/451, and the draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof. Under the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly would, inter alia, request the Secretary-General to submit his next annual report on United Nations rule of law activities, call for the continuation of the dialogue initiated by the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group and the Rule of Law Unit with Member States, and encourage the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to accord high priority to rule of law activities. Finally, the report on agenda item 84, entitled "The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction", is contained in document A/64/452. Under the draft resolution recommended for adoption, which is reproduced in paragraph 6 of the report, the General Assembly would request the Secretary-General to invite Member States to submit information and observations on the scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction and to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session. In addition, the Sixth Committee would continue its consideration of the item, without prejudice to the consideration of related issues in other forums of the United Nations. The Sixth Committee adopted these eight draft resolutions without a vote, and it is my hope that the General Assembly will be in a position to do the same. I shall now turn to the heading "Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestations". The Sixth Committee considered agenda item 106, entitled "Measures to eliminate international terrorism", under this heading. The relevant report is contained in document A/64/453, and the draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 11 thereof. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote, and it is my hope that the General Assembly will be able to do the same. I wish to point out that, should the Assembly adopt the draft resolution on measures to eliminate international terrorism, it would, inter alia, request the Ad Hoc Committee established pursuant to resolution 51/210 to report to the Assembly during the current session in the event of the completion of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism. As in the past, it is envisaged that the item in question will remain open in the agenda of the General Assembly. Under the third and final heading, "Organizational, administrative and other matters", the Sixth Committee considered eight substantive and two procedural items. I will start with the substantive items. The Sixth Committee considered agenda item 142, "Administration of justice at the United Nations". The relevant report, contained in document A/64/454, reproduces in paragraph 11 a draft resolution whereby the General Assembly would approve the rules of procedure of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals Tribunal, annexed thereto. The report also reproduces, in paragraph 12, a draft decision whereby the General Assembly would decide that the consideration of the outstanding legal aspects of the item shall be continued during its sixty-fifth session in the framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee. The Sixth Committee also considered agenda item 164, entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country". The relevant report is contained in document A/64/455, and the draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8 of the report. Furthermore, the Sixth Committee considered six requests for observer status in the General Assembly. It recommended that the General Assembly grant observer status to the following organizations: the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, under agenda item 165; the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, under agenda item 166; the International Olympic Committee, under agenda item 167; the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region of Africa, under agenda item 168; and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean, under agenda item 169. The sponsors of draft resolution A/C.6/64/L.20 under agenda item 171, entitled "Observer status in the General Assembly for the Council of Presidents of the General Assembly", withdrew the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee concluded its consideration of the item without taking action. The reports for each of the requests are found in documents A/64/456, A/64/457, A/64/458 and Corr.1, A/64/459, A/64/567 and A/64/568, respectively. The relevant draft resolutions are reproduced in paragraph 8 of documents A/64/456 and A/64/457, and in paragraph 7 of documents A/64/458, A/64/459 and A/64/567. The report on agenda item 171 is contained in document A/64/568, and no further action by the General Assembly is recommended. The draft resolution under item 167, entitled "Observer status for the International Olympic Committee in the General Assembly", was adopted by the Sixth Committee without a vote, and the General Assembly, at its 21st plenary meeting on 19 October 2009, adopted resolution 64/3 without a vote. Concerning the other requests for observer status, the draft resolutions under items 165, 166, 168 and 169 were also adopted by the Sixth Committee without a vote, and it is my hope that the General Assembly will be in a position to do the same. Under this heading, the Sixth Committee also considered two procedural items, namely, item 118, entitled "Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly", and item 133, entitled "Programme planning". The report under agenda item 118, containing the provisional programme of work of the Sixth Committee at the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly, is contained in document A/64/461. The draft decision by which the General Assembly would take note of the provisional programme of work is reproduced in paragraph 7 of the report. The report on agenda item 133 is contained in document A/64/462, and no further action by the General Assembly is recommended. Finally, I wish to inform the Assembly that there is no report in respect of agenda item 5, entitled "Election of the officers of the Main Committees". Consistent with previous practice, the election of the officers of the Sixth Committee for the sixty-fifth session will be taken up at a later stage in the course of the current session. Through the adoption of the draft resolutions and decisions reproduced in the reports that I have just introduced, the Sixth Committee has continued to deploy its efforts towards the fulfilment of the objectives relating to three priority areas identified by the General Assembly: "Promotion of justice and international law", "Drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism in all its forms and manifestation", and "Organizational, administrative and other matters". Furthermore, the Sixth Committee has continued to assist the Assembly in fulfilling its tasks related to the codification and progressive development of international law. Given the importance of international law in the conduct of international relations and in the activities of our Organization, it is my hope that the General Assembly will be able to achieve further progress in the areas in question. That concludes my introduction of the reports of the Sixth Committee. I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Mourad Benmehidi of Algeria for the outstanding way in which he has led the debates within the Commission, as well as the other members of the Bureau -- Mr. Esmaeil Baghaei Hamaneh of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Marcelo Böhlke of Brazil and Mr. Andris Stastoli of Albania -- for their cooperation and support to me in carrying out my duties. I would also like to thank all representatives and colleagues for their invaluable contributions to the success of this session. Finally, I would like to express my great gratitude and my deep appreciation to the secretariat of the Sixth Committee, backed by the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs, for its efficient support, valuable assistance and sensible advice throughout the session. The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee. If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Sixth Committee that are before the Assembly today. It was so decided. The Acting President: Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of delegations regarding the recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant official records. May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that "When the same draft resolution is considered in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the Committee." May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats. Before we begin to take action on the recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I should therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote those recommendations that were adopted without a vote in the Committee. Members are reminded that additional sponsors are no longer accepted now that draft resolutions and decisions have been adopted by the Committee. Any clarification about co-sponsorship should be addressed to the Secretary of the Committee. Agenda item 78 Criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/446) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/110). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 78? Agenda item 79 Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its forty-second session Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/447) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I and II. Draft resolution I is entitled "Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its forty-second session". The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to likewise? Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 64/111). The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled "Practice Guide on Cross-Border Insolvency Cooperation of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law". The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 64/112). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 79? Agenda item 80 United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/448) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/113). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 80? Agenda item 81 Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its sixty-first session Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/449) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/114). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 81? Agenda item 82 Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/450) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. I now call on the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who wishes to speak in explanation of position before action is taken on the draft resolution. Mr. Baghaei Hamaneh (Islamic Republic of Iran): My delegation will join consensus on the draft resolution contained in document A/64/450, entitled "Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization". With regard to paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, which takes note of the document entitled "Introduction and implementation of sanctions imposed by the United Nations", as set out in the annex to the draft resolution, my delegation would like to make the following statement. Sanctions, as a coercive measure, may be introduced only after the Security Council has determined a threat to the peace or breach of the peace, based on valid evidence or an act of aggression, and only when peaceful measures have been exhausted or proven to be inadequate. In so doing, the Security Council shall act in strict conformity with the purposes and principles of the Charter, and avoid exceeding its authority or acting in breach of the principles of international law. The Security Council should be held accountable for the consequences of unlawful sanctions applied for illegitimate purposes or introduced under political pressure or the influence of certain permanent members. Given that, my delegation regards paragraph 1 of the annex to the report as a cornerstone of the whole text, and welcomes the key assertion that sanctions should be in support of legitimate objectives. In view of this, the Security Council cannot deprive Member States of their rights, recognized under international law, by imposing sanctions. Such arbitrary actions by the Security Council would undermine the legitimacy of its decisions. Those Member States that exploit the Council for their national interests should also be held responsible. While we have full respect for the Charter of the United Nations, we are concerned about abuse of its provisions, particularly those relating to the mandate and power of the Security Council, by certain Member States for the advancement of their narrow political interests. The Islamic Republic of Iran understands the report as an initiative aimed partly at highlighting the international community's concern regarding the improper use of sanctions by the Security Council, and partly to provide guidance to the Council based on previous experience. The Acting President: We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/115). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 82? Agenda item 83 The rule of law at the national and international levels Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/451) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/116). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 83? Agenda item 84 The scope and application of the principle of universal jurisdiction Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/452) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/117). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 84? Agenda item 106 Measures to eliminate international terrorism Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/453) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. Make I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/118). The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus completed this stage of its consideration of agenda item 106. Agenda item 118 (continued) Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/461) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take action on the draft decision, entitled "Provisional programme of work of the Sixth Committee for the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly". The Sixth Committee adopted the draft decision. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft decision was adopted. The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 118. Agenda item 133 (continued) Programme planning Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/462) The Acting President: May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Sixth Committee? The Acting President: The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 133. Agenda item 142 Administration of justice at the United Nations Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/454) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 11 of its report and a draft decision recommended in paragraph 12 of the same report. The Assembly will first take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/119). The Acting President: The Assembly will now take action on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The Acting President: The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 142. Agenda item 164 Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/455) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/120). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 164? Agenda item 165 Observer status for the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission in the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/456) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/121). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 165? Agenda item 166 Observer status for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria in the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/457) The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/122). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 166? Agenda item 168 Observer status for the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region of Africa in the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/459) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/123). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 168? Agenda item 169 Observer status for the Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean in the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/567) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do likewise? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/124). The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 169? Agenda item 171 Observer status in the General Assembly for the Council of Presidents of the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee (A/64/568) The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item 171? The Acting President: On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Mourad Benmehidi, Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations and Chairman of the Sixth Committee, members of the Bureau, the Secretary of the Committee and representatives for a job well done. The General Assembly has thus concluded consideration of all the reports of the Sixth Committee before it. Agenda item 70 (continued) Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance (b) Assistance to the Palestinian people Draft resolution (A/64/L.35) The Acting President: Members will recall that the Assembly considered, in a joint debate, agenda item 70, "Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance" and its sub-items (a) and (b) as well as agenda item 71, "Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of sexual violence" at its 59th and 60th plenary meetings, on 7 December 2009. The Assembly has before it a draft resolution issued as document A/64/L.35. The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution. I would like to announce that, since the introduction of draft resolution A/64/L.35, the following countries have become sponsors: Benin, Cape Verde, Chad, the Congo, the Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Namibia, Peru, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, the United States of America and Zambia. May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.35? Draft resolution A/64/L.35 was adopted (resolution 64/125). The Acting President: One representative has asked to speak in explanation of position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind him that explanations of vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats. Mr. Weissbrod (Israel): I would like to share with Assembly members the fact that Israel has joined the consensus on resolution 64/125 concerning assistance to the Palestinian people. Unlike so many resolutions regarding our region, the resolution just adopted is constructive in its approach, as it seeks to assist the Palestinian people in increasing their economic and development capacity. These are issues that Israel has supported for many years and remains committed to. In this respect, I would like to draw the attention of the Assembly to the fact that, due to Israeli measures, economic growth stands at 8 per cent in the West Bank, while construction and development projects that improve the lives of countless Palestinians are moving forward at an exceptional pace. The Allenby Bridge now operates until midnight, and numerous checkpoints have been removed or expanded their hours of operation to promote freedom of movement and economic growth. Israel continues to explore additional measures that would augment this progress while ensuring that Israel's serious and legitimate security concerns are not compromised. Israel maintains certain reservations regarding particular aspects of the resolution, in particular regarding the policy of assistance to the Gaza Strip. It is necessary that such provisions reflect Israel's security needs with regard to delivering assistance and other issues. However, Israel joined the consensus on this resolution in order to support the broader principle of assistance and development for the Palestinian people. Furthermore, Israel calls upon the Palestinians to return to negotiations in order to reach a peace agreement. Only through bilateral negotiations can we achieve the vision of two States living side by side in peace and security. The Acting President: I now give the floor to the observer of Palestine. Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Palestine): I would like to make a general statement after the adoption of resolution 64/125. I would like to express Palestine's gratitude to the Assembly for its unanimous support of resolution 64/125 on assistance to the Palestinian people; to the presidency of the European Union, Sweden, for its efforts in drafting and promoting this resolution; and to all of the sponsors for their valuable support. International assistance in its many forms remains a vital component of the subsistence and steadfastness of the Palestinian people, both for the Palestinians living under Israel's military occupation and for the millions of refugees living in exile in the region. This assistance has taken on heightened importance and urgency in the context of the severe socio-economic difficulties prevailing in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in recent years. Indeed, this assistance has become a virtual lifeline for thousands upon thousands of Palestinian families, particularly in the Gaza Strip, where, regrettably, the overwhelming majority of the population has become impoverished and is now dependent on aid for survival as a direct result of Israel's illegal blockade. Assistance via United Nations agencies and programmes and direct assistance from the donor community in all fields have helped to alleviate such suffering through endless periods of instability, uncertainty and crisis. However, this assistance has not been limited to ameliorating Palestinian hardships. It has also been central to the development of the boundless human potential, capacity and institutions of the Palestinian people. Educational scholarships, training and a multitude of development projects supported by donors from around the globe have greatly contributed to and enhanced Palestinian efforts to rebuild, reform and develop their national institutions in all sectors. Such assistance has become increasingly important in the context of the plan launched in August 2009 by Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Salam Fayyad. That plan aims to establish within two years the solid foundation of the future independent State of Palestine, wherein the Palestinian people can exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and all of their other human rights as a dignified, resilient and self-reliant people living in peace and security with all of their neighbours. We thank all States that have expressed their support for that important plan, and we continue to appeal for their firm and generous support. While the resolution was adopted by consensus, we cannot ignore the fact of the continued obstruction by Israel of humanitarian and other forms of assistance to the Palestinian people. Nine months later, the generous pledges made by the international community at the Sharm el-Sheikh donor conference have yet to reach the Palestinian people, and reconstruction of the Gaza Strip, including repair of millions of dollars' worth of donor projects destroyed by the occupying Power in its military aggression last winter continue to be deliberately obstructed by Israel's blockade of Gaza. Clearly, these illegal Israeli policies and measures are gravely undermining the potential of donor support to the Palestinian people, and that requires serious redress by the international community. Thus, although it has joined the consensus on the resolution, Israel should not be absolved of its responsibilities and accountability for the negative role it has played and continues to play in obstructing assistance to the Palestinian people, whether by the blockade of Gaza or by the settlements, the wall and checkpoints throughout the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Israel has clear obligations under international law, including humanitarian and human rights law, with which it must be compelled to comply. Only is such important issues are addressed can the support of the international community, in line with the commitment reaffirmed here today, truly turn the process of assistance to the Palestinian people from one of humanitarian relief efforts, poverty alleviation and crisis management to one of genuine development and State-building with a view to the day when the occupation that began in 1967 is finally ended and an independent, viable and contiguous State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, has been established. In conclusion, I reiterate Palestine's deepest gratitude to the entire international community for the assistance and support so generously extended to the Palestinian people over the years. The Acting President: May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 70? Agenda item 115 (continued) The United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy Draft resolution (A/64/L.27) The Acting President: Members will recall that the representative of Argentina introduced draft resolution A/64/L.27 at the 60th plenary meeting, on 7 December 2009. Mr. Bühler (Austria): The adoption by consensus of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on 8 September 2006 (see resolution 60/288) was a historic milestone in the unified efforts of the General Assembly in the fight against terrorism. In that resolution, Member States welcomed the intention of the Secretary-General to institutionalize the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force within the Secretariat in order to ensure overall coordination and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system. Over the past three years, it has become clear that the full potential of the Task Force to ensure overall coordination and coherence in the implementation of the Global Strategy cannot be effectively achieved under the current budgetary arrangements, which are only ad hoc, temporary and dependent on voluntary donor funding. In order to ensure that the Task Force will be in a position to effectively fulfil its mandate in a sustainable manner, it is thus essential to finalize the institutionalization of the Task Force and provide it with the necessary resources from the regular budget. The draft resolution put forward in document A/64/L.27 by a cross-regional group of countries was introduced by the Permanent Representative of Argentina on 7 December on behalf of the group of five sponsors. It sets the necessary framework for the Task Force to fulfil its mandate and to ensure the full implementation of the Global Strategy in an integrated manner. The draft resolution reflects the high priority assigned to the implementation of the Global Strategy by the General Assembly and contributes to the unified efforts of the United Nations to counter terrorism. We would thus like to invite all Member States to support this joint endeavour to finalize the institutionalization of the Task Force. Mr. Sial (Pakistan): Terrorism cannot be defeated through compartmentalized and piecemeal efforts. It is a common challenge to the international community. Its multiplicity haunts us all and calls for unity and sincerity of purpose if we are to succeed. To respond to the daunting challenge of terrorism, Member States have adopted the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Strategy addresses conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, including prolonged, unresolved conflicts, ethnic, national and religious discrimination, and socio-economic marginalization. It also covers operational, capacity-building and human rights measures. The Strategy envisions the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) as the body for ensuring coordination and coherence within the United Nations system. The adoption of the Strategy by consensus has helped us to bridge the gulf among regional groups and organizations on approaches to fighting the menace. Today, we have come together once again to reaffirm our commitment to the fight against terrorism. The draft resolution before us (A/64/L.27) aims at institutionalizing the CTITF through the regular United Nations budget. This represents a long-term commitment to defeating terrorism. The adoption of the draft resolution by consensus would put to end uncertainties about the future of that General Assembly-mandated counter-terrorism entity. It would give the CTITF mid- and long-term political and administrative planning flexibility. It would also cement the consensus achieved through the adoption of resolution 60/288. Furthermore, it would put to rest any speculation about the divide between the General Assembly and the Security Council in the fight against terrorism and questions about the United Nations capacity to handle the challenge in an overarching and comprehensive manner. The long-term institutionalization of the CTITF would also raise the threshold of expectations for the CTITF and its leadership. In this regard, balanced implementation of the four pillars of the Strategy will be the most important objective. The CTITF might face difficulties at this stage in ensuring balanced implementation of the Strategy. However, the predictable nature of the CTITF will give it enough flexibility to prepare suitable plans to achieve this objective. The decision-making process within the CTITF should benefit from frequent interaction with Member States. We are of the view that Member States, through their ownership of the Strategy implementation process, will be able not only to ensure tangible results in achieving the consensus objectives, but also to lend credence to and enhance the legitimacy of the process itself. Regular briefings to Member States by the CTITF on its activities may also become a permanent feature of the CTITF programme, as there are precedents of regular briefings to Member States by other United Nations entities. It is against this backdrop that Pakistan strongly supports the institutionalization of the CTITF through the regular budget on a long-term basis. We also support the excellent work being done by Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Chairman of the CTITF. I am happy to state that, as of today, the number of sponsors of this draft resolution has reached more than 40. We request all Member States to support and consider renewing their unflinching commitment to the defeat of terrorism. Mr. Koné (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): My delegation endorses the statement made by the Permanent Representative of Argentina on 7 December 2009 on behalf of the sponsors of draft resolution A/64/L.27 (see A/64/PV.60). We would like to make the following additional comments. There is no doubt that a safer world, free forever from the scourge of terrorism, continues to be of particular interest to Member States insofar as it is clear today that this scourge continues be a major concern and thus a challenge for the international community and international law. Burkina Faso condemns terrorism in all its forms. For my delegation, the current scope of terrorist acts compels us to pursue our efforts together. That is why my delegation reaffirms that it is urgent to finalize the draft general convention that will give new momentum to the process. It is also for this reason that we reaffirm the importance that efforts to harmonize the activities of the various organs and entities of the system continue and that these activities be refocused within the framework of close cooperation with States and regional and subregional organizations. In our view, the Global Strategy and the Task Force established by the Secretary-General are, in this context, the appropriate tools to coordinate efforts of the system and partner agencies, specifically in the area of providing technical assistance to countries in need. We hope therefore that the draft resolution will be adopted by the General Assembly by consensus so as to give the Task Force the necessary resources to carry out its mandate, which is necessary in the fight against terrorism. Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I would like to make a brief statement in support of the draft resolution contained in document A/64/L.27, entitled "Institutionalization of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force", which was introduced at the 60th plenary meeting by Ambassador Argüello, Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United Nations, on behalf of five main sponsors, including my country. Croatia firmly believes that the United Nations should play a central role in the global struggle against terrorism. The Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy represents an overarching framework, pooling together all Member States, United Nations bodies, agencies and other counter-terrorism partners. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force was established precisely to ensure the coordination and coherence of efforts of all relevant parts of the United Nations system. As members of the Assembly know, for the past two years Croatia has chaired the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council. The Committee and its Executive Directorate have invested a lot of effort into cooperation with the Task Force, as well as with other United Nations bodies that contribute to the implementation of the Strategy. Throughout this period, we have noted a certain paradox whereby the Task Force, the body with the task of coordinating other institutions and agencies, has had the least amount of administrative and expert support. This experience has clearly demonstrated that the Task Force cannot continue to carry out its catalytic function unless its core operations are funded from the regular budget in a sustainable and predictable manner, independent from voluntary contributions, which are still needed for concrete projects. Therefore, we have joined a cross-regional core group with the aim of finishing the project of institutionalizing the Task Force, which commenced more than three years ago with unanimous adoption of the Strategy. I hope that the present draft resolution can enjoy the widespread support of all States Members of the United Nations, and that its adoption will confirm the renewed commitment of all States to the implementation of all four pillars of the Strategy. The Acting President: We have heard the last speaker in the debate on this agenda item. Action on draft resolution A/64/L.27 will be taken at a later date to be announced. The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item 115. Agenda item 3 (continued) Credentials of representatives to the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly (b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/64/571) The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a report of the Credentials Committee issued as document A/64/571, containing a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in paragraph 16 of its report. The draft resolution reads as follows: "The General Assembly, "Having considered the report of the Credentials Committee and the recommendation contained therein, "Approves the report of the Credentials Committee." I now give the floor to the Chairman of the Credentials Committee, Mr. Hilario Davide of the Philippines. Mr. Davide (Philippines), Chairman of the Credentials Committee: As mentioned, representatives have before them the report of the Credentials Committee on the credentials of representatives to the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly (A/64/571). In this connection, I would like to inform the General Assembly that today, at a meeting of the Credentials Committee, its members adopted the following revision to paragraph 11 of the report. The members agreed that at the end of the first sentence of paragraph 11 the following words would be added: "until such a time that the Credentials Committee reviews the matter and makes a final recommendation to the General Assembly". Accordingly, the revised first sentence of paragraph 11 would now read as follows: "The members of the Committee decided to adopt the proposal on the understanding that the representatives of both Guinea and Madagascar will continue to have the right to participate provisionally in the activities of the sixty-fourth session with all the rights and privileges enjoyed by other Member States whose credentials have been accepted, until such a time that the Credentials Committee reviews the matter and makes a final recommendation to the General Assembly." May I request that the General Assembly approve the report of the Committee as orally revised and the recommendations contained therein. The Acting President: The General Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee in paragraph 16 of its report, which has been orally revised. The Credentials Committee adopted this draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same? The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 64/126). The Acting President: Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation of position on the resolution just adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from their seats. Mr. Mottaghi Nejad (Islamic Republic of Iran): My delegation joined in the consensus adoption of resolution 64/126, entitled "Credentials of representatives to the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly". However, my delegation would like to express its reservations on any part of the report contained in the document that may be construed as recognition of the Israeli regime. Mr. Andrianarivelo-Razafy (Madagascar) (spoke in French): The delegation of Madagascar would like to make a brief statement under the item under consideration. Madagascar would like to thank Member States for their understanding and cooperation given the current difficult situation of my country, which we hope will be satisfactorily resolved very shortly. The Acting President: We have heard the last speaker in explanation of position. The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 3. The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m. 