%%%SPACE OBJECTS|GEOSTATIONARY ORBIT|

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Information furnished under the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies Note verbale dated 15 June 2009 from the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands to the United Nations (Vienna) addressed to the Secretary-General 1. The Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the United Nations (Vienna) presents its compliments to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and, with reference to article XI of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (General Assembly resolution 2222 (XXI), annex), informs him of a change in status of a space object that appears in the Online Index of Objects Launched into Outer Space. It concerns the following entry: "1992-032A (International Designator); [NSS K (INTELSAT K)] (Name of Space Objects); USA (for Intelsat) (State/Organization); 10/06/1992 (Date of Launch); [-21.6 degrees East] (GSO Location); Yes (UN Registered); ST/SG/SER.E/260 (Document of Registration); in GSO (Status)" 2. The space object referred to above was no longer in geostationary orbit as at 22 August 2002. The satellite's final orbit was at a perigee height of +515 kilometres (km) and an apogee height of +1,267 km above geostationary orbit. 3. The Netherlands requests the Secretary-General to incorporate this information in the Online Index in square brackets ([ and ]) and highlighted in green in accordance with the practice related to information that has not been communicated to the United Nations in conformity with the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (General Assembly resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex) or General Assembly resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20 December 1961. 4. In respect of the above-mentioned space object, the Netherlands is not the "launching State", "State of registry" or "launching authority" for the purposes of (a) the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (General Assembly resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex); (b) the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space; or (c) the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution 2345 (XXII), annex), respectively. 5. The above-mentioned space object was transferred in orbit to New Skies Satellites after it was launched, positioned in orbit and operated by persons who were not subject to the jurisdiction or control of the Netherlands. New Skies Satellites is a company that is incorporated in the Netherlands. Following the transfer in orbit of ownership of the space object to New Skies Satellites, the Netherlands is of the opinion that it bears international responsibility for its operation in accordance with article VI and has jurisdiction and control over it in accordance with article VIII of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. 