%%%NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|DISARMAMENT|NUCLEAR WEAPON TESTS|ARMS LIMITATION|CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS|DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS|BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS|CHEMICAL WEAPONS|CLUSTER MUNITIONS|LANDMINES|WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION|SMALL ARMS|OUTER SPACE|NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|MILITARY EXPENDITURES|GENERAL DEBATE|

Chairperson: Mr. José Luis Cancela (Uruguay) The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m. Agenda items 86 to 103 (continued) General debate on all disarmament and international security agenda items The Chairperson (spoke in Spanish): May I on behalf of delegations welcome Mr. Sergei Ordzhonikidze, Director-General and Secretary-General of the Conference on Disarmament. Before proceeding, I should again like to remind delegations to limit their statements to 10 minutes for those speaking in their national capacities. May I indicate to delegations that there are 16 speakers on today's list and three left over from yesterday's list who will speak today? I shall indicate to speakers by means of a stroke of the gavel that their time is up. The red light here to my left will also light up. I would ask delegations for their cooperation in staying within the time allocated as there is such a lengthy speakers' list. Mr. Rao (India): It is a pleasure to convey to you, Sir, our congratulations on your election to the chairmanship of this Committee and we assure you the full cooperation of the Indian delegation. We would like to associate ourselves with the statement made by Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We commence this year's First Committee deliberations against the background of not only multiple challenges to global peace and security but also an accompanying mood of optimism that we will find viable and enduring solutions through collective efforts, underlined by a genuine spirit of multilateralism. In achieving this objective, as provided by the Charter of the United Nations, the General Assembly and the First Committee, dealing with international security and disarmament issues, can play a vital and substantive role. India attaches the highest priority to the goal of nuclear disarmament. During the sixty-third session of the United Nations General Assembly, India's Prime Minister reiterated our proposal for a nuclear weapons convention prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and providing for their complete elimination within a specified time frame (see A/63/PV.9). Our policy is consistent with the highest priority accorded to the goal of nuclear disarmament that is enshrined in the Final Document of the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament (resolution S-10/2) and in the Rajiv Gandhi Action Plan of 1988. The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirmed the same objectives during its July summit at Sharm el-Sheikh this year. We believe that just as it is possible to prohibit chemical and biological weapons through nondiscriminatory and global international conventions, not only is the achievement of nondiscriminatory, global nuclear disarmament possible, but global security would be enhanced by a nuclear-weapon-free world. Such a vision brings together principle and pragmatism. India welcomes the active debate among scholars and statesmen on nuclear disarmament and a number of initiatives launched to add new life to the global disarmament agenda, including by the Secretary-General in October 2008. There are some encouraging signs, including the declared intention of the United States and Russia to negotiate further cuts in their nuclear arsenals, as well as the willingness of the United States, as indicated in President Obama's statement in Prague in April this year, to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in its national security strategy. The goal of nuclear disarmament can be achieved through a step-by-step process underwritten by a universal commitment to achieve the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are mutually reinforcing processes, but the overall goal of nuclear disarmament should not be held hostage to nuclear non-proliferation. At the same time, we must ensure that nonproliferation objectives are achieved through concerted and cooperative international efforts. Expansion of nuclear energy, which is vital to ensure global energy security and to combat climate change, must be ensured in a manner that does not enhance proliferation risks. To take forward the global debate on nuclear disarmament, India has suggested the following measures: reaffirmation of the unequivocal commitment of all nuclear-weapon States to the goal of the complete elimination of nuclear weapons; reduction of the salience of nuclear weapons in security doctrines; taking into account the global reach and menace of nuclear weapons, the adoption of measures by nuclear-weapon States to reduce nuclear danger, including the risks of accidental nuclear war, dealerting of nuclear weapons to prevent unintentional and accidental use of nuclear weapons; the negotiation of a global agreement among nuclear-weapon States on a no-first-use of nuclear weapons; the negotiation of a universal and legally binding agreement on the non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States; the negotiation of a convention on the complete prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons; and the negotiation of a nuclear weapons convention prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and on their destruction, leading to the global, non-discriminatory and verifiable elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified time frame. During its 2009 annual session, the Conference on Disarmament reached consensus on a programme of work, an important milestone after more than a decade of impasse. We share the disappointment that the Conference was thereafter unable to get down to substantive work. As the single multilateral negotiating forum on disarmament the Conference on Disarmament bears a responsibility meaningfully to respond to the international community's expectations in the disarmament field, particularly on the priority issue of nuclear disarmament. India is committed to participating constructively in the fissile material cut-off treaty (FMCT) negotiations in the Conference as part of its programme of work. On 13 August 2006, our Prime Minister stated that India was willing to join only a non-discriminatory, multilaterally negotiated and internationally verifiable FMCT as and when it is concluded in the Conference on Disarmament, provided our security interests are fully addressed. India is a nuclear-weapon State and a responsible member of the world community and would approach these negotiations as such. India continues to attach importance to addressing widespread international demands for the conclusion of an agreement on effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. As part of its minimum nuclear deterrent, India has espoused the policy of no-first-use and non-use against non-nuclear-weapon States and is prepared to convert these undertakings into multilateral legal arrangements. India is committed to maintaining its voluntary, unilateral moratorium on nuclear testing. India would support continuing international efforts to strengthen the international legal framework to ensure the safety and security of space assets and to prevent the weaponization of outer space. Issues relating to the possession and use of missiles should be addressed in a sustainable and comprehensive manner through a global process based on the principle of equal and legitimate security. India attaches importance to the continuing role of the United Nations in addressing conventional arms control, including the regulation of small arms and light weapons in view of the nexus between small arms proliferation and terrorism. We remain strongly committed to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons process as being vitally important in strengthening the regulation of armed conflict and international humanitarian law. India has ratified all of the five protocols. It will be India's honour to chair the annual meeting of the States parties to Protocol V in November this year. Last year, India welcomed the opening of the new United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, in Kathmandu. India will extend all possible support for the Kathmandu Centre to fulfil its mandate. As in previous years, India seeks the support of the First Committee for the following three draft resolutions: "Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons"; "Reducing nuclear danger"; and "Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction". We will be making more detailed statements to introduce these draft resolutions during the time allocated for that purpose. We would like to assure you, Mr. Chairman, of our full support in ensuring the success of this year's deliberations. Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): My delegation and I express warm congratulations to you, Sir -- and through you to the entire Bureau of the First Committee for the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly -- on your well-deserved election. Please rest assured that you have our full cooperation and support as you steer the deliberations of this Committee to a successful conclusion. We wish to associate ourselves with the statements delivered by Nigeria on behalf of the African Group and Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We also wish to reaffirm Tanzania's commitment to multilateralism through the First Committee as a United Nations forum for deliberations and decisions in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation. We support and welcome General Assembly resolution 63/50 of 2008 and previous relevant resolutions on this subject. To complement this leading role of the United Nations, Tanzania also commends all initiatives undertaken by regional and subregional organizations as well as Member States in partnership with the international community to develop various instruments and practical measures on the disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, including denying terrorist groups the capacity to develop, acquire and use weapons of mass destruction. We welcome the current positive momentum towards more nuclear arms reductions and efforts on nuclear non-proliferation by the leading nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States. This is an encouraging and most welcome trend which needs to be sustained in all forums, both bilateral and multilateral, such as the resumption of the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. We welcome the convening of the Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) in September 2009. We are encouraged by the adoption of the Final Declaration by consensus and are particularly encouraged by the exemplary commitment and leadership demonstrated by the current United States Administration in pursuing a step-by-step approach to persuade the United States Congress to ratify the Treaty. We believe that such ratification would go a long way in encouraging other States, which have not yet signed or ratified the Treaty, to do so. In that spirit, the community of nations will go a long way in advancing sustainable nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Our efforts should also be demonstrated through the ratification of the nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties. In Africa, in July this year, we celebrated the entering into force of the Treaty of Pelindaba on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. We believe that this historical achievement will act as a catalyst to achieve the remaining ratifications in our continent and beyond. It is a chilling reminder to recall that the uranium that was used in the first atomic bombs that were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki was imported from Africa. Africa has the largest proven deposits of uranium and nuclear-related strategic minerals in the world. Africa, however, in abiding by all international and regional instruments to prevent nuclear proliferation, is showing by example by working transparently with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in safeguarding the exploitation, trade and peaceful uses of nuclear materials and technology. In this regard, we call for the strengthening of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa to enable it to provide more expert knowledge to African States on nuclear and conventional disarmament in Africa. The Centre should also be more proactive in expanding its network and partnership with various civil society organizations in the various subregions of Africa in promoting peace and disarmament initiatives on the African continent. In the same vein, we welcome the entry into force of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia in March 2009. We believe that these zones play a pivotal role in promoting international peace and security in the regions concerned and the international community as a whole. It is in this light that we encourage undertaking similar efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East and on the Korean peninsula. We live in a world that is facing a mounting energy crisis. Countries, particularly in the developing world, are increasingly searching for reliable and green sources of energy. Nuclear energy is one of the promising solutions to this energy crisis. It is compellingly logical that more countries are seeking and willing to continue to pursue this technology in the foreseeable future. It is imperative that our collective commitment to nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament does not undermine the inalienable right of developing countries to engage in research, production and use of nuclear energy and technology for peaceful purposes. We therefore need to ensure internationally safeguarded access to fissile material for peaceful scientific uses in accordance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and safeguards by IAEA. Africa in general, and its Great Lakes region in particular, are deeply concerned by the continuing proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which are a real threat to security and human rights and have been weapons of mass atrocities in the region. Small arms and light weapons fuel conflicts and instability, displace civilians and undermine the provision of humanitarian assistance to victims. They also undermine peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict situations and contribute to transborder crimes and terrorism. Tanzania supports international efforts, particularly the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. We shall continue to support efforts to reach expeditiously an arms trade treaty that will regulate the trade in arms and ammunition and prevent their illicit circulation. We also confirm our commitment to regional efforts under the Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons (RECSA). We call on the international community to support our regional non-proliferation and disarmament efforts in Africa through the activities and initiatives of that institution. In conclusion, I should also like to touch briefly on the importance of political will in the adherence of States to international instruments in the area of nonproliferation and disarmament. The adoption of conventions and binding resolutions, without the political will and commitment of individual States to implement their obligations in letter and spirit, is a futile exercise. Tanzania is party to several international instruments on disarmament and non-proliferation, including the NPT, the CTBT, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of AntiPersonnel Mines and on Their Destruction and the Treaty of Pelindaba. We are in the process of ratifying the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and the Convention on Cluster Munitions. Where required, we have established national authorities and focal points and are in the process of enacting ground-breaking legislation that will cater for categories of weapons of mass destruction. Tanzania looks forward to the successful NPT Review Conference next year following the disappointing outcome of the Review Conference in 2005. The Chairperson (spoke in Spanish): I call on the observer of the Observer State of the Holy See. Archbishop Migliore (Holy See): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the chairmanship of this session of the First Committee. My delegation assures you of its full support in your endeavours. Civil society, international humanitarian organizations, ordinary individuals, and especially those suffering and struggling because of armed conflicts and violence, expect from us tangible and convincing results in the hope of seeing a world free of nuclear weapons, with strict controls over the arms trade, which in our day is strongly embedded in illicit markets and causing serious damage to humanity. They want to see a world where education, food, health care and clean water are more accessible than illicit arms. Given that we are two thirds of the way to the Millennium Development Goals, many wonder whether the international community will ever achieve these goals when, for example, military expenditure for 2008 increased by 4 per cent and amounted to some $1.464 billion -- and this in the year of the most acute economic crisis. The world is watching while once again we are entering into discussions on disarmament issues. Can ordinary people expect more progressive, concrete and courageous changes from their leaders? The answer is in our hands and will show the determination of the international community to pursue world peace and security, based on the promotion of integral human development. Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations declares that excessive spending on arms is a diversion from human and economic resources. The main role of the disarmament machinery is to reduce military expenditures through arms control and disarmament so that the international community can progressively deweaponize security. What alternatives are there to such excessive military spending that at the same time do not lower security? One is to strengthen multilateralism. There are positive signs that disarmament is returning to the multilateral agenda as was seen also in the 24 September Security Council summit on nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament (see S/PV.6191). All things considered, a new political climate and a new momentum on the part of major players in disarmament have been discerned and recognized: the positive outcome of the last session of the Preparatory Committee for next year's Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the adoption of a new Convention on Cluster Munitions; the renewed commitments to achieve a mine-free world; many initiatives undertaken by Governments, international organizations, nongovernmental organizations and civil society organizations in promoting disarmament in all its aspects; and constructive and promising exchanges in the process towards an arms trade treaty. All these are encouraging achievements. From that perspective, my delegation reiterates the Holy See's commitment to advancing the work on an arms trade treaty as a legally binding instrument on the import, export and transfer of arms. Weapons cannot be considered like any other good exchanged on the global, regional or national market. Their excessive stockpiling or indiscriminate trading, especially to conflict-affected areas, cannot by any means be morally justified. In a globalized world, it is a given that we need to regulate trade, the financial system, and the interconnected economy. The same ought to be the case for the arms trade. With the adoption of Security Council resolution 1887 (2009), nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation are at the centre of the international debate on peace and security. My delegation commends national policies and bilateral agreements aimed at reducing nuclear arsenals and looks forward to progress being made in seriously addressing issues related to strategic and tactical nuclear arms, as well as their means of delivery. This, however, should not divert our attention from many long-standing yet unresolved issues. After 13 years the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has not yet entered into force, lacking only nine ratifications, while we continue to witness nuclear tests. Persistent obstacles hamper negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty. Although the Conference on Disarmament broke the gridlock on its programme of work for the first time in 12 years, it failed to advance because of procedural disagreement. The outcome of the last session of the Disarmament Commission was not much better. Some major players choose to remain outside the international instruments to ban anti-personnel landmines and cluster munitions, which are significant humanitarian achievements. A few States have yet to join the Chemical Weapons Convention. An international Programme of Action to stem the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons still faces many challenges in achieving its goals. And the international community lacks multilateral legal norms concerning missiles. Many disarmament issues await definitive solutions. As a new disarmament cycle has just begun, let us join efforts and good will so that international security is provided with well-functioning multilateral organisms. Mr. Grinius (Canada): I am distributing the full text of the Canadian statement. My intervention will be an abridged version, Sir, keeping to your time limits, with which I agree. (spoke in French) On behalf of the Canadian delegation, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption of your role as Chairperson of this Committee. Rest assured that Canada, as always, is ready to contribute to ensuring a fruitful and productive session. The world is in economic turmoil and going through a period of profound and rapid change. Major issues facing us, including the economy, terrorism, peace and security, climate change, the promotion of democracy, human rights and the rule of law, cannot be solved by countries on their own. Without peace and security, it is that much more difficult to improve governance, make economic progress or address climate change. Clearly, solutions to these issues must be achieved on the basis of a collective vision, purpose and effort. For Canada, the importance of the United Nations disarmament machinery in contributing to peace and security has therefore never been greater. It is now our joint responsibility to make this machinery function effectively. Progress in nuclear disarmament requires, first, that we work to prevent nuclear weapons from spreading and reduce nuclear arsenals to the lowest levels possible with a view to eliminating them altogether; secondly, that we ban all nuclear-weapon test explosions to prohibit the last step that must be taken in a nuclear-weapon development programme; and thirdly, that we ban the production of fissile material to turn off the tap of the substances required to manufacture nuclear weapons. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and a possible fissile material cut-off treaty are the three key mutually supporting instruments that address these steps. If we wish to make serious progress on these three fundamental challenges, we need to make more effective use of the United Nations disarmament machinery and support those international organizations that have been established to implement existing agreements, such as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization. (spoke in English) The recent unanimous adoption of Security Council resolution 1887 (2009) reflects clearly the renewed emphasis being placed on strengthening nonproliferation and disarmament efforts by the international community. It is encouraging to note, in particular, the recent activities of the nuclear-weapon States in this regard. United States President Obama and British Prime Minister Brown have each pledged to work towards a world free of all nuclear weapons. Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov spoke eloquently to these issues in the Conference on Disarmament during the 2008 session. Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi also delivered a statement in the Conference on Disarmament in August in which he stated China's commitment to pursuing a world free of nuclear weapons. French President Sarkozy, on behalf of the European Union, put forward a comprehensive plan for nuclear disarmament last year. Canada ascribes particular importance to strong coordination and cooperation among the nuclear-weapon States in the effort to advance the nuclear arms control agenda. It is important to note that the efforts by States that possess nuclear weapons must be reinforced by leadership and action by all members of the international community in advancing our collective disarmament and non-proliferation goals. We applaud those States and organizations that have shown such leadership -- for example, the joint initiative of Australia and Japan to set up the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, the International Panel on Fissile Materials and those States that have implemented the Additional Protocol with IAEA. Canada for its part continues to be at the forefront of efforts to combat terrorism and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament regime. Indeed, as the Group of Eight (G-8) President for 2010, we intend to undertake diplomatic advocacy initiatives to continue advancing those efforts. Canada has been a committed participant in the G-8 Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation Security Initiative. We have promoted the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004). We have been an active participant in the meetings leading up to next year's NPT Review Conference, including through the introduction of a working paper on strengthening the NPT's architecture to be more responsive and effective. We have been at the forefront of efforts to achieve the entry into force of the CTBT in meetings in both Vienna and New York and through domestic implementation of the Treaty. Also, Canada has been a strong supporter of the commencement of negotiations on a verifiable fissile material cut-off treaty in the Conference on Disarmament and we intend to introduce a draft resolution in the First Committee to that effect. Let me turn my attention to the security challenges confronting us in our activities associated with outer space. The Outer Space Treaty of 1967 is our foundation document. It grants States freedom to use outer space for peaceful purposes without harmful interference. The Treaty also provides us assurances that we may use this domain for legitimate self-defence purposes. However, these freedoms are not unlimited and the Outer Space Treaty rightly bans the placement of weapons of mass destruction in space. Since then, aerospace technologies have advanced to the point where conventional weapons on Earth are capable of destroying satellites in orbit. Orbital conventional weapons could also be developed to attack targets on Earth or engage space objects in transit above the Earth. It has become all too apparent during the past three years that the space debris produced by these types of weapons could deny us the very economic, scientific and security benefits we all need to function as a prosperous and secure global community. Canada therefore believes that now is the time to start work on the security guarantees that we would all share by banning the placement of weapons in outer space, prohibiting the testing and use of weapons on satellites so as to damage or destroy them and banning the use of satellites themselves as weapons. The forum in which this work should be undertaken is the Conference on Disarmament. To this end, I wish to reiterate Canada's hope that the programme of work that includes a discussion mandate on space security issues can be adopted again in 2010 and implemented fully. I wish now to move on to the issue of other weapons of mass destruction. I have appreciated the ongoing support from delegations during my tenure as Chair for the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention in 2009. Disease outbreaks, whether natural or deliberate, respect no geographic borders and can cause catastrophic harm. Advances in biotechnology and the rise of terrorism also create new challenges to our collective security. That was the impetus for this year's intersessional theme of international assistance and cooperation on disease surveillance so that we may strengthen the Convention and enhance the use of biology for peaceful purposes. With respect to the impact of conventional weapons, the illicit trade and misuse of small arms and light weapons continues to have a devastating impact on the lives of civilians throughout the world. Canada continues to be seized by the urgency of addressing the problem while at the same time respecting the legitimate interests of lawful firearms producers, exporters, retailers and owners. Canada looks forward to the 2010 Biennial Meeting of States and the 2011 Meeting of Experts. Canada continues to support efforts towards the negotiation of a comprehensive, legally binding arms trade treaty. Important movement has been made over the past three years towards such a treaty. The aim of an arms trade treaty should be to help prevent the diversion of conventional arms to the illicit market and their misuse, consistent with the obligations of States under international law. At the same time, an arms trade treaty must recognize that States have the right to meet their own defence and security needs. An arms trade treaty should also recognize that there is a legitimate, legal trade in firearms for certain civilian uses and it should not impose restrictions on how arms may be acquired, held or used within a State. The humanitarian and development impact on civilians caused by explosive munitions also remains a major concern. We must take advantage of any possible synergies between the Anti-Personnel Landmine Convention (Ottawa Convention), Protocol V of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, and the Convention on Cluster Munitions, properly to alleviate the threat to civilians. Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the delegation of the United Arab Emirates, on your election as Chairman of this important Committee. The sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly is taking place as we are witnessing a number of positive developments and encouraging initiatives in the area of disarmament, most notably the agreement reached on a programme of work at the Conference on Disarmament in May. That decision reversed the negative trend that the Conference had been experiencing for more than a decade. Other positive developments include the joint understanding reached between the Governments of the United States and the Russian Federation in July to begin negotiations to renew the Strategic Arms Reductions Treaty. That understanding was also reflected in the historic addresses delivered by President Barack Obama in the General Assembly (see A/64/PV.3) and the Security Council (see S/PV.6191) in September. Those statements contained a firm commitment and assurances that the United States intended to pursue a new approach to reducing existing strategic nuclear arsenals in order to reduce the risk and threat they pose to the peoples of the world and the future of humanity. The United Arab Emirates welcomes these positive developments. Further, we welcome the adoption by the Security Council at the September summit meeting of resolution 1887 (2009). That resolution will reinforce the many resolutions that the General Assembly has adopted on the issue, as well as the resolutions and decisions adopted by the conferences of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which are aimed at creating a world free from weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons. Two initiatives recently announced by President Obama are also reasons for optimism: to hold in April 2010 an international summit on securing vulnerable nuclear materials; and to seek agreement with the Russian Federation on reducing each side's nuclear warheads and delivery systems. We welcome those commitments but at the same time would like to stress that these important efforts and initiatives cannot be a substitute for actual reductions in nuclear weapons by the two parties concerned, and that these reductions should be carried out in a fully transparent manner with the ultimate goal of the total elimination of those weapons. That process will inevitably contribute to strengthening multilateral cooperation in this area and will encourage non-nuclear-weapon States to abandon their feverish pursuit to acquire these dangerous weapons. It will also strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime, which is emerging from decades of a security climate of tension, heightened military confrontation and an arms race. We therefore call upon all States, particularly the nuclear-weapon States, to demonstrate the necessary flexibility and political will to strengthen the principle of multilateralism in their current negotiations on disarmament, in particular in their work towards the 2010 NPT Review Conference, the convening of which will coincide with the fortieth anniversary of the Treaty's entry into force. In that context, we should like to emphasize the 13 practical steps adopted at the 2000 Review Conference of the Treaty, as well as other relevant resolutions whose goal is the prevention of vertical and horizontal proliferation. Also in the same context, we should like to emphasize that those discussions must be aimed at the following objectives. The first is to achieve tangible progress in the areas of nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation in all its aspects. This requires methodological and comprehensive agreement among all nuclear-weapon States on eliminating their strategic military arsenals within a specified time frame. The second is to initiate serious negotiations without preconditions that would ultimately lead to an international agreement on a fissile material treaty. The third is to support ongoing efforts to bring the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty into force as soon as possible and to promote the implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. The fourth and final objective is to strengthen efforts aimed at developing an unconditional and legally binding instrument to guarantee non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, while ensuring the inalienable right of States to conduct research on the production and use of nuclear energy solely for peaceful and development purposes. That would entail full cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), without discrimination, and in accordance with article III of the NPT. With regard to the issue of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, we would like to draw attention to a recent law adopted by the United Arab Emirates, underscoring the peaceful nature of the country's nuclear programme, which will become operational in 2017. In order to ensure the nuclear programme's safe and peaceful implementation, particularly in the areas of power generation and the development of medical and industrial services, it will be implemented with international support and under the supervision of IAEA. It will also be carried out in a transparent manner that does not harm the environment and that ensures public safety. This programme, therefore, promises to be a highly beneficial project and an optimal model for the exploitation of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Security is a legitimate right of all States and peoples of the world, without exception. Thus, efforts to ensure security should not be limited to addressing strategic arms, but also must address the strengthening of international cooperative mechanisms in other equally vital areas, such as reducing armed violence, the illicit trade in arms, including small arms and light weapons, and the need to prevent dangerous or sensitive materials from falling into the hands of irresponsible or criminal groups. Efforts must also include enhancing cooperation in the areas of peacekeeping and preventive diplomacy. The United Arab Emirates has always pursued balanced and consistent internal and external policies, based on mutual cooperation with all countries, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, particularly those relating to the promotion of mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and non-intervention in internal affairs, and in support of justice and international stability and peace. The United Arab Emirates reaffirms that peace and stability in the Middle East and the Arab Gulf cannot be achieved as long as occupation policies continue, military confrontations persist and nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction are pursued. That can only lead to even more dangerous security and strategic imbalances in the region. We thus reaffirm that the achievement of regional and international security and stability requires the promotion of dialogue and the peaceful resolution of regional disputes, as well as the prioritizing of the public interest in the pursuit of development, security and stability for all. There is also a need to reach agreement on how to proceed with the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones and zones free of all weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and in other parts of the world. In that connection, we call upon the international community to exert pressure on Israel to accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to subject all its nuclear facilities to the supervision of IAEA. We call for respect for the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the resolution on the Middle East adopted at the NPT Review and Extension Conference in 1995. Given the impact on the peace process and on the security and stability of the peoples of the region, we also call upon all concerned parties to stop providing scientific, technical and financial assistance that can be used in the development of Israeli nuclear armaments. As for the nuclear programme of Iran, we look forward to the continuation of negotiations between the West and the Islamic Republic of Iran. We hope that a comprehensive peaceful settlement of this issue will be reached soon. We also call upon Iran to cooperate with IAEA and the Security Council in this regard, for the maintenance of the security and stability of the peoples of the region. Mr. Del Campo (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to add our voice to those of other delegations in expressing our congratulations to you, Sir, and wishing you every success in chairing the First Committee. We also extend congratulations to the other members of the Bureau. We are quite certain that with you at the helm and with the cooperation of all States our meetings will have a positive outcome. The development of the discussions in the First Committee comes at a time when the international situation is favourable to the cause of disarmament and non-proliferation. A series of events well known to everybody and indeed indicated by previous speakers has come together to provide a favourable backdrop to enable us to make progress in tackling the very serious challenges facing us. Chile's commitment to international peace and security is based on its firm commitment to both the letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. Consequently, we favour a multilateral cooperative approach when it comes to any threat to security. We also believe that our development strategy, based on an open and outward-looking economy, requires international peace and security. As a responsible member of the international community, Chile is well prepared to make its contribution to collective security endeavours. Our country accordingly participates in peacekeeping operations established by Security Council resolutions in Haiti, Cyprus and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Chile is a party to the major treaties on disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control and the various conventions and instruments in those areas, including the recent Oslo Convention prohibiting the production and use of cluster munitions. Indeed, we actively support all mechanisms and multilateral forums for disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. We shall certainly play an active part in the 2010 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We believe that this instrument is the cornerstone of a multilateral non-proliferation regime. Chile believes in a balanced approach to all the provisions in the Treaty. We believe that this balance is a sine qua non to ensure the legitimacy and political commitment inherent in this agreement. We acknowledge the progress made by the United States and Russia since 1990, to make bilaterally agreed reductions in their nuclear weapons and related means of delivery. We also welcome the beginning of bilateral negotiations with regard to the START-I Treaty. Multilaterally, we welcome the progress made in the Conference on Disarmament and we trust that further progress will be made in the implementation of its programme of work in 2010. We would also like to highlight the recent Security Council summit on nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament (see S/PV.6191) and the redoubled emphasis against nuclear weapons in the world. We trust that this favourable environment will lead to cooperation among all nuclear-weapon States to take practical and concrete measures to bring about nuclear disarmament. Chile defends the right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy without discrimination through the exchange of scientific material and information and regular multilateral cooperation. However, this right must go only to those States that entirely fulfil their non-proliferation obligations pursuant to the NPT. Chile is prepared to lend its support to the endeavours of the international community to make progress on next year's NPT Review Conference. A positive outcome will be vital to save the nonproliferation system from collapse. Nuclear proliferation is a disastrous threat to all regions. Preventing it requires a credible commitment by nuclear Powers pursuant to article VI of the NPT. A commitment here will bolster the political credibility of multilateral efforts to contain those States where there is a risk of nuclear proliferation. We welcome the endeavours made by the United States Government to lend momentum to multilateralism with regard to disarmament and nonproliferation issues. It is important to move to the ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and we trust that such a step will create a virtuous circle for the benefit of overall disarmament. This requires cooperation and flexibility from all concerned, discarding any rigidity that might have hampered negotiations on a treaty to restrict the use of fissile material for weapons purposes and the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, among other endeavours to bring about disarmament and curb proliferation. Chile, and the Latin American and Caribbean States, are in an area free of nuclear weapons, and in a zone of peace. The 1967 Treaty of Tlatelolco was the first to establish a regional nuclear-weapon-free zone. We welcome the entry into force of the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon Free Zone in Central Asia and the Treaty of Pelindaba, which have established nuclear-weapon-free zones in Central Asia and Africa. We firmly believe that creating nuclear-weapon-free zones reinforces international and regional security, simultaneously with the non-proliferation regime, and contributes to nuclear disarmament. Establishing such areas and fulfilling and observing related agreements will mean that a considerable area of the world will be free of nuclear weapons. Chile is coordinating the group of focal points of nuclear-weapon-free zones for the organization of the second Conference of States Parties and Signatories of Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones. This gathering, which was mandated by the first Conference held in Mexico in 2005, further confirms the need for joint efforts to bring about disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and is aimed at establishing even closer cooperation among the countries of the zones. We firmly believe in multilateralism and that currently the United Nations is the most appropriate forum in which to work. There is a close link between nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and the establishment and promotion of new nuclear-weapon-free zones. These are a significant tool in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and reducing the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons. They also serve to foster a climate of mutual trust, which again will help on this count. The establishment of such zones in other parts of the world is a goal of the international community, and we believe that the holding of such a conference will contribute to highlighting the subject and can provide a reference point and benchmark for other regions. The second Conference of nuclear-weapon-free zones, scheduled to be held on the eve of the NPT Review Conference, will be a good complement to the NPT. On behalf of the focal points, we will be submitting a draft resolution in that regard and urge all delegations to lend their support to it. Lastly, we call upon delegations to give favourable consideration to the holding of a fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. Such special sessions, first held 30 years ago, have been of great use in creating the disarmament machinery we know today. Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me at the outset congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the chairmanship of the Committee and wish you success in guiding our deliberations. My delegation would like to associate itself with the statement made by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. Since last year's session of the Committee, some developments have taken place in the area of disarmament. The most notable one has been the heightened attention of the international community to the question of nuclear disarmament. If accompanied by sincere political will, real change in past policies, understanding the new dynamics and realities of today's world, and improvements in the relations of nations, this significant development would hold out the promise of a return to genuine multilateralism and respect for disarmament obligations and, it is hoped, the beginning of a positive trend in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation. The First Committee provides a good opportunity to contribute to the promotion of the current atmosphere, which should be seized. We look forward to cooperating to this end with other delegations during this session of the Committee. The Islamic Republic of Iran views nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation in all its aspects as essential components of international security. Threats stemming from the existence of weapons of mass destruction, in particular the thousands of nuclear warheads in the stockpiles of nuclear-weapon States, failure in the implementation of disarmament obligations, and horizontal and vertical proliferation have deep effects on international security. This underscores the importance of cooperative endeavours by all nations, in particular nuclear-weapon States, to revitalize multilateral disarmament efforts. The lofty goal of a world free from weapons of mass destruction deserves the utmost attention in our discussions in the Committee. As we know from the bitter experiences of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the chemical attacks by the Saddam regime against the Iranians and the people of Halabche in Iraq, the consequences of the use of weapons of mass destruction are horrible and long-term. To achieve the goal of a world free from such inhumane weapons, persistent and sustained collective efforts are required by all nations, in particular possessor States. The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a victim of weapons of mass destruction in recent history, is firmly committed to pursuing the realization of a world free from weapons of mass destruction, not only in words, but also by the full implementation of the three major legal instruments banning weapons of mass destruction, namely the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Biological Weapons Convention and the Chemical Weapons Convention, and has taken concrete steps in support of its commitment. The adoption of many resolutions in the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament is a clear manifestation that this objective has the utmost priority on the agenda of the international community. That is because nuclear weapons are unique as the most destructive weapons ever produced. Existing nuclear arsenals are capable of destroying our civilization and all life on Earth. With the exception of a few people in the nuclear-weapon States, nobody else can deny the fact that the continued existence and proliferation of nuclear weapons by the nuclear Powers pose the greatest threat to the security of humanity. In order to rid the world of the threat of nuclear weapons, various efforts have been pursued by the international community from the earliest days of the United Nations to the present time. Regrettably, some nuclear-weapon States have not demonstrated a genuine will to accomplish the disarmament part of the NPT bargain and full compliance with their obligations. Despite their unequivocal legal undertakings at the 2000 NPT Review Conference, nuclear-weapon States have not moved towards the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals and, on the contrary, have continued to develop and modernize their nuclear weapons. That is a serious case of noncompliance which, if it remains unaddressed, will cause a grave disservice to the objectives and principles of the NPT. If the NPT is to continue its role of promoting international peace and security, it is necessary that the nuclear-weapon States prove that they are serious about their responsibility and commitment fully to implement the provisions of article VI of the NPT and the decisions and resolution of the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and agreements of the 2000 Review Conference. Regrettably, the nuclear-weapon States, the permanent members of the Security Council, missed an opportunity at the 24 September summit meeting (see S/PV.6191) to reaffirm their commitment to the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals. They adopted resolution 1887 (2009), which went beyond the provisions of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Statute and the NPT and introduced certain provisions that are in clear contradiction of the letter of the NPT. Since that resolution partly distorted the language of article VI of the NPT, legally speaking, it cannot and must not be referred to in any future NPT meetings. We are not able to support the reference to this legally flawed resolution in First Committee resolutions. The forthcoming NPT Review Conference in 2010 is a good opportunity for some nuclear-weapon States to turn the page and prove they take their responsibility seriously in addressing the concerns of the international community with respect to their nuclear weapons. This is possible by strengthening nuclear disarmament measures and adopting a plan of action for total elimination within a specified time frame. In connection with the work ahead of us, I should like to bring to the attention of delegations that the Islamic Republic of Iran will present to the First Committee a draft resolution entitled "Follow-up to nuclear disarmament obligations agreed to at the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons". The General Assembly has adopted similar resolutions since their introduction in 2005 with the overwhelming support of Member States. This year will be a test to show how real the claims for change are. The international community for a long time has made clear its expectation by adopting resolutions at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, the General Assembly and the IAEA that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East would greatly enhance international peace and security. Yet, a regime that has flouted all international instruments on weapons of mass destruction continues to be the only impediment to realizing such a zone in the Middle East due to its refusal to submit itself to the global demand of acceding to the NPT as well as its continued clandestine nuclear-weapons programme and operation of unsafeguarded nuclear facilities. This Zionist regime has repeatedly attacked and openly threatened to attack other countries in the region. It is indisputable that nuclear weapons in the hands of such a regime with a dark catalogue of crimes, occupation and aggression, pose a uniquely grave threat to regional and international peace and security. The 1995 resolution on the Middle East, which is related to both the implementation and the universality of the Treaty, should, therefore, be a main focus of the upcoming Review Conference. The inalienable right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy and technology is one of the basic foundations of the NPT. Iran, as a party to the NPT, is determined to exercise its inalienable right to the peaceful use of nuclear technology, including a fuel cycle, in full conformity with the provisions of the Treaty. This policy is based on long-term planning to meet the growing energy needs of the country. By presenting its package of proposals for comprehensive and constructive negotiations to the Permanent Five plus one (P5+1) group in September 2009, Iran has already demonstrated its firm determination to negotiate, aimed at creating a framework for cooperative relationships. After the constructive meeting in Geneva, which was a positive step forward, it is now up to the other parties to change their past policies to demonstrate their goodwill. Affected by the international security climate, the Conference on Disarmament was deadlocked for the past decade. We have supported the reactivation of the Conference, based on a balanced and comprehensive programme of work responsive to the priorities of all member States. The recent momentum created in the Conference can only be maintained if we accommodate the concerns of all member States. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the Islamic Republic of Iran, as a victim of weapons of mass destruction, together with other peace-loving nations, spares no effort in pursuing a world free from inhuman and horrible weapons of mass destruction. Ms. Diallo (Mali) (spoke in French): Since this is the first time that I am taking the floor in the Committee, I should like at the outset of my remarks to extend to you, Sir, the heartfelt congratulations of the delegation of Mali on your election to preside over the First Committee. I also wish to congratulate the other members of the Bureau. I should also like to pay a deeply felt tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Marco Antonio Suazo of Honduras, and his team for having skilfully guided the work of the Committee last session. The delegation of Mali associates itself with the statement made by Nigeria on behalf of the States of Africa and with the statement made by Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. Therefore, my statement will focus on the question of small arms and light weapons. The delegation of Mali, on behalf of the members of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), would like to take this opportunity to extend its sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to all our other bilateral and multilateral partners, for their actions in favour of assistance to States to halt the illicit circulation and stockpiling of small arms and light weapons. There can be no doubt that peace and security must be managed in a preventive fashion. Conflict prevention and security guarantees are an ongoing concern for the highest authorities in Mali and other African States. Given the magnitude of the phenomenon of the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons, as well as the tragic consequences that flow from them, initiatives have been taken at the global, regional, subregional and national levels to deal with them. Mali was one of the very first countries to establish a national commission to combat the spread of small arms and light weapons, created by Decree No. 96-304/P-RM of 14 November 1996, following the "Flame of Peace" ceremony on 27 March 1996, which marked the end of the armed rebellion in the northern region of the country. Later, specific national legislation in this area was strengthened by the adoption on 12 November 2004 of a new law governing firearms and munitions in accordance with the 2001 Programme of Action and 2000 Declaration of Bamako, followed on 8 July 2008 by the law on terrorism. At the subregional level, ECOWAS has made the fight against the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons a major plank of its security policy. Indeed, as a result of an initiative put forward by Mali, which had the support of neighbouring countries and ECOWAS, the Programme for Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development which began in 1999 was officially replaced on 6 June 2006 by the ECOWAS Small Arms Control Programme. This community programme, based in Bamako, is entrusted with controlling the trafficking in small arms and light weapons, strengthening the capacity of national commissions on small arms and providing technical assistance to the ECOWAS Secretariat in this field. It is in this context that ECOWAS members decided to transform the Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons into a binding legal instrument. Thus, on 14 June 2006 in Abuja, the heads of State or Government adopted the ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition, and Other Related Materials. This Convention, which establishes the principle of a ban on transfers of weapons, marks great progress in our community space and a decisive stage in combating the spread of small arms and light weapons. Faithful to its commitment to continue this fight, together with the countries of the region, Mali, on behalf of ECOWAS, will be submitting a draft resolution entitled "Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons and collecting them" under the Committee's agenda item 96 (u). Such draft resolutions have always been adopted without a vote. During the sixty-third session, a similar resolution was adopted as resolution 63/66. The security situation in the Sahelo-Saharan region has recently changed because of the allegiance of certain armed bands to the shadowy Al-Qaida. Given the situation, the Government of Mali has decided to convene a summit conference on security and development in the region, which will be held before the end of the year, in Bamako. That conference will allow States of the region to provide specific responses to the problems of insecurity, cross-border banditry, terrorism, and trafficking of all types, including in drugs, weapons and human beings. In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm the full readiness of my delegation to make its modest contribution to the success of our work. Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset and on behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, may I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the chairmanship of the First Committee of the General Assembly. Our warm congratulations also go to the other members of the Bureau. My delegation wishes you a successful outcome. The Vietnamese delegation fully associates itself with the statement made by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the NonAligned Movement and the statement made by the representative of Myanmar on behalf of the Association of South-East Asian Nations at the opening meetings of the Committee. Our work this year takes place against the backdrop of some encouraging developments in the field of disarmament. My delegation shares the sense of optimism expressed by many delegations over the prospects for general and complete disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament in particular. The Conference on Disarmament has agreed on a programme of work after years of stalemate. The Russian Federation and the United States of America have made renewed commitments in their bilateral negotiations to conclude a new instrument to replace the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with deeper reductions of their respective nuclear arsenals. The Security Council recently convened a summit meeting (see S/PV.6191) and unanimously adopted its resolution 1887 (2009). That resolution in our view constitutes comprehensive action on nuclear issues. It reaffirms the need for all Member States to fulfil their obligations in relation to arms control and disarmament and to prevent the proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction. We also witnessed a strong emphasis on the issues of disarmament and non-proliferation in the general debate at this session of the General Assembly. The existence of nuclear weapons will always pose the serious threat of nuclear disaster. We have argued for many years that the only absolute guarantee against nuclear catastrophe is the complete elimination of these weapons. In this connection, we wish to reiterate our strong support for the convening of an international conference to identify ways and means to free our world from all nuclear weapons in a specific time frame. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is surely the cornerstone of the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime. We underscore the importance of a full and non-selective implementation of the Treaty's three pillars, which aim at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons technology, promoting cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and achieving the goal of nuclear disarmament. Nuclear-weapon States should undertake concrete steps to implement the package agreed at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and reaffirmed at the 2000 NPT Review Conference. My delegation further stresses the inalienable right of States to develop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in conformity with the provisions of the NPT. We attach particular significance to the upcoming 2010 NPT Review Conference. We believe this event will offer an opportunity for member States to review progress in implementing the Treaty's provisions, to renew their commitments to the principles and purposes of the Treaty, and to agree upon means and measures to strengthen the Treaty in all its aspects. Viet Nam reaffirms its unswerving support for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty which prohibits all nuclear testing and the modernization of existing nuclear weapons as well as the development of new sophisticated nuclear weapons. We remain deeply concerned by the fact that 13 years after the Treaty opened for signature, this important Treaty has not yet entered into force. While welcoming recent ratifications, we urge States that have not ratified the Treaty, especially the Annex 2 States, to do so as soon as possible. In this connection, we firmly believe that nuclear-weapon States should take a leading role to enable the Treaty to enter into force without any further delay. My country strongly supports the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the world. We consider nuclear-weapon-free zones as positive steps to strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime and to enhance regional and global peace and security. In this spirit, my delegation welcomes the entry into force this year of the treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones in Central Asia and in Africa. Likewise, we wish to express our firm support for the convening next year of the second Conference of States Parties and Signatories of Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones. That Conference will be a good opportunity to mobilize greater and wider support for the implementation of these treaties and for the promotion of nuclear nonproliferation and disarmament objectives. Regarding efforts to eliminate other types of weapons of mass destruction -- chemical and biological weapons in particular -- my delegation underscores the important roles played by the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention in preventing and eliminating the proliferation of chemical and biological weapons. With regard to conventional arms, we recognize the negative impact caused by small arms and light weapons and support international efforts to curb the illegal manufacture, transfer and circulation of such arms and weapons. My country is convinced that the negotiation of an arms trade treaty should be carried out within the framework of the United Nations, taking into full account the right of States to manufacture, import, and export conventional arms for self-defence purposes, in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that all decisions related to a future arms trade treaty should be built through a consensus-based approach to ensure its universal acceptance and effective implementation. My delegation would like to reiterate its firm support for the strengthening of the disarmament machinery of the United Nations. In this regard, we reaffirm our support for the work of the Disarmament Commission. It is regrettable, however, that at its substantive 2009 session, member States failed to reach agreement on an agenda for the next three-year cycle. It is, therefore, our sincere hope that at the 2010 session, member States will demonstrate greater political will and flexibility to reach consensus on a substantive agenda for the next cycle in order to enable this important Commission to consider and make practical recommendations on the issues of disarmament and arms control. Early this year, the Conference on Disarmament managed to adopt its programme of work after more than a decade of deadlock and deep frustration. We hope that at its session in 2010, member States will find common ground and be able to begin negotiations on an instrument banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons as well as on other important issues of disarmament. In conclusion, may I assure you, Sir, and the Bureau of our full support and cooperation so that the work of the First Committee will have a satisfactory outcome. Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Mr. Chairman, and the other members of the Bureau on your well-deserved election. We are confident that your leadership will steer our work to a successful conclusion. In this regard, you may be assured of my delegation's full support and cooperation. In compliance with your request, Sir, I shall shorten my statement. The complete text will be distributed to all participants in this forum. I would kindly request that the complete version be documented as the official text of my statement. Ukraine, as a country that voluntarily renounced the world's third largest nuclear arsenal and thus made a significant contribution to nuclear disarmament and the strengthening of regional and global security, would like to use this opportunity to confirm its commitment to secure peace and stability. It is encouraging that many political leaders have expressed support for the clear and vital goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world. Governments must begin now to think how they will design their countries' future security without these weapons. We welcome the efforts of the United States and the Russian Federation to develop a new, meaningful and verifiable START follow-up treaty. Taking into account the fact that the two countries do not wish to extend the Treaty in its current form, we urge the United States and the Russian Federation to finalize the follow-up process before 5 December, when START expires. I should like to reiterate the vital importance of the universalization of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). We are confident that entry into force of the CTBT will tangibly help to realize the noble objective of a safe and peaceful world free of nuclear weapons. We hope that the commitment of United States President Obama to pursue United States ratification of the CTBT will be fulfilled soon. Meanwhile, it is of the greatest importance that the integrity of the norms set by the CTBT is respected. Pending the Treaty's entry into force, the moratorium on nuclear tests or any other nuclear explosions should be maintained. We call upon all States to refrain from any action contrary to the Treaty and to further demonstrate their firm determination to observe the CTBT norms and keep to their commitments once the Treaty enters into force. Next year, the 2010 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) will take place. We are fully committed to the implementation of the NPT in all its three mutually reinforcing pillars, namely, non-proliferation, disarmament and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We also continue to work towards universal accession to the NPT and call upon those States that are not yet parties to it to join the Treaty. In this context, we hope that implementation of the recently adopted Security Council resolution 1887 (2009) will make a considerable contribution towards the successful outcome of the 2010 NPT review cycle. We also welcome the fact that the Geneva-based Conference on Disarmament agreed this year on a programme of work, ending almost 12 years of deadlock. It gives hope for further progress on a series of pressing disarmament and non-proliferation issues. We are especially looking forward to starting negotiations on a verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for use in nuclear weapons. Another pressing issue in the sphere of disarmament is the destruction of anti-personnel landmines. Having inherited one of the largest stocks of mines in the world, Ukraine attaches great importance to their safe destruction in accordance with the provisions of the Anti-Personnel Landmine (Ottawa) Convention, known also as the Mine Ban Convention. We fully support endeavours of the Mine Ban Convention community to overcome the humanitarian crisis caused by the large-scale proliferation and use of anti-personnel landmines. We wish to see the world free from this type of weapon. At the same time, I must mention that, on its own, Ukraine is capable of eliminating only one third of its anti-personnel landmine stockpiles in time. That is why Ukraine relies on the assistance of the European Commission to resolve this problem according to the European Commission obligations related to the ratification of the Convention by the Ukrainian Parliament. We are happy that, in 2009, we managed to renew the suspended dialogue with the European Commission in that regard. I should also like to underline that the Ukrainian side is grateful to the United Nations Mine Action Service for its willingness to launch cooperation in the sphere of anti-personnel landmine stockpile destruction in the Ukraine. As a party to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and all its Protocols, Ukraine considers these documents to be important instruments in the sphere of arms control and disarmament, which play a key role in resolving the humanitarian concerns caused by such weapons. We call upon all States parties to continue to further promote the universality and efficiency of the Convention, including its Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War. With regard to the issue of regulating global trade in conventional arms, Ukraine supports the initiative on the international arms trade treaty which could become a comprehensive instrument for establishing common standards in this field and thus preventing conventional arms diversion. We welcome the open and constructive exchange of views during the two sessions of the Open-ended Working Group, under expert guidance, which were held in New York in March and July this year. We are encouraged by the positive will to address the problem posed by the unregulated trade, transfer and activities in arms. Space activities are also an important security question, raising sensitive issues. We understand the concerns expressed by a number of States in that regard. As an actor in space, Ukraine is particularly aware of the issue of the security of space activities for peaceful purposes. We urge all member States to refrain from taking actions likely to undermine space security, especially by creating additional debris. To conclude my statement, I should like to underline the urgency of consolidating international efforts to strive for achieving progress in the areas of disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control in the United Nations and other forums for the sake of future generations. Mr. Zee (Singapore): Our congratulations go to you, Sir, on your election to the chairmanship of the First Committee and also to the members of the Bureau on their election. My delegation looks forward to working closely with you in the coming weeks. We continue to face more complex challenges in our quest for peace and security. At the core remains the continued existence of nuclear weapons, along with two consequences of this: first, the threat of nuclear conflict; and secondly, the danger of proliferation, which increases the potential threat of nuclear terrorism. During the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly Singapore intends to work with the international community in addressing these concerns. Regarding the first consequence, we believe that the world can never be truly safe from nuclear conflict without total and complete nuclear disarmament. As a non-nuclear-weapon State, Singapore has been deeply concerned over the moribund state of nuclear disarmament efforts. Thus, we were heartened by President Obama's landmark speech in April this year in Prague where he declared that the United States was committed to seek the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons. In addition, President Obama proclaimed that the United States had a moral responsibility to act and take the lead. We note that part of this vision was subsequently developed through the United States initiative in the Security Council that resulted in the unanimous adoption of resolution 1887 (2009) (see S/PV.6191). We applaud the resolution for revitalizing the global commitment towards nuclear disarmament. We consider the move by the United States and the action of the Security Council to be useful measures in generating positive momentum in the run-up to the 2010 Review Conference of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We note that the NPT is at a critical phase, with many challenges to overcome, and Singapore pledges to play its part to help the NPT Review Conference reach a successful outcome. In this context, my delegation welcomes Ambassador Libran Cabactulan of the Philippines, a fellow member State of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, as President-elect of the NPT Review Conference. Secondly, to support the cause of nuclear nonproliferation, Singapore remains committed to strengthening its national laws and export controls system to ensure that it can effectively play its part in preventing dual-use technologies and items related to weapons of mass destruction from falling into the wrong hands. In today's interconnected world, determined terrorists can easily and effectively reach beyond national borders and are harder to confine to any single geographical location. It is also more difficult to distinguish between what is and what is not a weapon. Technological advances have made the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as well as related systems and materials, much easier. The free flow of information, materials and people between countries compounds the difficulty of preventing proliferation in today's environment. As one of the world's busiest trans-shipment hubs and a responsible member of the international community, Singapore takes its responsibilities seriously. It has implemented a robust export controls regime that now monitors items from all four major multilateral export controls list -- the Australia Group, the Missile Technology Control Regime, the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Wassenaar Arrangement. Furthermore, in support of these efforts, Singapore participates in the Container Security Initiative and the Proliferation Security Initiative. These have been and continue to be demonstrations of our firm commitment towards non-proliferation. Along with sustainable development and respect for human rights, the desire for peace and security remains one of the fundamental pillars upon which the United Nations was built. Thus, the United Nations must be vigilant and continue to play a leading role to find resolutions for the security issues on the agenda and in finding pragmatic and practical ways for us to cooperate with one another. My delegation expresses its confidence that under your able leadership, Sir, this Committee will be able to work together for effective disarmament and non-proliferation regimes. Mr. Sea (Cambodia): At the outset allow me to join previous speakers warmly to congratulate you, Sir, on your deserved election to preside over the work of the First Committee during this sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly. My delegation is confident that with your vast knowledge, skills and experience you will be able to steer the work of the First Committee towards fruitful outcomes. Rest assured of our full support and cooperation. My delegation would like to associate itself with the statement made by my colleague from Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the statement made by Myanmar on behalf of all members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). The world today is at the crossroads of whether we can prevent the further proliferation of nuclear arms. Our disarmament efforts for many decades have brought unsatisfactory results. The time has come to renew our determination to make headway in these efforts. Cambodia is of the view that reinforcing and empowering the process of disarmament and nonproliferation is vital through combined efforts at the national, regional and international level. Genuine political will and true commitment from individual countries and the international community are crucial to the progress of the disarmament regime, thus contributing to peace, stability and security. In this context, Cambodia highly values the call by United States President Obama at the general debate in the General Assembly last month to "stop the spread of nuclear weapons and seek the goal of a world without them" (A/64/PV.3). Cambodia also warmly welcomes the appeal stipulated in Security Council resolution 1887 (2009), adopted during the Council's summit on 24 September (see S/PV.6191), to secure a safer world for all. The ongoing process of negotiation between the United States and the Russian Federation on a new agreement to replace the START Treaty is indeed an encouraging positive step towards the nonproliferation environment. In the ASEAN framework, we have the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ), which is an important instrument to keep South-East Asia free of nuclear weapons to ensure peace and security in that part of the world. It is also a good confidence-building mechanism, which should be adhered to by all, especially by the nuclear-weapon States. In recent years ASEAN has actively encouraged those States to accede to the SEANWFZ Treaty. In this regard my Government wishes to appeal to all nuclear-weapon States to engage more constructively with the SEANWFZ Treaty. Furthermore, Cambodia welcomes the adoption of the agenda for the 2010 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) which highlights the prospect of realizing the objectives and principles enshrined in the NPT in a balanced manner. My country wishes to assure the Philippine presidency of this important NPT Review Conference of its fullest support and cooperation. Cambodia also notes with satisfaction the adoption by the Conference on Disarmament of the programme of work for its 2009 session, thereby breaking its 12-year stalemate; this will allow the world's sole multilateral disarmament negotiating forum to negotiate and substantively discuss strategic disarmament and non-proliferation issues. Small arms and light weapons are just dangerous as weapons of mass destruction. While weapons of mass destruction destroy human beings by the thousand with one blow, small arms kill thousands one by one and day by day. Therefore, urgent attention is compulsory to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. Cambodia has never been a source of arms supply, although the possibility of arms smuggling through Cambodia to other locations may exist owing to past armed conflicts. The win-win policy of Samdech Prime Minister Hun Sen, which ended war and conflict in Cambodia in 1998, has brought an immense transformation to the country -- from a region of uncertainty, war, instability and backwardness to an epicentre of sustained peace, security, social order, and respect for democracy. Thousands and thousands of small arms and light weapons left over from the war had to be removed and destroyed without delay. As of now, my Government has seized and collected nearly half a million small arms and light weapons. Having understood that the negative impacts of the illegal use and circulation of small arms and light weapons go beyond national borders, Cambodia consistently advocates international cooperation in addressing this serious issue. The implementation of the 2001 Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons remains a bold action-oriented programme. We urge the international community to continue its global efforts to control small arms and we pledge our fullest cooperation in every possible way. Likewise, mines and unexploded ordnance (UXO) continue to provoke serious insecurity and negative social impacts on many countries throughout the world, including my own. In the countryside of Cambodia, there are millions of mines and UXO left over from war and conflicts in the past. We can neither ignore the grave dangers of landmines and UXO nor overlook the challenges of demining. Cambodia suffers too much from these silent and indiscriminate killers. It is not only a nightmare for those affected, but these weapons bring untold misery to the victims who become permanently traumatized and physically handicapped. That constitutes a heavy burden for our Government and society. As such, Cambodia exerts its utmost efforts to address the issue of landmines and UXO by integrating the demining issue into our national agenda, including the Cambodian Millennium Development Goals and the Rectangular Strategy of the Government. As of August 2009, we had removed nearly 2 million mines and UXO. We highly appreciate the contributions from our partners, including United Nations agencies, in terms of financial and technical support for ongoing demining activities in the country. Concerning international demining efforts, the Royal Government of Cambodia has been deploying deminers of the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces to Sudan for mine clearance action under the umbrella of the United Nations. The fourth group was dispatched in June this year. Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): First, I should like to extend to you, Sir, my warmest congratulations on your election to the chairmanship of the First Committee and simultaneously to assure you of the full support and cooperation of the delegation of Senegal. I should like to take advantage of this opportunity most warmly to welcome the members of the Secretariat, and I see among them some very familiar faces. In particular I would single out the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Sergio Duarte. Senegal associates itself with the statements made by the representatives of Nigeria and Indonesia, respectively, on behalf of the African Group and the Non-Aligned Movement. For several years, the global disarmament and non-proliferation regime has been encountering numerous obstacles which have served to considerably delay the progress that Member States have a right to expect in this area. Several glimmers of hope, however, have been appearing on the horizon, in particular at the Conference on Disarmament, where consensus was reached on a programme of work. A flurry of activity was also noted just before the Security Council summit on 24 September 2009 on disarmament and nonproliferation (see S/PV.6191). For Senegal, the following points must be the focus of the greatest attention if we wish to go beyond the stage of a flurry of action and make genuine progress. First, ridding the world of nuclear weapons more than ever remains a major objective that must have the support of all States. Secondly, strengthening the authority of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) -- which must be made universal -- remains the highest priority. Thirdly, the framework governing nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation must be completed as quickly as possible by the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the negotiation and adoption of a binding instrument banning the production of fissile material. Fourthly, nuclear-weapon States must reach agreement on an irreversible and more far-reaching programme for the reduction of their arsenals and, concurrently, provide security guarantees through a binding instrument to nonnuclear-weapon States. Fifthly, greater adherence to the treaties on existing nuclear-weapon-free zones should be encouraged and a zone in the Middle East should be created, for such zones contribute decisively to the strengthening of confidence and stability. And the final point on the nuclear issue is that there is a need to reaffirm the right of countries to the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to ensure the effective and safe transfer of relevant technology to those States that are shouldering their obligations under the NPT. That would hinge on the strengthening of the authority and capacity of the International Atomic Energy Agency. But nuclear weapons are not the sole priority of our time. Indeed, we need to work to better cope with conventional weapons. We are eagerly awaiting the holding of a summit on conventional weapons at the level of the Security Council as was recently the case for nuclear weapons. In that connection, the Register of Conventional Arms should continue to benefit from the support and active participation of all States, in particular the weapons-producing States. Ultimately, it seems to us, only a universal treaty on trade in weapons can allow us to have proper control of conventional weapons. Senegal welcomes the dynamic process that has already begun and believes that our commitment to this issue must remain strong until the conclusion of a binding treaty. Reflecting that commitment, Senegal hosted, on 28 and 29 April 2009, in Dakar, a seminar for North, West and Central Africa on the arms trade treaty. The same commitment should motivate us to see to it that the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons becomes legally binding so that a similar instrument can be adopted concerning illicit brokering of small arms and light weapons. On the specific issue of small arms and light weapons, my country urges the effective implementation of the final document of the third Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action on Small Arms, and stresses in particular the following essential points: cooperation and international assistance; illicit brokering; stockpile management and the destruction of surpluses; and marking and tracing. The proper implementation and universalization of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction must continue to mobilize our energy if we wish to rid the world of these deadly devices. The same holds true for cluster weapons, regarding which a Convention was adopted in Dublin, on 30 May 2008, which is a significant advance for the protection of civilians and the strengthening of international humanitarian law. The major challenges to international peace and security just cited are not insurmountable and the progress that we will make in future will depend on the degree of multilateral cooperation and political will devoted to so doing. Senegal's support will continue to be unwavering and we are confident that a safer world is possible, a world free from nuclear weapons and one in which conventional weapons will be better controlled. Mr. Bodini (San Marino): I congratulate you, Ambassador Cancela, and the other members of the Bureau on your appointments. San Marino, a State without an army, a situation it shares with other members of the General Assembly, is delighted by the adoption of Security Council resolution 1887 (2009) on 24 September 2009. Presidents Obama, Medvedev, Hu, and Sarkozy, and Prime Minister Brown, leaders of the countries with the largest nuclear arsenals, showed great leadership to the world and to all its citizens. We are grateful for this turning point in their nuclear policies. Leadership is shown by example. We cannot think of a better example for containing nuclear armament throughout the world than a self-imposed reduction of such devastating weapons. Moreover, we are delighted that such a historic event occurred in the Security Council under the roof of the United Nations, in the presence of all the leaders of the entire world. In doing so, the Permanent Five reaffirmed, in a solemn way, the central and universal role of the United Nations. The work of the First Committee this year should focus more than ever on indispensable and inevitable nuclear arms reduction and the urgency of re-energizing efforts for the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We are particularly pleased by the strong support that the Security Council expressed for the International Atomic Energy Agency, reaffirming its authority and providing new resources to carry out its mission. The fight against terrorism, especially nuclear terrorism, is of vital importance. All Member States can contribute to such a fight through a network of information. Be assured that San Marino will do its part. Once again, the events of the last few days give us great hope for a more just and secure world. Let us continue our effort with great diligence and a sense of responsibility in the First Committee of the General Assembly. Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation wishes to extend its congratulations to you, Sir, on your election to the chairmanship of this Committee. We also congratulate the other members of the Bureau. We are certain that, with your experience and leadership skills, you will guide the Committee's discussions to the desired outcome. We fully assure you of our readiness to cooperate with you and aid you and the other members of the Bureau in your task, as we strive to reach our desired goals. My delegation would also like to express its thanks to your predecessor, Mr. Marco Antonio Suazo, who so successfully conducted the work of the Committee during the previous session. May I take this opportunity to express our gratitude and appreciation to Mr. Sergio Duarte, the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and his team for their endeavours over the past year. My delegation associates itself with the statement made by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We wish to state once again that the Republic of Yemen is deeply committed to the goal and the principle of eliminating weapons of mass destruction. We believe that collective multilateral action and a return to the principle of dialogue among States are the best means of achieving disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and making progress towards a world free of nuclear weapons. Further, my delegation welcomes the new momentum and the positive developments that have occurred in the sphere of disarmament and non-proliferation. These provide us with a unique opportunity to make progress on the international agenda for disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation. The Republic of Yemen has adopted a firm position with regard to matters pertaining to the elimination of weapons of mass destruction and nuclear non-proliferation, as an expression of our political commitment to disarmament. We have thus ratified or acceded to all multilateral disarmament treaties, including the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Bacteriological Weapons Convention, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the Anti-Personnel Landmine Convention. We are fully committed to those international treaties and stress our firm position regarding the total elimination of all weapons of mass destruction and a complete ban on all nuclear tests and on the qualitative development of nuclear weapons. The Republic of Yemen, as a party to these treaties, wishes to see an end to the proliferation of such weapons and the prohibition of their trafficking at our borders. To that end, we have enacted legislation prohibiting such weapons and prescribing penalties for those who engage in such activities. The Republic of Yemen recently adopted measures and procedures aimed at prohibiting illegal trafficking in small arms and light weapons, and we are making genuine and strenuous efforts to regulate the possession and carrying of such weapons. Our parliament will be discussing legislation to regulate the carrying of weapons; the goal is to prevent this in our main towns and our capital. My country has also shut down weapons stockpiles and confiscated unauthorized weapons. We are further acting to cancel previously granted licences which had allowed some persons to bear weapons. We wish definitively to eradicate the phenomenon of weapons possession. My Government recommends further efforts and practical and effective measures to deal constructively with illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons. This has a negative impact on peace and security for many societies, because it facilitates the acquisition of such weapons by terrorist groups and organizations, organized transnational crime syndicates or other illegal groups. This leads to instability, hampers development efforts and increases poverty and unemployment. It also fosters deadly pandemics and creates a favourable climate for terrorist groups and organizations to flourish. It can only increase violence and instability and have detrimental national and regional effects. The Republic of Yemen lends its support to international efforts to create a legally binding instrument establishing international norms to govern and punish illegal trafficking in such weapons and the establishment of effective international controls, leading to the elimination of this trafficking. My delegation would also like to emphasize the paramount responsibility of arms producing and exporting countries to lend material and technical assistance to those States that suffer from the scourge of such weapons. There is a moral and humanitarian responsibility to put an end to the suffering of those countries that are experiencing the harmful consequences of these weapons on life and in other economic, social and cultural areas, which can lead to a deterioration of economic conditions and to social instability. My delegation reaffirms its full support for the total elimination of all nuclear weapons throughout the world and urges all nuclear-weapon States to continue to work for disarmament and to develop appropriate arrangements to bring about an end to proliferation and the total elimination of weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, with a view to ensuring the rights of people to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. This will help eliminate global concern about proliferation. The Republic of Yemen once again calls for a Middle East zone free from weapons of mass destruction. My delegation wishes to stress how important it is for Israel to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and for all its nuclear facilities to be opened to international inspectors. In that regard, we must implement Security Council resolutions on the elimination of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, including resolution 687 (1991), adopted by the Council under Chapter VII of the Charter. That resolution restates the goal of the elimination of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, which would include Israeli nuclear weapons. We also call for the implementation of the resolutions adopted in September this year by the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) at its fifty-third session, on the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East and on Israeli nuclear capabilities (GC(53)/RES/16 and 17, respectively). In closing, my delegation stresses once again that our Republic supports all international efforts to take even preventative measures to halt arms trafficking by non-State actors. We call for cooperation, coordination and consultation among our neighbouring States to combat the trade in such weapons and their purchase by non-authorized parties in order to combat terrorism, terrorist groups and international transboundary organized crime. Despite our limited financial and other resources, we have achieved great successes in this area. We are working vigorously for peace and security, thus laying the foundation for stability throughout our land. Mr. Riot Jaem (Malaysia): On behalf of the delegation of Malaysia, I wish to extend our warmest congratulations to you, Mr. Chairman, and your Bureau on your assumption of office in the First Committee at the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly. At the outset my delegation associates itself with the statement made by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the statement made by the representative of Myanmar on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. The achievement of non-proliferation rests on fulfilling a basic bargain consisting of the following elements: first, nations have the right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy; secondly, nuclear-weapon States have the obligation to undertake effective measures towards nuclear disarmament; and, thirdly, those without nuclear weapons must disavow acquiring them. Consequently, progress in non-proliferation can be analysed through the prism of the three elements mentioned above. Where then are we? What does our collective report card look like? Malaysia's assessment of the situation is that more needs to be done. We should note that the United States estimate in 1958 was that 16 nations could have nuclear weapons within 10 years. In 1960, President Kennedy warned that there would be 15, 20 or 25 nuclear States by the end of the presidential term in 1964. Today there are eight confirmed nuclear-weapon States. There is, therefore, room for optimism. However, this needs to be tempered by the following concerns: first, it does not appear that the nuclear-weapon States are moving towards disarmament, jeopardizing the non-proliferation bargain; secondly, related to this, other countries are pursuing nuclearization programmes; thirdly, there are now credible fears that non-State actors may enter the nuclear foray; and, fourthly, further reductions in strategic and non-strategic stockpiles, greater transparency, de-alerting and a diminished role for nuclear weapons in security policies are needed. If we are to fulfil the basic nuclear bargain, we need to address the following issues. The first is how best to promote transparency, the bedrock of trust and confidence. To that end, it is imperative that efforts to achieve non-proliferation and eventual disarmament be undertaken in a multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive and non-discriminatory manner. Secondly, in that regard, we support negotiations between the United States and the Russian Federation on a legally binding agreement on reducing and limiting strategic offensive arms to replace the Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (START I) which is due to expire by the end of 2009. However, we note that it is unlikely that this will lead to eventual complete and comprehensive disarmament. Thirdly, the creation of a clear system of incentives to ensure that all countries intending to establish programmes for the peaceful use of nuclear energy can do so. That requires an international regime to facilitate the transfer of technology, material and equipment. The 2010 Review Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) can be a significant event in our efforts to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons. But that will require the willingness of all parties to fulfil their obligations under the Treaty. We look forward to working with all States parties to the NPT to make progress on all issues of concern. Although we managed to reach agreement on procedural items during the third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference held in May 2009 in New York, it was rather disheartening that the spirit of compromise did not prevail in the debate over the recommendations for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. In this regard, we sincerely hope that all parties will exhibit further good will and cooperation in order to arrive at a successful outcome at the Review Conference next year. Malaysia submitted its instrument of ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) on 17 January 2008. In that connection, we call upon all States to work towards the entry into force of the CTBT, particularly the Annex 2 States whose signature and ratification of the CTBT are necessary for the Treaty's entry into force. In welcoming the United States' policy shift related to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, we hope to see the United States ratify the Treaty, which we believe will spur other Annex 2 countries to accede to the CTBT. At the regional level, Malaysia has been a signatory to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (SEANWFZ) since 15 December 1995, and ratified it on 11 October 1996. We wish to call upon all nuclear-weapon States to become parties to the Protocol of the SEANWFZ Treaty at the earliest opportunity. We also welcome the entry into force of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia on 21 March 2009 and the Pelindaba Treaty on 15 July 2009, as effective contributions to the strengthening of regional peace and security. Malaysia also fully supports the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of all weapons of mass destruction. As a further commitment to nuclear nonproliferation, Malaysia will again submit a draft resolution entitled "Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons". Malaysia is submitting this draft resolution to remind us of our obligation to pursue in good faith and to bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under strict and effective international control. Malaysia calls on all States to fulfil this obligation by commencing multilateral negotiations leading to an early conclusion of a nuclear-weapon convention at the earliest possible date. The threat posed by other weapons of mass destruction should also be of concern to us. In this regard, we call for the prohibition and total elimination of all types of weapons of mass destruction, including biological and chemical weapons. Malaysia strongly supports the universal implementation of, and adherence to, both the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention. For its part, Malaysia has put in place adequate and stringent laws, regulations and administrative procedures to effectively control the production of small arms and light weapons, and the export, import, transit and retransfer of such weapons, in order to prevent illegal manufacture and illicit trafficking or their illegal diversion to unauthorized recipients. Malaysia strongly supports international and humanitarian efforts to ban anti-personnel mines. For its part, Malaysia completed the destruction of its stockpile of anti-personnel mines on 23 January 2001, making it the first country in Asia to be free of antipersonnel mines. Malaysia calls on other countries to follow suit, particularly those in the South-East Asian region, and become parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. Malaysia also aligns itself with the objective of achieving the total elimination of cluster munitions which cause excessive injury or have indiscriminate effects, especially on civilians, and which cause massive destruction of property. Let me conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's commitment to general and complete disarmament. My delegation remains ready to work with you, Sir, and with other member States towards achieving a positive and successful outcome of this session of the First Committee. Organization of work The Chairperson (spoke in Spanish): In connection with the preparation for the second stage of the Committee's work, namely the structured discussion of specific subjects and the introduction and consideration of draft resolutions, an indicative timetable was circulated to the Committee at the organizational meeting on 1 October, document A/C.1/64/CRP.1. In preparing the indicative timetable, I have largely followed the practice already established by the Committee during previous sessions. As laid down in that document, we will begin the thematic segment of our work by considering the follow-up of resolutions and decisions adopted by the Committee at its last session and the presentation of reports by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs. This exchange will be held in informal mode. For the remainder of the thematic segment, I should like to propose that we carry out discussions for the second segment of the Committee's work in the following manner. First, during the first week of the thematic discussions, the bulk of the meeting on the afternoon of Tuesday, 13 October, will be devoted to an exchange with the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs and other high-level officials on the current state of affairs in the field of arms control and disarmament and the role of international organizations with mandates in this field. As indicated in document A/C.1/64/CRP.1, we will have as guest speakers the Secretary-General of the Conference on Disarmament, a representative of the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Executive Secretary of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization. Due to a scheduling conflict, the Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons will not be present on 13 October. Instead, he will address the Committee on Friday, 16 October. If time is available after the exchange on 13 October, we may begin listening to statements under the nuclear weapons cluster in the remaining part of the meeting on Tuesday afternoon. Second, the meetings on Wednesday afternoon, 14 October, and Thursday, 15 October will be used to listen to statements on the nuclear weapons cluster. Third, the meeting on Friday, 16 October, will be devoted to other weapons of mass destruction. At that meeting, we will listen to a statement by the Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. Fourth, in the morning of Monday, 19 October, the Committee will examine the disarmament aspects of outer space. Fifth, following that, in the afternoon of Monday, 19 October, and the morning of Tuesday, 20 October, we will discuss conventional weapons. On 19 October, we will have an exchange with the Chairman of the Open-ended Working Group towards an Arms Trade Treaty, establishing common international standards for the import, export and transfer of conventional arms. Sixth, on Wednesday, 21 October, we will discuss other disarmament measures and international security. At that meeting, under the topic "Transparency in armaments", there will be an introduction by the Chairperson of the Group of Governmental Experts on the continuing operation and further development of the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms. Seventh, at that same meeting, we will discuss regional disarmament and security. The Committee will have an interactive exchange with the Chief of the Regional Disarmament Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Directors of the three United Nations regional centres for peace and disarmament. As in previous years, this exchange will be held in informal mode. Eighth, on Thursday, 22 October, we will begin by listening to any remaining statements on regional disarmament and security. Following that, the Committee will address disarmament machinery. There will be a panel discussion involving the President of the Conference on Disarmament, the Chairperson of the Disarmament Commission, the Chairperson of the Secretary-General's Advisory Board on Disarmament Matters, and the Director of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research. That exchange will also be held in informal mode. Ninth, on Friday, 23 October we will listen to any remaining statements on disarmament machinery. Following that, representatives of a number of nongovernmental organizations will make presentations to the Committee. Tenth, the meeting on Monday, 26 October, has been reserved should it prove necessary to conclude the discussion on any of the items in the thematic debate. As seen in the note at the bottom of document A/C.1/64/CRP.1, it is my intention to divide the meetings into two parts so that the Committee can fully utilize the time allocated to it by engaging in productive and interactive discussions, as well as introducing all the draft resolutions in an efficient and timely manner. The first part of each meeting will start with a panel or guest speaker, as appropriate, for those meetings indicated in document A/C.1/64/CRP.1. After the opening statements, I will briefly suspend the formal meeting so that we can have an informal question and answer session with the panel or guest speaker. Afterwards, we will resume the formal meeting and proceed to the second part, consisting of interventions by delegations on the specific subject under discussion and the introduction of draft resolutions and decisions. As I mentioned earlier, in accordance with past practice, the discussion on the follow-up of resolutions adopted by the Committee at its past session, the presentation of reports by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs and exchanges on regional disarmament and security and disarmament machinery, as well as the meeting with the non-governmental organizations, will be in informal mode. I should also like to mention that at the last meeting of the second segment of our work, on Monday 26 October, delegations will still be able to introduce any remaining draft resolutions, if necessary. I strongly urge all delegations to do their utmost to introduce their draft resolutions during the upcoming second stage of the Committee's work. May I take it that the proposed indicative timetable for our thematic discussion contained in document A/C.1/64/CRP.1 is acceptable to all delegations? It was so decided. The Chairperson (spoke in Spanish): So far we have had a rich general debate and have listened to more than 40 statements during the past three meetings. This year, we have a very high number of delegations on the list of speakers for the general debate -- more than 100, compared to 86 at last year's general debate. This bears witness to the high priority placed by member States on matters of disarmament and international security. Due to the high number of inscribed speakers, in order to provide adequate time for all delegations wishing to make general statements without impinging on the timetable of the thematic segment which is scheduled to start next Tuesday afternoon, I wish to inform the Committee of the decision reached by the Bureau. We have decided to use the services of the meeting currently in reserve on Monday, 26 October, to convene an additional meeting of the Committee at the end of this week to conclude the list of speakers in the general debate. That additional meeting to conclude the list of speakers will be held tomorrow afternoon, Friday, 9 October, from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. in Conference Room 1. I ask for the understanding of delegations in continuing our practice of implementing a rolling list of speakers. Thus, delegations inscribed to speak at a particular meeting should be prepared to speak at the next meeting in case, because of time constraints, it is not possible to exhaust the list of speakers on a particular day. I should like to thank all delegations for their understanding and once again request those who have not yet made general statements to adhere to the time limits agreed by the Committee. Before adjourning the meeting, I should like to remind delegations once again that the cut-off time for the list of participants is at 6 p.m. today. Participants who have not yet done so are encouraged to submit their list of delegations to the Secretariat before that deadline. The names of participants submitted after the deadline will be included in an addendum, which will be issued only after the session. The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m. 