%%%SETTLEMENT POLICY|ISRAEL|HUMAN RIGHTS|PALESTINIANS|TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|PALESTINE QUESTION|

Special Political and Decolonization Committee Fourth Committee Summary record of the 24th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 7 November 2008, at 3 p.m. Chairman: Mr. Argüello (Argentina) Contents Agenda item 29: United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (continued) Agenda item 30: Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories (continued) Completion of the Committee's work The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m. Agenda item 29: United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (continued) (A/C.4/63/L.11-L.14) 1. The Chairman invited Committee members to take action on the four draft resolutions under the item, adding that he had been informed that none of them had any programme budget implications. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.11: Assistance to Palestine refugees 2. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee) said that Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cuba, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Liechtenstein, Mali, Nigeria, Norway, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. 3. Mr. Saripudin (Indonesia), speaking on behalf of the sponsors, said that the date of 30 September 2009, in paragraph 5, should be replaced by 1 October 2009. The change was intended to ensure that the meeting commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) did not conflict with the general debate of the General Assembly. 4. A recorded vote was taken. In favour: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Against: Israel. Abstaining: Cameroon, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America. 5. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.11, as orally amended, was adopted by 158 to 1, with 6 abstentions.* Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.12: Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent hostilities 6. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee) said that Cuba, Djibouti, Guinea, Indonesia, Mali, Nigeria and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. 7. A recorded vote was taken. Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America. Cameroon, Canada. 8. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.12 was adopted by 158 to 6, with 2 abstentions. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.13: Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East 9. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee) said that Cuba, Djibouti, Guinea, Indonesia, Nigeria and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. 10. A recorded vote was taken. Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Cameroon. 11. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.13 was adopted by 160 to 6, with 1 abstention. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.14: Palestine refugees' properties and their revenues 12. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee) said that Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cuba, Djibouti, Guinea, Indonesia, Mali, Nigeria, Slovakia, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. 13. A recorded vote was taken. Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 14. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.14 was adopted by 161 to 6, with 1 abstention.§ Agenda item 30: Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories (continued) (A/C.4/63/L.15L.19) 15. The Chairman invited Committee members to take action on the five draft resolutions under the item. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.15: Work of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories 16. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee), referring to the programme budget implications of paragraph 8, said that a provision of $283,000 for the Special Committee had been included under Section 23 (Human rights) in the proposed programme budget for 2008-2009. Hence, adoption of the draft resolution would not entail any additional appropriation. He drew attention to General Assembly resolution 45/248 B, which reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee was the appropriate main committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters and reaffirmed also the role of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. Finally, he informed the Committee that Cuba, Guinea, Indonesia, Mali, Nigeria, the Sudan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. 17. A recorded vote was taken. Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America. Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay. 18. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.15 was adopted by 87 to 8, with 70 abstentions.** Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.16: Applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, to the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and the other Occupied Arab Territories 19. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee) said that Cuba, Djibouti, Guinea, Indonesia, Mali, the Sudan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. The draft resolution had no programme budget implications. 20. A recorded vote was taken. Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire. 21. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.16 was adopted by 161 to 6, with 2 abstentions.† Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.17: Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan 22. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee) said that Cuba, Djibouti, Guinea, Indonesia, the Sudan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. The draft resolution had no programme budget implications. 23. A recorded vote was taken. 24. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.17 was adopted by 161 to 6, with 2 abstentions.‡ Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.18: Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem 25. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee) said that Cuba, Djibouti, Guinea, Indonesia, Mali, the Sudan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. The draft resolution had no programme budget implications. 26. A recorded vote was taken. Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, El Salvador, Honduras, Mongolia. 27. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.18 was adopted by 155 to 8, with 5 abstentions.§§ Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.19: The occupied Syrian Golan 28. Mr. Zhang (Secretary of the Committee) said that Cuba, Djibouti, Guinea, Indonesia, the Sudan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had become sponsors. The draft resolution had no programme budget implications. 29. A recorded vote was taken. Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of America. 30. Draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.19 was adopted by 161 to 1, with 7 abstentions.*** 31. Mr. Kassianides (France), speaking in explanation of vote on behalf of the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and association process countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, said that the European Union had, as in previous years, voted in favour of the draft resolution on Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem (A/C.4/63/L.18). Convinced of the need to adopt a balanced approach to the issue, it attached great importance to the human rights of the Palestinian people and all other peoples in the region, and called on all parties in the region to respect those rights. In order to further the peace process, both parties must cease all acts of violence and terrorism against each other. The European Union condemned the recent upsurge in violence against Palestinian civilians by settlers, as well as the firing of rockets into Israel, and firmly supported a maintenance of the period of calm. It was convinced of the need to ensure real improvement both in the freedom of movement of goods and people, and in the security situation in the West Bank. The European Union continued to support the negotiations launched at Annapolis, and hoped that they would lead to the creation of a viable, independent, democratic and fully sovereign Palestinian State living in peace and security alongside Israel and its neighbours. 32. Ms. Gatehouse (Australia) said that her delegation's vote in favour of draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.16 reflected Australia's long-standing support for international humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions, including their Additional Protocols. Australia had not, however, supported the referral of Israel's security barrier to the International Court of Justice, believing that doing so would not assist the peace process. Resolutions referring to the Court's advisory opinion should reflect the latter's non-binding character and give due regard to Israel's legitimate security concerns. Australia's support for draft resolutions A/C.4/63/L.16 and L.17 were thus without prejudice to its views on the advisory opinion. 33. Her delegation had voted in favour of draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.17 because it strongly supported a two-State resolution of the conflict. It recognized, however, that the precise borders of those States would be a matter for negotiation between the parties. It strongly supported the Road Map and believed that both parties should abide by their obligations under it, and avoid actions that might undermine confidence in the negotiations or prejudice the outcome. Israel, for its part, should freeze all settlement activity and take steps to normalize Palestinian life, while the Palestinians should undertake an unconditional cessation of all violence. 34. Although it was a strong supporter of human rights internationally and remained concerned about the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian Territories, her delegation had voted against draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.18. While the draft resolution contained some language critical of acts of terror and of the firing of rockets into Israel, it criticized Israel without taking the latter's legitimate security concerns into account, or adequately reflecting the responsibility of Palestinians to end attacks against Israel. Both sides should ensure that civilians and civilian infrastructure were not harmed. The one-sided focus of the resolution would not contribute to the goal of a negotiated two-State solution to the conflict. 35. Mr. Hosseini (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his delegation had supported all the draft resolutions out of solidarity and sympathy for the Palestinian people. While his Government had been unwavering in its support for the aspirations of the Palestinian people, it felt that some parts of the draft resolutions could be construed as interference in the latter's domestic affairs; any internal difficulties should be addressed by the Palestinians themselves. The support of the international community for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people was critical, since there could be no solution unless those rights were fully recognized, restored and maintained. A durable peace must include an end to discrimination and occupation, the return of refugees and the establishment of a democratic Palestinian State with Al-Quds Al-sharif as its capital. 36. Mr. Bowman (Canada) said that his delegation remained concerned about the disproportionate attention given by the Committee to the Middle East situation and the number of draft resolutions singling out one country -- Israel. The debate in the General Assembly should be fair-minded and serve to advance efforts to arrive at a two-State solution. His delegation had reiterated its support for draft resolutions touching on the key issues and had voted in favour of draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.16 and L.17 since Israel had violated the Fourth Geneva Convention, particularly through its settlements on the West Bank. However, some of the language used in the draft resolutions, particularly in A/C.4/63/L.17, was unbalanced and potentially divisive. His delegation had abstained on draft resolution A/C.4/63/L.12 since the latter failed to mention that the issue of displaced Palestinians must be addressed in the context of a comprehensive solution. Canada would continue to encourage the Assembly to focus on assisting the parties in their efforts towards peace, and to resist any further polarization of the situation. 37. Ms. Abdelhady-Nasser (Observer for Palestine) said that the draft resolutions reflected the international community's continuing commitment to addressing critical aspects of the question of Palestine. Respect for international law should not be seen as contrary to current peace efforts. Those who truly supported the cause of peace should continue to demand a cessation of human rights violations. That would bring about a real change on the ground and in the negotiating environment between the two sides towards the achievement of a final, just and lasting settlement. 38. While her delegation welcomed the reports of the Secretary-General on Israeli practices affecting the human rights of the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (A/63/518) and on Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan (A/63/519), it was deeply concerned that their late issuance had precluded serious discussion by the Committee. 39. Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that, by adopting the various draft resolutions, the international community had rejected the principle of the forcible acquisition of territory. It had also sent Israel a clear message that it should end its occupation of Arab territories, and had reaffirmed that Israel's attempts to annex the Golan or to impose its laws thereon were null and void and without international legal effect. He called on all Member States to continue their support for the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories. 40. Although his country had repeatedly stated its commitment to achieving a just and comprehensive peace and had launched, in conjunction with the other Arab States, the Arab Peace Initiative, Israel had responded either by evading or ignoring any peace proposals and had continued to violate international humanitarian law in the Arab territories it occupied. 41. He expressed hope that those delegations that had abstained from voting would vote in favour of the draft resolutions in the General Assembly. 42. The Chairman declared that the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) had completed its work for the main part of the sixty-third session of the General Assembly. The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m. 