%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA|CROATIA|REPATRIATION|ARMS EMBARGO|YUGOSLAVIA|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SITUATION|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1998/1072 13 November 1998 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH LETTER DATED 13 NOVEMBER 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 11 November 1998, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Kofi A. ANNAN English Page Annex Letter dated 11 November 1998 from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the Secretary-General In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the twenty-second monthly report on the operations of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) (see appendix). I would appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council. (Signed) Javier SOLANA Appendix Twenty-second monthly report to the United Nations Security Council on the operations of the Stabilization Force 1. There are approximately 33,000 troops currently deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and, with Egypt's departure from the theatre at the end of September, from 20 non-NATO countries. 2. Over the reporting period (21 September-20 October), the Stabilization Force (SFOR) continued to conduct surveillance and reconnaissance by means of ground and air patrols. Approximately 1,850 sorties were flown by combat aircraft, with the SFOR helicopter fleet flying approximately 168 hours. 3. SFOR continues to monitor crossing points on the border with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and to inspect government-owned factories in order to help ensure compliance with the prohibition on the transport of weapons established by the Security Council in its resolution 1160 (1998). No reports of non-compliance were received during the current reporting period. Cooperation and compliance by the parties 4. The parties remain substantially compliant with most military provisions of the Peace Agreement. However, a number of incidents related to the return of displaced persons and refugees caused tensions to rise during the reporting period in Multi-National Division South East, near Caplijina. On 1 October, a group of Bosnian Croats erected a road block near the village of Tasovcici, thereby preventing approximately 40 Bosniac displaced persons from returning to their former homes. The Multi-National Specialized Unit was ordered into the area by the Commander of the Multi-National Division South East and removed the road block. This incident was followed by further acts of intimidation and violence in Tasovcici. Bosniac homes were set on fire, Bosniac returnees were harassed and one Bosniac was murdered. In consequence, SFOR increased the number of patrols in the area and intensified surveillance of the Mostar-Stolac-Caplijina triangle. Following this incident, the United Nations International Police Task Force (IPTF) sought the dismissal of the Caplijina police chief for failing to provide adequate security to returnees. He was de-certified by IPTF on 8 October. 5. Over the reporting period, SFOR troops conducted a total of 285 inspections of military weapons storage sites: 60 Bosniac; 62 Bosnian Croat; 137 Bosnian Serb; and 26 Federation. No major discrepancies were noted and no weapons confiscated. In line with SFOR policy of reducing the overall number of weapons sites, 85 of the 136 weapons storage sites which are due to be closed between 10 June 1998 and 28 February 1999 have now been closed. 6. The Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade of the Republika Srpska Specialist Police remains compliant with the terms of the Peace Agreement and with the requirements set out by SFOR on 15 August 1997. The Police Restructuring and Training Programme, which was led by IPTF and monitored by SFOR, has now been completed. A total of 650 officers of the Police Anti-Terrorist Brigade have completed human dignity and transition training, while 643 officers of the Brigade and 45 supervisors attended a crowd control course in September. 7. Over the reporting period, SFOR troops monitored 1,038 training and movement activities: 282 Bosniac; 93 Bosnian Croat; 549 Bosnian Serb; and 114 Federation. A training and movement ban was imposed on the Bosnian Serb Air Force and Air Defence Units from 21 September to 4 October because of the failure of the Air Force Commander to attend a meeting of the Joint Military Commission in the Multi-National Division South West on 21 August. 8. Between 14 September and 18 October, the Entity Armed Forces, now accredited to the Bosnia-Herzegovina Mine Action Centre, conducted 836 demining activities, removing a total of 536 devices (19 anti-tank mines, 324 anti-personnel mines and 193 items of unexploded ordnance) from 40,453 square metres of land. There are currently no bans imposed on the Entity Armed Forces for non-compliance with mine-clearing operations. Cooperation with international institutions 9. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to provide assistance to the international organizations in the theatre, working closely with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), IPTF (including in its inspections of local police stations), the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 10. SFOR continues to provide assistance to the Office of the High Representative in the field of civil air traffic. On 10 October, after the signature of a Memorandum of Understanding between SFOR and the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Tuzla International Airport was officially opened. With respect to Mostar airport, the High Representative extended the mandate of the Interim Airport Authority for a further six months from 31 August 1998. With respect to Sarajevo Airport, the Memorandum of Understanding between SFOR and the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina has now been signed. This will permit cargo operations to take place and enable commercial aircraft to remain on the apron overnight. Following agreement from the Council of Ministers, the Commander of SFOR delegated authority and responsibility to manage the upper airspace over Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Department of Civil Aviation. Outlook 11. Election results may cause a potential source of tension for SFOR, acts of intimidation and violence towards displaced persons and refugees can be expected to continue. 