%%%HISTORY|ARMENIA|TURKEY|GENOCIDE|

UNITED NATIONS A General Assembly Distr. Original: ENGLISH HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Tenth session Agenda item 2 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS AND REPORTS OF THE OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER AND THE SECRETARY-GENERAL Views expressed by the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Turkey on the contribution made by Armenia to the OHCHR's report on "Prevention of Genocide" (A/HRC/10/25)* Geneva, 25 March 2009 The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Turkey to the United Nations Office at Geneva and other international organisations in Switzerland presents its compliments to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and has the honour to convey in annex its views on the unfounded allegations contained in the contribution made by Armenia to the OHCHR's report on "Prevention of Genocide" (A/HRC/10/25). The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Turkey would appreciate it if this Note and its attachment could be circulated as an official document of the 10th session of the Human Rights Council. The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Turkey avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights the assurances of its highest consideration. - The views of Armenia, published in document A/HRC/10/25 of 9 March 2009, include historically inaccurate or distorted information. - Armenia has also presented interpretation of the events of 1915 which is based on her own allegations. We all know that there are different opinions and theses on these events. Many historians have voiced these different opinions in their scientific work, including books, articles and other documents. - The statements by Armenia on past political, economic and social conditions are taken out of their context. Our current concept of citizenship can not be transposed and applied retroactively to the end of the 19th century and early 20th century. History can not be interpreted in this manner. This country is still basing itself on a false historiography. - Beyond interpretation even basic realities are misapprehended. It is a well known fact that many Armenians have occupied high posts within the Ottoman bureaucracy. There have been many Armenian Ottoman Ministers, Governors and Ambassadors including in 1915. History has witnessed the fact that intolerance, discrimination and racism have never been present in the Ottoman state and society. Historians of Ottoman history have unanimously pointed out to the traditional tolerance of the Ottoman Empire. - It is also inaccurate to state that "Armenia" existed at that time. There was not such a political entity and it is only curious that one tries to portray such an image. - It is only regrettable that such unsubstantiated allegations have been forwarded to the OHCHR for inclusion in a UN document. It is obvious that these allegations and propaganda have no place in such official documents. They contravene historical facts, international law and basic UN principles and practices. - While we are embarking on an effort within the UN Human Rights system to elaborate mechanisms under this particular heading of "prevention of genocide", it is harmful that such inaccurate information was provided as a misguiding factor for our work. 