%%%HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY|CAMEROON|RECOMMENDATIONS|

UNITED NATIONS A General Assembly Distr. ENGLISH Original: HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Eleventh session Agenda item 6 universal periodic review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* cameroon Addendum Opinions on the conclusions and/or recommendations, voluntary commitments and responses submitted by the State reviewed Responses A. Participation in the main international human rights instruments 76 (1) (Algeria, Mexico, Haiti) Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Measures have already been taken to protect children from pornographic production. A prefectoral decision to that effect has been taken in the Central Region. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. It signed the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities on 1 October 2008 and the instruments of ratification are currently being prepared. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance will be envisaged. 76 (1) (Mexico, Luxembourg, United Kingdom, Brazil, South Africa, Djibouti, Estonia, Czech Republic) The ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture is under consideration. Existing domestic legislation contains guarantees, such as stays of executions and interim administrative measures as provided for by administrative law, which can be invoked to effect to obtain suspension of deportation orders. In addition, refoulement of individuals whom a State deems undesirable is a sovereign act. Cameroon can authorize an individual to enter its territory or not, at its discretion. Nevertheless, there may be alternative ways of protecting such individuals and the issue will therefore remain under consideration. Cameroon warmly welcomed the creation of the International Criminal Court, which it had actively supported during the negotiation process. While it is not yet party to the Rome Statute, Cameroon is planning to incorporate the crimes under the Court's jurisdiction (genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes) into its domestic legislation. The Cameroonian authorities are giving very serious consideration to the matter of accession to the Rome Statute. Most of the Convention's provisions are already being applied under the country's legislation. The Constitution also protects "minorities and indigenous peoples". Nevertheless, certain provisions of the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (No. 169) are inconsistent with the commitment of Cameroon to strengthening national unity and preserving its territorial integrity. For this reason, Cameroon does not accept this recommendation as it stands, since it calls for more detailed consideration. B. Women's rights Cameroon accepts these recommendations and will take steps to strengthen the significant measures it has already taken in these areas. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. It has already implemented a Programme to improve the conditions of detention and respect for human rights (PACDET) and has initiated a project to modernize prisons and prepare detainees for social reintegration, which will include the construction of six new prisons each accommodating 300 inmates and the renovation of 24 existing prisons. Cameroon accepts these recommendations. A bill to punish violence against women is being finalized and the draft deals specifically with female genital mutilation. 76 (16) (Turkey) Cameroon accepts this recommendation. The Ministry for the Promotion of Women and the Family has developed and introduced an extensive programme to combat violence against women. A special vice squad has been established within the Interpol National Central Bureau, which is responsible for combating trafficking in children, exploitation, and abuse of and violence against women. The Government will redouble its efforts in this regard. C. Rights of the child Cameroon accepts these recommendations. They are entirely consistent with the measures already taken by the Government, including the establishment of bodies responsible for combating the worst forms of child labour (the National Committee for implementing the International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC)) and the setting up of a special vice squad responsible for combating the trafficking and exploitation of children. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Measures to educate and raise awareness among the general public and families about the effects of improper working conditions and the benefits of reintegrating victims within their families will be strengthened, in particular through radio broadcasts. D. Justice and prison administration Cameroon accepts this recommendation. In addition to the observations made on recommendation No. 12, Cameroon wishes to emphasize that all humanitarian organizations that so request are granted authorization giving them wide and unimpeded access to the country's prisons. While it accepts this recommendation, Cameroon wishes to clarify that the civil and military systems of justice are two separate systems independent of each other. It is also worth mentioning that special services have been set up within the police and the gendarmerie to carry out investigations, and that instances of abuse by members of the security forces are punished where they have been established. Cameroon is committed to expediting the necessary reforms of the legal system, as far as its resources allow. 78 (71, b) For efficiency reasons, it makes sense that the judicial police officer responsible for the execution of an arrest warrant can arrest the person sought whenever he or she is found, even on Sundays and national holidays, as permitted under article 28 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Article 23 of the Code nevertheless forbids officers to enter a place of abode between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. In cases of arrest without a warrant, article 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure requires that the attention of the person arrested should be drawn to any substitute document employed and that the judicial police officer should bring the person before the Procurator from the place of arrest without delay. Cameroon therefore rejects this recommendation. E. Promotion and protection of civil and political rights Cameroon accepts these recommendations. It undertakes to pursue its cooperation in the special procedures framework. It emphasizes, however, that the rights of all human rights defenders are respected and calls on the latter to comply with article 3 of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders by respecting the Republic's laws and regulations. Human rights training and education sessions are regularly organized for police and justice system personnel. Human rights courses are included in the curricula of staff training academies. The responses to recommendations Nos. 12 and 22 are also applicable to the present recommendation. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Its press legislation, in particular the 1990 laws, is in line with international human rights standards. 78 (16, d; 17) Cameroon rejects these recommendations as they stand. There is a wide range of press bodies in Cameroon, including over 200 private newspapers (with varying frequencies of issue), private radio and television companies, online news media, private printing presses, advertising agencies and media associations. On 30 August 2007, the first licences were issued to private audiovisual media companies in accordance with Decree No. 2000/158 of 3 April 2000, which establishes the terms and conditions for setting up and operating private media companies. Furthermore, a national commission, which meets annually, has been set up to consider requests for public aid for private media. While administrative censorship has been abolished, press offences are still punishable under criminal law with the aim of promoting responsibility and respect for the journalists' code of conduct, and protecting the rights of other citizens and public order. 78 (22, d) Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Freedom of the press is guaranteed in Cameroon. 78 (22, b) The membership of Elections Cameroon (ELECAM) is consistent with the decree setting it up. In accordance with its provisions, its members are individuals from very diverse ethnic, cultural and professional backgrounds and are reputed for their independence, moral rectitude, intellectual honesty, neutrality and impartiality. Moreover, the Head of State has undertaken to safeguard the independence of this body and, on his instructions, the relevant ministry has published a circular reaffirming this commitment. Cameroon therefore rejects this recommendation. 78 (19, d) Cameroon is an abolitionist country in practice, since the death penalty has not been carried out for over a decade. It remains in the country's legal armoury because of its dissuasive effect and public support for its retention. Cameroon rejects this recommendation. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. The Court is progressively being set up with the promulgation of Act Nos. 2004/004 and 2004/005 of 21 April 2004 concerning, respectively, the organization and operation of the Constitutional Council, and the status of its members. Its secretariat is organized in accordance with Decree No. 2005/253 of 30 June 2005. The forthcoming appointment of its members is the final stage on the way to its effective operation. 78 (22, b; 28, c; 20; 25, c; 29, d; 32, c; 46, b) From the standpoint of Cameroonian law, the criminalization of homosexuality is not contrary to article 12 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights or article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights insofar as homosexuals are not denied legal rights or services because of their alleged sexual orientation. The practices in question are contrary to both current legislation and what Cameroonian society still considers to be proper moral conduct. Moreover, the position adopted in domestic legislation finds support in the provisions of article 29 (2) of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and article 29 (7) of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, which represent safeguard clauses that can be invoked by any democratic society in accordance with its moral characteristics. These provisions respectively: (a) Recognize that a State may limit a right or freedom in order to meet "the just requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a democratic society"; (b) Require the individual "to preserve and strengthen positive African cultural values in his relations with other members of the society". In the present context of African culture, homosexuality is not deemed acceptable by Cameroonian society, being generally viewed as a manifestation of moral decadence to be resisted. Cameroon therefore rejects the recommendations related to the decriminalization of homosexuality. F. Economic, social and cultural rights The Cameroonian legal arsenal contains provisions which can usefully be invoked in HIV/AIDS-related cases and a law setting forth the rights of persons living with HIV/AIDS is under consideration. This recommendation is being followed up closely. Cameroon accepts this recommendation and is committed to implementing it to the extent that its resources allow. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Measures have already been taken to that effect. These include the provision since 2001 of free primary education and steps to ensure fair educational provision through the establishment of secondary schools in border zones and remote areas, as well as in the large cities. Further measures in the field of human rights education will be undertaken in conjunction with the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms. 78 (16, c) Cameroon rejects this recommendation. Labour law provisions guarantee equality for all those in Cameroon. G. Minorities and vulnerable populations While it accepts this recommendation, Cameroon points out that Mbororos enjoy the status of vulnerable population (not indigenous people) and that, like Pygmies and other citizens, they enjoy the right to own property. In addition, the Government pays special attention to them. Cameroon rejects this recommendation. Domestic law provides guarantees in this regard which may, where appropriate, be invoked by representatives of the Pygmy communities. H. International cooperation Cameroon accepts this recommendation. The outstanding reports have been submitted to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Committee on the Rights of the Child, the Human Rights Committee, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and Committee against Torture. Consideration of the combined second and third periodic reports of Cameroon by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women took place in January 2009. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. An invitation was extended to the Special Rapporteur. Mr. Frank La Rue has agreed to visit Cameroon from 14 to 18 September 2009. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. It is prepared to extend an open invitation to the Special Procedures and authorization to visit Cameroon will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Cameroon already cooperates fruitfully with the United Nations Sub-regional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa, which has enabled several human rights promotion and capacity-building activities to be organized. I. Concluding remarks Cameroon accepts this recommendation. Cameroon is a multi-ethnic country where more than 230 ethnic groups (identified according to dialect) and various religious groups (Christians, Muslims and Animists, among others) live peacefully together. This diversity contributes to mutual enrichment. The Government is ready and willing to share its experience in this area. 