%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|HUMAN RIGHTS EDUCATION|RIGHT TO FOOD|WOMEN'S RIGHTS|DISAPPEARANCE OF PERSONS|PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES|DISCRIMINATION|LEPROSY|

UNITED NATIONS A General Assembly Distr. Original: HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Advisory Committee Second session 26-30 January 2009 Agenda item 4 report of the advisory committee on its second session Geneva, 2630 January 2009 Rapporteur: Emmanuel DECAUX Paragraphs Page I. Recommendations adopted by the Advisory Committee at its second session 4 2/1. Drafting group on human rights education and training: progress report 4 2/2. Subsidiary bodies of the Human Rights Council 11 2/3. Elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family members 11 2/4. Drafting group on gender mainstreaming 12 2/5. Protection of civilians in armed conflict 13 2/6. Missing persons 14 2/7. Right to food 15 II. Officers, adoption of the agenda and organization of work 1 - 22 20 A. Opening and duration of the session 1 - 4 20 B. Composition of the Advisory Committee 5 20 C. Attendance 6 20 D. Meetings and documentation 7 20 E. Officers 8 21 F. Adoption of the agenda 9 - 10 21 G. Organization of work and conduct of business 11 - 22 21 III. Requests to the Advisory Committee stemming from Human Rights Council resolutions 23 - 53 23 A. Human rights education and training 24 30 23 B. Right to food 31 38 24 C. Human rights of women 39 - 42 24 continued) D. Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order 43 25 E. Missing persons 44 - 47 25 F. Human rights of persons with disabilities 48 25 G. Elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family 49 - 53 25 IV. Implementation of section III of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007 54 - 62 27 A. Rules of procedures and methods of work 55 27 B. Agenda and annual programme of work, including new priorities 56 -58 27 C. Follow-up to Advisory Committee recommendation 1/11 59 - 62 27 V. Report to the Human Rights Council on the second session of the Advisory Committee 63 - 65 28 Annex I. Agenda [as adopted] 29 II. List of speakers 30 III. Administrative and programme budget implications of recommendations adopted by the Advisory Committee at its second session 33 at its second session progress report The Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, Recalling resolution 6/10 of the Human Rights Council on the United Nations declaration on human rights education and training of 28 September 2007, Bearing in mind its recommendation 1/1 on the drafting group on human rights education and training: programme of work, setting forth elements of the conceptual framework for the continuation of work and consultations, and encouraging the drafting group to continue its preparatory work, with a view to submit further elements to the Advisory Committee at its next session, Taking note with satisfaction of the working paper prepared by the rapporteur of the drafting group, Emmanuel Decaux (A/HRC/AC/2/CRP.1), and the work of the drafting group in public and closed meetings during its second session, Welcoming the contacts established with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, especially the rapporteur's participation in the round table discussion entitled "Putting human rights into practice: the role of education", held at that organization's headquarters in Paris on 10 and 11 December 2008 on the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Thanking the secretariat for its efforts to facilitate the activities of the drafting group, in particular for sending out the questionnaires addressed to the various stakeholders, and for making available on the Advisory Committee's Extranet site all useful information on the work of the group under way, and expressing the hope that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights will continue to provide its experience and expertise and to foster the distribution of such information through all its branches, Welcoming the very favourable reception given to the consultations in progress, as seen by the fact that the questionnaires sent to the various stakeholders have to date elicited some 100 responses (see annex to the present recommendation), and in the quality of the replies, which have often been substantial, providing a wealth of practical information and useful suggestions, With regard to the consultations currently under way pursuant to paragraph 1 (a) of Council resolution 6/10: 1. Considers it appropriate to allow the various stakeholders, in particular the States and the national institutions, including the national commissions for the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, that have not yet been able to make a contribution to do so now, and requests the secretariat to issue a reminder, setting 15 March 2009 as the deadline for submission of the new round of contributions; 2. Believes it necessary that the comments of the treaty bodies and special rapporteurs be obtained, in particular those of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education, about their experience and initiatives in human rights education and training; 3. Requests the rapporteur of the drafting group to prepare a summary of the replies received, on the basis of the provisional conclusions reached by members of the group at the second session of the Advisory Committee, and to submit that summary to the Committee at its third session; 4. Considers it highly desirable that informal seminars be held in order to enrich the collective debate before its next session, and expresses the hope that the main sponsors of Council resolution 6/10 will take the initiative and arrange such a seminar in Geneva with the participation of human rights education and training practitioners and specialists; 5. Expresses the hope that similar initiatives can be taken in other international organizations, such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Organization of la Francophonie and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, that have already indicated their interest in the work of the Advisory Committee, and by other stakeholders, in particular non-governmental organizations, teachers' and parents' associations, the academic world and researchers; 6. Requests national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights to add the present item to the agendas of their forthcoming international meetings, in March 2009 in Geneva, at the annual meeting of the International Coordinating Committee, and at their regional meetings; 7. Thanks all stakeholders that have contributed to the collective discussion by answering questionnaires or by attending parallel events during its sessions, and intends to continue the work in progress in the same spirit of openness, responsiveness and transparency; With regard to the elements of the draft, pursuant to Council resolution 6/10, paragraph 1 (b): 8. Recalls the programme of work contained in the annex to its recommendation 1/1, in which it emphasized the importance of drawing up a brief yet substantive declaration with a message that would make a difference, setting out a collection of consistent, systematic principles or guidelines to suit different situations and settings; 9. Believes it worthwhile that the possibility of distinguishing between two levels of analysis be considered, one consisting of a framework declaration with action-oriented guiding principles, the other of more specialized technical documents targeting particular professional categories or specific domains; Considers that one of the first elements in the declaration should be a series of general guidelines recalling the legal underpinnings of the right to human rights education and training within international organizations, such as the United Nations and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, including the legal obligations which Member States are already under, spelling out the related obligations - to respect, to protect and to implement - and those who owe them - States, but also public or private non-State actors - and the intended beneficiaries of that right; 11. Considers that an overall vision should be developed upon this legal plinth, and that a large series of topics should be explored, beginning with the idea that education is an ongoing process and that human rights education and training for all should continue throughout life and apply to not only formal education, including vocational training and continuous learning, but also to informal education; 12. Emphasizes the importance of an integrated approach based on the equality of the sexes, non-discrimination and the promotion and protection of all human rights, including those of women and girls, with particular stress on human rights education and training within the family; 13. Also emphasizes the importance of paying special attention to vulnerable groups, particularly persons with disabilities, and of taking into account the specific situations of illiteracy and extreme poverty, as well as those of people belonging to ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples; 14. Believes it necessary that an integrated approach be favoured, hinging on the participation of the individuals concerned, who must be active players in human rights education and training, and taking specific action in response to needs on the ground; 15. Considers that full account should be taken of academic research and practical, including pedagogical, experience; 16. Believes it essential that steps taken to enshrine the right to human rights education and training in law be ensured by appropriate means and that they be followed up internationally, regionally, nationally and locally; 17. Considers that it might also be helpful to take into account a number of parameters, including: (a) With regard to the components of education and human rights training, beginning with curriculum definition, combining instruction in law with a multidisciplinary approach, the organization of the school system, but also how trainers are trained, the accent being on quality of education; b) The different stages or forms of education, taking into account age levels, primary, secondary and higher education and basic vocational training in all domains, legal occupations, administrations, forces of law and order, prison staff and military personnel, but also all related professions, including those in the private sector; (c) The means to employ, taking into account time-honoured vectors, including publications and translations into national and local languages, training schemes and summer courses, youth movements and so forth, and of the opportunities afforded by new technology, such as distance learning, the development of computerized databases and e-learning; 18. Submits the above reflections to the Human Rights Council as a progress report on its current work and consultations, and expresses the hope that the Council will give it guidance on the pursuit of this collective undertaking with a view to the drafting of a declaration on human rights education and training at its next session; 19. Recommends that the Human Rights Council consider adopting the following decision: "The Human Rights Council, 1. Takes note with satisfaction of the reflections submitted by the Advisory Committee as a progress report on its current work and consultations, and encourages the Committee to pursue this collective undertaking with a view to the drafting of a declaration on human rights education and training; 2. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to facilitate the holding of an informal seminar in Geneva, with the participation of human rights education and training practitioners and specialists, in order to enrich the collective debate before the next session of the Advisory Committee." 8th meeting 30th January 2009 Replies received to questionnaire prepared by the Advisory Committee, as at 28 January 2009 Governments and federal entities Name Date of receipt Albania Algeria Argentina Austria Belarus Belgium (Flemish Department of Education and Training) Belgium (Ministère de la région Wallonne) Bulgaria Colombia Cyprus Czech Republic Ecuador Finland Greece Honduras Hungary Indonesia Italy Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Latvia Mexico Montenegro Morocco Republic of Korea Romania Slovenia Spain Switzerland Thailand The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Turkey Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) International organizations Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Secretariat of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization United Nations Population Fund Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees United Nations Children's Fund United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute Department of Public Information World Food Programme National human rights institutions and other relevant institutions Australian Human Rights Commission* * Accredited by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions. Canadian Human Rights Commission* Commission national des droits de l'homme et des libertés fondamentales du Niger* Conseil consultatif des droits de l'homme (Maroc)* Fiji Human Rights Commission German Institute for Human Rights* Human Rights Commission of Malaysia* Human Rights Commission of New Zealand* Malawi Human Rights Commission* National Human Rights Commission of Mauritius* National Human Rights Commission of Mongolia* National Human Rights Commission of Nepal* Norwegian Centre for Human Rights* Office of the Spanish Ombudsman* Procuradurìa para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos de El Salvador* Procuradurìa para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos de Nicaragua German Commission for UNESCO Maltese Parliamentary Ombudsman People's Advocate Institution Romania Civil society actors, including non-governmental organizations and academia Armenian Constitutional Right-Protective Centre** ** In consultative status with the Economic and Social Council. Association Droits Partagés Association ESTER Association Points-Cœur** Buraku Liberation and Human Rights Research Institute Center for the Protection of Children's Rights Foundation Centre de documentation, de recherche et d'information des peuples autochtones** Centre international de formation à l'enseignement des droits de l'homme et de la paix Centre on Human Rights for People with Disabilities, Disability Action, Belfast, Northern Ireland Children's Rights Alliance for England Commission Programmatique Mixte ONG-UNESCO (on behalf of 30 non-governmental organizations) Confédération française des travailleurs chrétiens Diaspora Bridge Center Project Educational Center for Research and Development (Lebanon) Espace & Vie European Union of Public Relations** Europe-Third World Centre** Good Shepherd Sisters - Germany Groupement Tsara Manasoa Hotline Human Rights Bangladesh Human Rights Office IIMA HURIGHTS Osaka Indian Institute for Human Rights Ingénieurs du monde** International Catholic Child Bureau** for questions 1-3 International Catholic Child Bureau** also on behalf of seven other non-governmental organizations and three academics in response to question 4 International Federation of Rural Adult Catholic Movements* International Union of Latin Notariat** Lawyer's Rights Watch Canada Ligue internationale contre le racisme et l'antisémitisme** Mouvement pour la défense de l'humanité et l'abolition de la torture New Humanity** Nord-Sud XXI** Pax Christi International, International Catholic Peace Movement** People's Movement for Human Rights Learning Reseau des citoyens haitiens pour la promotion des droits de l'homme Sœurs du Bon Pasteur (Budapest) Soka Gakkai International** Norway Helsinki Committee / Udruga Legalis UHD Prijateljice VORMEN Academia and individuals Interdepartmental Centre on Human Rights and the Rights of Peoples, University of Padua Department of Education, Gothenburg University, Sweden Mr. Ge Mingzhen, Associate Professor, Law School, Shandong University, China Mr. Joseph Sergo Louis-Charles, Teacher-Researcher (Haiti) Mr. Patrick Taylor, MA Understanding and Securing Human Rights 15.08.2008 (dissertation) 2/2. Subsidiary bodies of the Human Rights Council Considering the discussion it held at its sixth plenary meeting on 29 January 2009, during which it highlighted the importance of the issues to be analysed by other subsidiary bodies established by the Human Rights Council and the need to avoid possible duplication of work, 1. Designated Committee members José Bengoa Cabello and Purificación Valera Quisumbing to follow the work of the Social Forum, which will meet on 31 August 2009, and brief the Committee at its fourth session on issues of relevance to the work of the Committee; 2. Also designated the members Mona Zulficar and Miguel Alfonso Martínez to follow the work of the Forum on Minority Issues and the work of the Expert Mechanism of Indigenous Peoples, respectively, which will meet in August and September 2009, and to brief the Committee on issues of relevance to its work at its fourth session. 30 January 2009 2/3. Elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family members Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 8/13 of 18 June 2008 on the elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family members, Welcoming the fact that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has collected information on the measures that 24 Governments have taken to eliminate discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family members, pursuant to Council resolution 8/13, Welcoming also the submissions of civil society organizations on the issue of leprosy, Taking note of the open-ended consultation meeting held on 15 January 2008 to exchange views among relevant actors, including Governments, observers of the United Nations, relevant United Nations bodies, specialized agencies and programmes, non-governmental organizations, scientists and medical experts, as well as representatives of persons affected by leprosy and their family members, Recommends that the Human Rights Council consider adopting the following decisions: 1. Welcomes with appreciation the working paper on the elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family members (A/HRC/AC/2/CRP.5), submitted by Shigeki Sakamoto; 2. Endorses the conclusions contained in the above-mentioned working paper; 3. Requests Mr. Sakamoto to formulate a draft set of principles and guidelines for the elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family members, for review by the Advisory Committee at its third session and for consideration by the Council by September 2009; 4. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to provide Mr. Sakamoto with all the assistance necessary to enable him to accomplish the abovementioned task." 2/4. Drafting group on gender mainstreaming Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 6/30 of 14 December 2007 on integrating the human rights of women throughout the United Nations system, in which the Council requested the Advisory Committee regularly and systematically to integrate a gender perspective into the implementation of its mandate, including when examining the intersection of multiple forms of discrimination against women, and to include in its reports information on and qualitative analysis of human rights of women and girls, Recalling also that, at its first session, the Advisory Committee adopted a recommendation on integrating the human rights of women throughout the United Nations system, in which it requested Mr. Burney, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Sakamoto and Ms. Zulficar to prepare for the next session a set of draft guidelines on methods to operationalize gender mainstreaming, including action-oriented mechanisms that would facilitate the implementation of the Committee's mandates, Taking note of the draft guidelines on methods to operationalize gender mainstreaming, including action-oriented mechanisms (A/HRC/AC/2/CRP.4/Rev.2), Acknowledging the importance of building on the existing work carried out by the various United Nations organs, agencies, mechanisms and treaty bodies and nongovernmental organizations on gender mainstreaming and developing guidelines aiming at enhancing implementation and effectiveness of gender mainstreaming strategies, Recommends that the Human Rights Council consider adopting the following decision: "The Human Rights Council authorizes the Advisory Committee to prepare draft guidelines on methods to enhance implementation of gender mainstreaming, including action-oriented mechanisms within the Council and all other organs within the United Nations system, in consultation with all other relevant United Nations organs, specialized agencies, treaty bodies, national human rights institutions and nongovernmental organizations." 2/5. Protection of civilians in armed conflict Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 9/9 of 24 September 2008 on the protection of the human rights of civilians in armed conflict, in which the Council requested relevant special procedures and the Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, and invited human rights treaty bodies, within their respective mandate, to continue to address the relevant aspects of the protection of human rights of civilians in armed conflicts in their work, Recalling also that, in the same resolution, the Council invited the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to convene an expert consultation, open to the participation of Governments, regional organizations, relevant United Nations bodies and civil society organizations, and in consultation with the International Committee of the Red Cross, on the issue of protecting the human rights of civilians in armed conflict, and requested the Office of the High Commissioner to report on the outcome of that consultation, in the form of a summary of discussions on the issue, to the Council at its eleventh session, Recalling further that, in the same resolution, the Council decided to continue consideration of this question at its eleventh session under the same agenda item on the basis of the outcome of the consultation, with a view to consider requesting the Advisory Committee, while taking into account the work of the Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights on this subject, to elaborate a study with potential recommendations on the protection of the human rights of civilians in armed conflict, "The Human Rights Council requests the Advisory Committee to designate one of its members to be invited to participate in the expert consultation on the protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict, to be convened by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as requested by the Council in its resolution 9/9, and to report thereon to the Advisory Committee at its fourth session." 2/6. Missing persons Recalling Human Rights Council resolution 7/28 of 28 March 2008, in which the Council decided to hold a panel discussion on the question of missing persons at its ninth session and requested the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to prepare a summary of the panel's deliberations with a view to subsequently charging the Advisory Committee, at the same session, with the preparation of a study on best practices in the matter, Recalling also Council decision 9/101 of 24 September 2008, in which the Council renewed its request to the Advisory Committee to prepare the above-mentioned study and to submit it to the Council at its twelfth session, Taking note of the results of the panel discussion prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on 22 September 2008, Appreciative of the summary of the panel discussion prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner, Noting that the Advisory Committee, at its second session, held from 26 to 30 January 2009, continued its deliberations on the issue of missing persons, 1. Entrusted a drafting group with the task of preparing a study on best practices in the matter of missing persons in situations of armed conflict as requested by the Council; 2. Designated the Committee members Ansar Burney, Chinsung Chung, Wolfgang Stefan Heinz, Latif Hüseynov, Miguel Alfonso Martinez and Bernard Andrews Nyamwaya Mudho as members of the drafting group; 3. Notes that the drafting group elected Mr. Heinz as Chairperson and Mr. Hüseynov as Rapporteur of the drafting group; Requests the drafting group to submit the results of its work on the study to the Advisory Committee at its third session with a view to submitting them to the Council at its twelfth session; 5. Requests the Secretariat to provide all the assistance necessary to support the activities of the drafting group, particularly to facilitate contacts with relevant stakeholders, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross, and to make all relevant information on the ongoing work of the drafting group available on the website of the Advisory Committee. 2/7. Right to food Recalling the resolutions of the Human Rights Council on the right to food for all, particularly its resolution 7/14 of 27 March 2008, in which the Council requested the Advisory Committee to consider potential recommendations for approval by the Council on possible further measures to enhance the realization of the right to food, bearing in mind the priority importance of promoting the implementation of existing standards, Recalling also that the right to adequate food is realized when every man, woman and child, alone or in community with others, has physical and economic access at all times to adequate food or means for its procurement, as defined by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in its general comment No. 12 (1999), Recalling further that, inspired by the above-mentioned definition, the right to food has been defined as the right to have regular, permanent and unrestricted access, either directly or by means of financial purchases, to quantitatively and qualitatively adequate and sufficient food corresponding to the cultural traditions of the people to which the consumer belongs, and which ensures a physical and mental, individual and collective, fulfilling and dignified life free of fear (A/HRC/7/5, para. 17), Bearing in mind the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on 23 November 2004, and the Comprehensive Framework for Action developed as a result of the High-Level Conference on World Food Security of June 2008, Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to food (A/HRC/9/23) and of the recommendations therein, with deep concern that 923 million people, mainly in developing and least developed countries, continue to suffer from hunger, malnutrition and food insecurity, and that every five seconds a child under the age of 10 dies, directly and indirectly, of hunger somewhere in the world, despite the fact that, according to reports of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, world agricultural output should be able to feed 12 billion people, twice the world's present population, Affirming that dying as a direct or indirect result of hunger is a flagrant violation of the right to life as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Considering that the current world food crisis is characterized by extreme volatility and consistent massive increases in the food prices over the medium and long term, and that, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the world food index is 50 per cent higher in December 2008 than it was in December 2003, Recognizing that, according to many expert reports, the underlying causes of the current food crisis are, inter alia: (a) Speculation on food and agricultural commodities; (b) The conversion of staple foods (hereinafter denoting wheat, rice and maize only) into biofuels; (c) Distortions in agricultural policies, particularly agricultural subsidies, tariffs and nontariff barriers, by highly developed countries, which severely affect small farmers and threaten food security, especially in developing countries; (d) Inadequate and decreasing investments in agriculture by Governments and the private sector, which, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, dropped to an average of 4 per cent in 2008 in Western and Central Africa, financial measures taken by leading international financial agencies, as well as the sharp fall in official development assistance allocated to agricultural development, which, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, dropped from 17 per cent in 1980 to 3 per cent in 2006; Deeply concerned at the grave consequences of the current food crisis, which include: (a) Increasing poverty, particularly extreme poverty, especially of women and children, as confirmed by the World Bank, which has indicated that in 2008, the food crisis pushed 105 million people back into poverty, in both urban and rural areas; (b) Increasing vulnerability to food insecurity in at least 37 countries in danger which, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, are most affected by the food crisis, insofar as food accounts for at least 60 to 80 per cent of consumer spending, compared to 10 to 20 per cent in industrialized countries, and a 40 per cent increase in food prices forces families in these countries to spend their entire budget on food; c) The severe and negative impact on the right to adequate food of already foodinsecure agricultural workers in the informal sector and small-hold farming households, while a small number of transnational corporations, controlling the food chain, acquire disproportionately huge benefits; (d) An increasing number of "hunger refugees" fleeing their countries, as a matter of necessity rather than choice, because hunger threatens their lives and those of their families, a number of whom may not qualify for protection under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 and the protocol thereto of 1967, or other existing human rights instruments; (e) An increasing risk of perpetuating hunger among refugees and in camps for internally displaced persons, also in urban settings, owing to, inter alia, the lack of financial means available to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Food Programme to ensure adequate food for refugees and internally displaced persons, in addition to the lack of employment and self-reliance opportunities, considering that, in some camps, over 80 per cent of all children under 10 years of age suffer from anaemia and face serious difficulties in following school programmes of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Reaffirming that States have a primary obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the right to food of their own population, especially vulnerable groups and households, which also involves the duty to ensure that any activities undertaken within their jurisdiction do not deprive another State of the ability to realize the right to food for its own population, 1. Recommends that the Human Rights Council consider the following proposals with a view to further enhancing respect for and protection and fulfilment of the right to food in the light of the ongoing crisis, and that it call on States: (a) Individually and through multilateral institutions and international organizations, to take measures to prohibit non-commercial stock exchange speculation by financial investors on, restrict the use of derivatives in relation to staple foods prices through regulations, in order to limit price volatility and ensure market stability, and consider re-establishing international buffer stocks to stabilize the price of food commodities, following the model developed in 2008 by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; (b) Individually and through multilateral institutions and international organizations: To give priority to developing bioenergy technologies that do not use staple foods; To put an end to the transformation of staple foods into biofuels, including any related subsidies, incentives or tax breaks; to this end, a five-year moratorium on all initiatives aiming at converting staple foods into biofuels could be considered; (c) To call on industrialized and developed States, individually and through multilateral institutions and international organizations to take measures to eliminate distortions in agricultural policies, particularly with respect to agricultural subsidies, tariffs and non-tariff barriers; (d) Individually and through international cooperation and assistance, relevant multilateral institutions and international organizations, to take measures: To support small-holders, traditional farmers and their organizations, including in particular rural women and vulnerable groups, by guaranteeing them access to land rights and fair prices for their products and promoting sustainable forms of agricultural production; To give top priority in national budgets to investments in subsistence agriculture and local production, including infrastructures, irrigation, seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and so on; to this end, the Bretton Woods institutions and the World Trade Organization should change the existing paradigm of their agricultural policy accordingly; To address the violations of the human rights of agricultural workers and small-hold rural families, particularly the right to adequate food, including by considering the drafting and the adoption of an international convention on the rights of peasants; (e) Individually and through international cooperation and assistance, relevant multilateral institutions and international organizations, to increase international aid allocated to agricultural development, particularly with respect to production of staple foods in least developed countries, in order to reduce dependency on food imports and foster local production; (f) Individually and through multilateral institutions and international organizations, to take measures to strengthen national and international protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their land and countries because of hunger or other severe violations of their right to adequate food; (g) Individually and through multilateral institutions and international organizations, to ensure that their international political and economic policies, including international trade agreements, do not have an adverse impact on the right to food in other countries; to develop international trade agreements with the participation of all stakeholders, including civil society; and to consider implementing the concept of food sovereignty; (h) Individually and through multilateral institutions and international organizations, to take measures to ensure that food deprivation is not use, directly or indirectly, as a means of political or economic pressure; Also recommends that the Council consider adopting the following decisions: 1. Entrusts the Advisory Committee with the task of preparing a study on the food crisis, the right to food, agricultural subsidies and the rights of peasants; 2. Also entrusts the Advisory Committee with the task of preparing a study on the food crisis, the right to food and the new concept of "hunger refugees": definition and situation; 3. Urgently appeals to Member States to increase their contributions substantially and as soon as possible to enable the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Food Programme to discharge their mandates effectively during the current crisis; such contributions are based on the obligation of the States to respect, protect and fulfil the right to food without discrimination and without any territorial or jurisdictional limitations." 9th meeting A. Opening and duration of the session 1. The Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, established pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its second session at the United Nations Office at Geneva from 26 to 30 January 2009. The session was opened by the Chairperson of the Advisory Committee, Mr. Miguel Alfonso Martínez. 2. Mr. Bacre Waly Ndiaye made a statement on behalf of the deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights at the 1st meeting of the second session of the Advisory Committee, on 26 January 2009. 3. At the same meeting, the President of the Human Rights Council, Ambassador Martin Uhomoibhi, addressed the Advisory Committee. 4. Also at the same meeting, the Advisory Committee observed a minute of silence for the victims of human rights violations world-wide, at the suggestion of one of the Committee experts, Mrs. Halima Warzazi. B. Composition of the Advisory Committee 5. In accordance with Council resolution 5/1 and Council decision 6/102, 18 members of the Advisory Committee were elected at the seventh session of the Council on 26 March 2008. The names of the members are as follows (the year in brackets indicates when the term of office of the members expires): Mr. Miguel Alfonso Martínez (Cuba, 2009); Mr. José Antonio Bengoa Cabello (Chile, 2010); Mr. Ansar Ahmed Burney (Pakistan, 2011); Mr. Chen Shiqiu (China, 2009); Ms. Chinsung Chung (Republic of Korea, 2010); Mr. Emmanuel Decaux (France, 2011); Mr. Héctor Felipe Fix Fierro (Mexico, 2011); Mr. Wolfgang Stefan Heinz (Germany, 2010); Mr. Latif Hüseynov (Azerbaijan, 2011); Mr. Baba Kura Kaigama (Nigeria, 2011); Mr. Vladimir Kartashkin (Russian Federation, 2010); Mr. Bernards Andrews Nyamwaya Mudho (Kenya, 2010); Ms. Purificacion V. Quisumbing (Philippines, 2011); Mr. Shigeki Sakamoto (Japan, 2010); Mr. Dheerujlall Seetulsingh (Mauritius, 2011); Mrs. Halima Embarek Warzazi (Morocco, 2009); Mr. Jean Ziegler (Switzerland, 2009); and Ms. Mona Zulficar (Egypt, 2010). C. Attendance 6. The session was attended by members of the Advisory Committee, observers for States members of the United Nations, observers for nonmember States and for intergovernmental organizations, United Nations bodies, specialized agencies, other organizations, national human rights institutions and nongovernmental organizations. One member of the Advisory Committee, Mr. Kaigama, was unable to attend the second session. D. Meetings and documentation 7. The Advisory Committee held 9 plenary meetings, 4 meetings of drafting groups and 2 closed meetings. The Advisory Committee adopted 7 recommendations. The text of the recommendations is contained in chapter I. E. Officers 8. In accordance with rule 103 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, at its 1st meeting, on 4 August 2008, the Advisory Committee elected the following officers by acclamation, who also served as officers for the second session: Chairperson: Miguel Alfonso Martínez (Cuba) ViceChairpersons: Chinsung Chung (Republic of Korea) Vladimir Kartashkin (Russian Federation) Mona Zulficar (Egypt) Rapporteur: Emmanuel Decaux (France) F. Adoption of the agenda 9. At its 1st meeting, on 26 January 2009, the Advisory Committee had before it a note by the SecretaryGeneral containing the provisional agenda for the second session (A/HRC/AC/2/1). The annotations to the provisional agenda are contained in document A/HRC/AC/2/1/Add.1. 10. Also at the same meeting, the agenda was adopted without a vote (see annex I). G. Organization of work and conduct of business 11. The Advisory Committee considered item 2 of the agenda at its 2nd and 3rd meetings, on 27 January; at its 4th and 5th meetings, on 28 January; at its 6th and 7th meetings, on 29 January; at its 8th and 9th meetings, on 30 January; and also at its drafting group meetings on 26 January. 12. The Advisory Committee considered item 3 of the agenda at its 6th and 7th meetings, on 29 January, and at its 8th meeting on 30 January. 13. At its 1st meeting, on 26 January, the Advisory Committee considered its programme of work, in accordance with rule 99 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. 14. At the same meeting, it was agreed that a new sub-item on the follow-up to Advisory Committee recommendation 1/11 be added to item 3. 15. At the same meeting, statements in connection with the organization of work for the second session were made by members of the Advisory Committee (see annex II). 16. Also at the same meeting, the programme of work, as revised, was adopted without a vote. 17. The Advisory Committee agreed that meetings of the Bureau would be held on Tuesday morning, 27 January, and whenever necessary. The Bureau would also hold a meeting with nongovernmental organizations on Wednesday 28 January, from 9:15 to 10 a.m. 18. At its 3rd meeting, on 27 January, the modalities with respect to the organization of work and conduct of business were announced, following recommendation by the Bureau on the basis of the modalities applied at the first session of the Committee. 19. According to the modalities, members of the Advisory Committee would be entitled to make one or more statements of 10 minutes maximum for each item or sub-item. Statements on procedural matters should not exceed 2 minutes. Experts entrusted with the preparation of any report or working paper could speak for a maximum of 20 minutes, to be divided between the introduction of the report and concluding remarks. 20. Government observers and observers for intergovernmental organizations, United Nations bodies, national human rights institutions and other organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations' observers would be limited to one statement of seven minutes for each item or subitem. According to the modalities, the order of statements during discussions would be: members of the Advisory Committee, observers for intergovernmental organizations, national human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations, and then Government observers. 21. It was agreed that the deadline for submitting draft recommendations was 28 January. 22. At the 9th meeting, on 30 January, general comments were made by the Chairperson, Mr. Bengoa, Mr. Decaux, Mr. Kartashkin, Ms. Quisumbing, Mrs. Warzazi, Mr. Ziegler. Mr. Ziegler took again the floor to make a statement and comments were made by the Chairperson, Mr. Bengoa and Mrs. Warzazi. A representative of the non-governmental organization community, the Arab Commission of Human Rights, also made concluding remarks at the same meeting. Human Rights Council resolutions 23. The Advisory Committee considered agenda item 2 at its 2nd and 3rd meetings, on 27 January; at its 4th and 5th meetings, on 28 January; at its 6th and 7th meetings, on 29 January; at its 8th and 9th meetings, on 30 January; and also at its drafting group meetings on 26 January. A. Human rights education and training 24. Pursuant to Council resolution 6/10, the Advisory Committee, at its meetings of drafting group on human rights education and training, on 26 January, and at its 4th and 5th meetings, on 28 January, held discussions on human rights education and training. 25. At the 4th and 5th meetings, on 28 January, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee and by observers for Governments and nongovernmental organizations (see annex II). 26. The drafting group on human rights education and training, consisting of the following members of the Advisory Committee: Mr. Decaux, Mr. Fix Fierro, Mr. Kartashkin, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Seetulsingh and Mrs. Warzazi, held 2 meetings in the morning and afternoon of 26 January. Drafting group on human rights education and training: progress report 27. At its 8th meeting, on 30 January, the Advisory Committee considered draft recommendation A/HRC/AC/2/L.1, sponsored by Mr. Decaux, Mr. Fix Fierro, Mr. Kartashkin, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Seetulsingh and Mrs. Warzazi. 28. At that meeting, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the attention of the Advisory Committee was drawn to the estimated administrative and programme budget implications of the draft recommendations discussed and adopted at its 8th and 9th meetings on 30 January (see annex III). 29. At the same meeting, Mr. Decaux introduced the draft recommendation and orally revised it by modifying operative paragraph 19. 30. Also at the same meeting, the draft recommendation was adopted, as orally revised, without a vote. B. Right to food 31. Pursuant to Council resolution 7/14, the Advisory Committee, at its 5th meeting, on 28 January, and at its 6th meeting, on 29 January, held discussions on the right to food. At these two meetings, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee and by observers for Governments, United Nations bodies, intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations (see annex II). 32. The drafting group on the right to food, consisting of the following members of the Advisory Committee: Mr. Bengoa, Ms. Chung, Mr. Hüseynov, Mr. Ziegler and Ms. Zulficar, held 2 meetings on the morning and afternoon of 26 January. 33. At its 8th and 9th meetings, on 30 January, the Advisory Committee considered draft recommendation A/HRC/AC/2/L.2, sponsored by Mr. Bengoa, Ms. Chung, Mr. Hüseynov, Mr. Mudho, Mr. Ziegler and Ms. Zulficar. 34. At its 8th meeting, on 30 January, Ms. Zulficar introduced the draft recommendation and orally revised it. 35. Statements in connection with the draft recommendation were made by Mr. Martínez, Mr. Mudho and Mr. Ziegler. 36. At its 9th meeting, on 30 January, statements in connection with the draft recommendation were made by Mr. Martínez, Mr. Ziegler and Ms. Zulficar. 37. At the same meeting, the draft recommendation was adopted, as orally revised, without a vote. 38. Also at the same meeting, on 30 January, statements in explanation of the vote after the vote were made by Mr. Chen and Mr. Kartashkin. Comments on the adopted recommendation were made by the representative of Brazil. C. Human rights of women 39. Pursuant to Council resolution 6/30 and Advisory Committee recommendation 1/4, the Advisory Committee, at its 3rd meeting, on 27 January, held a discussion on gender mainstreaming. Ms. Chung made a presentation. During the discussion at the same meeting, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee (see annex II). Drafting group on gender mainstreaming 40. At its 8th meeting, on 30 January, the Advisory Committee considered draft recommendation A/HRC/AC/2/L.5, sponsored by Mr. Bengoa, Mr. Burney, Mr. Chen, Ms. Chung, Mr. Fix Fierro, Mr. Heinz, Mr. Hüseynov, Mr. Kartashkin, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Sakamoto, Mr. Seetulsingh, Mrs. Warzazi and Ms. Zulficar. 42. Also at the same meeting, the draft recommendation was adopted, as orally revised, without a vote. D. Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order 43. Pursuant to Council resolution 8/5, the Advisory Committee, at its 3rd meeting, on 27 January, held a discussion on the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order. During the discussion at the same meeting, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee (see annex II). E. Missing persons 44. Pursuant to Council resolution 7/28, the Advisory Committee, at its 2nd meeting, on 27 January, held a discussion on missing persons. Mr. Hüseynov made a presentation. During the discussion at the same meeting, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee and by observers for Governments and non-governmental organizations (see annex II). Drafting group on missing persons 45. At the 8th meeting, on 30 January, the Advisory Committee considered draft recommendation A/HRC/AC/2/L.7, sponsored by Mr. Burney, Ms. Chung, Mr. Heinz, Mr. Hüseynov, Mr. Kartashkin, Mr. Mudho and Ms. Zulficar. 46. At the same meeting, Mr. Heinz introduced the draft recommendation. 47. Also at the same meeting, the draft recommendation was adopted without a vote. F. Human rights of persons with disabilities 48. Pursuant to Council resolution 7/9, the Advisory Committee, at its 4th meeting, on 28 January, held a discussion on the human rights of persons with disabilities. During the discussion at the same meeting, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee and by an observer for Government (see annex II). G. Elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family 49. Pursuant to Council resolution 8/13, the Advisory Committee, at its 4th meeting, on 28 January, held a discussion on the elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family. Mr. Sakamoto made a presentation. During the discussion at the same meeting, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee (see annex II). 51. At that meeting, Mr. Sakamoto introduced the draft recommendation. 52. At the same meeting, the draft recommendation was adopted without a vote. 53. Also at the same meeting, a statement in explanation of the vote after the vote was made by Mrs. Warzazi. IV. Implementation of section III of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007 54. The Advisory Committee considered agenda item 3 at its 6th and 7th meetings, on 29 January, and at its 8th meeting on 30 January. A. Rules of procedures and methods of work 55. At its 6th meetings, on 29 January, the Advisory Committee discussed its rules of procedure and methods of work. During the discussion at the same meeting, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee, by an observer for Government and by observers for nongovernmental organizations (see annex II). B. Agenda and annual programme of work, including new priorities Protection of civilians in armed conflict 56. At its 8th meeting, on 30 January, the Advisory Committee considered draft recommendation A/HRC/AC/2/L.6, sponsored by Mr. Decaux, Mr. Hüseynov, Mrs. Warzazi and Ms. Zulficar. 57. At the same meeting, Ms. Zulficar introduced the draft recommendation, orally revising it by modifying the last paragraph. 58. Also at the same meeting, the draft recommendation was adopted, as orally revised, without a vote. C. Follow-up to Advisory Committee recommendation 1/11 59. At its 7th meeting, on 29 January, the Advisory Committee heard presentations from Mr. Bengoa, Ms. Zulficar and Mr. Martínez as follow-up to its recommendation 1/11 to the Human Rights Council. During the discussion at the same meeting, statements were made by members of the Advisory Committee (see annex II). Subsidiary bodies of the Human Rights Council 60. At its 8th meeting, on 30 January, the Advisory Committee considered draft recommendation A/HRC/AC/2/L.3, sponsored by Mr. Bengoa, Mr. Burney, Mr. Chen, Ms. Chung, Mr. Fix Fierro, Mr. Heinz, Mr. Hüseynov, Mr. Kartashkin, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Sakamoto, Mrs. Warzazi, Mr. Ziegler and Ms. Zulficar. 61. At the same meeting Mrs. Warzazi introduced the draft recommendation. 62. Also at the same meeting, the draft recommendation was adopted without a vote. 63. The Advisory Committee considered agenda item 4 at its 9th meeting on 30 January. 64. At that meeting, the Rapporteur of the Advisory Committee, Mr. Decaux, presented the draft report on its second session (A/HRC/AC/2/L.10). 65. At the same meeting, the Advisory Committee adopted the draft report ad referendum and decided to entrust the Rapporteur with its finalization. Agenda [as adopted] 1. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work 2. Requests to the Advisory Committee stemming from Human Rights Council resolutions: (a) Human rights education and training (b) Right to food (c) Human rights of women (d) Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order (e) Missing persons (f) Human rights of persons with disabilities (g) Elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family 3. Implementation of sections III and IV of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007: (a) Rules of procedures and methods of work (b) Agenda and annual programme of work, including new priorities (c) Follow-up to Advisory Committee recommendation 1/11 4. Report to the Human Rights Council on the second session of the Advisory Committee Annex II List of speakers Agenda item Meeting and date Speakers Adoption of the agenda and organization of work 1st meeting 26 January 2009 Members: Ms. Chung, Mr. Decaux, Mrs. Warzazi, Mr. Ziegler Secretariat of the Advisory Committee Request to the Advisory Committee stemming from Human Rights Council resolutions 2(a) Human rights education and training 4th meeting 28 January 2009 Members: Mr. Chen, Mr. Decaux, Mr. Kartashkin, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Seetulsingh, Ms. Zulficar Government observers: Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Indonesia Observers for non-governmental organizations: Soka Gakkai International [also on behalf of International Organization For the Right to Education and Freedom of Education , Pax Romana (International Catholic Movement for Intellectual and Cultural Affairs and International Movement of Catholic Students)], Indian Movement Tupaj Amaru 5th meeting Members: Mr. Bengoa, Mr. Decaux Observers for non-governmental organizations: Federation of Development and Promotion of Human Rights, Arab Commission on Human Rights 2(b) Right to food Members: Mr. Bengoa, Mr. Ziegler, Ms. Zulficar 6th meeting 29 January 2009 Members: Ms. Quisumbing Mr. Seetulsingh, Mrs. Warzazi, Mr. Ziegler, Ms. Zulficar Government observers: Bolivia, Brazil, Czech Republic (on behalf of the European Union) Observers for non-governmental organizations: International Organization of Indigenous Resources Development (also on behalf of International Indian Treaty Council) Observer for United Nations bodies: UNHCR Observer for intergovernmental organizations: FAO 2(c) Human rights of women 3rd meeting 27 January 2009 Members: Mr. Chen, Ms. Chung, Mr. Decaux, Mr. Heinz, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Seetulsingh, Mrs. Warzazi 2(d) Promotion of a democratic and equitable international order Members: Mr. Chen, Mr. Decaux, Mr. Heinz, Mr. Mudho, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Seetulsingh, Mrs. Warzazi 2(e) Missing persons 2nd meeting Members: Mr. Burney, Mr. Chen, Ms. Chung, Mr. Decaux, Mr. Heinz, Mr. Hüseynov, Mr. Kartashkin, Mr. Mudho, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Seetulsingh, Ms. Zulficar Government observers: Argentina, Azerbaijan, Mexico Observers for non-governmental organization: Indian Movement Tupaj Amaru 2(f) Human rights of persons with disabilities Members: Mr. Hüseynov, Mr. Mudho Government Observer: Mexico 2(g) Elimination of discrimination against persons affected by leprosy and their family Members: Mr. Chen, Ms. Chung, Mr. Decaux, Mr. Heinz, Mr. Kartashkin, Mr. Mudho, Ms. Quisumbing, Mr. Sakamoto, Mrs. Warzazi 3(a) Rules of procedures and methods of work Members: Mr. Chen, Ms. Chung, Mr. Decaux, Mr. Hüseynov, Ms. Kartashkin, Mr. Sakamoto, Mr. Seetulsingh, Mrs. Warzazi Government observer: Mexico Observer for non-governmental organizations: International Organization of Indigenous Resource Development, Indigenous Council of South America 3(c) Follow-up to Advisory Committee recommendation 1/11 7th meeting Members: Mr. Bengoa, Mr. Kartashkin, Mr. Martínez, Mr. Quisumbing, Mrs. Warzazi, Ms. Zulficar Annex III Administrative and programme budget implications of recommendations adopted by the Advisory Committee at its second session 1. The Advisory Committee, as established under Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, is reminded in respect of its draft recommendations that it has no authority to commit financial resources of the Organization. The financial implications, if any, of its recommendations will be addressed at such time as they may be taken up by the Human Rights Council. In the meantime, the Advisory Committee is reminded that secretariat support for the Committee is provided by the secretariat of the Human Rights Council, which has no resources or capacity to undertake substantive work additional to its established work plans. 