%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|NIGERIA|INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS|TREATY-MONITORING BODIES|SPECIAL PROCEDURES|

UNITED NATIONS A General Assembly Distr. GENERAL A/HRC/WG.6/4/NGA/2 5 January 2009 Original: HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Fourth session Geneva, 2-13 February 2009 COMPILATION PREPARED BY THE OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH 15(B) OF THE ANNEX TO HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL RESOLUTION 5/1 * Nigeria The present report is a compilation of the information contained in the reports of treaty bodies, special procedures, including observations and comments by the State concerned, and other relevant official United Nations documents. It does not contain any opinions, views or suggestions on the part of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), other than those contained in public reports issued by OHCHR. It follows the structure of the general guidelines adopted by the Human Rights Council. Information included herein has been systematically referenced in endnotes. The report has been prepared taking into consideration the four-year periodicity of the first cycle of the review. In the absence of recent information, the latest available reports and documents have been taken into consideration, unless they are outdated. Since this report only compiles information contained in official United Nations documents, lack of information or focus on specific issues may be due to non-ratification of a treaty and/or to a low level of interaction or cooperation with international human rights mechanisms. I. BACKGROUND AND FRAMEWORK A. Scope of international obligations Core universal human rights treaties The following abbreviations have been used for this document: ICERD International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination ICESCR International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights ICCPR International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ICCPR-OP 1 Optional Protocol to ICCPR ICCPR-OP 2 Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women OP-CEDAW Optional Protocol to CEDAW CAT Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment OP-CAT Optional Protocol to CAT CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child OP-CRC-AC Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict OP-CRC-SC Optional Protocol to CRC on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography ICRMW International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families CPD Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities OP-CPD Optional Protocol to Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities CED International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance Date of ratification, accession or succession Declarations /reservations Recognition of specific competences of treaty bodies ICERD 16 October 1967 None Individual complaints (article 14): No ICESCR 29 July 1993 ICCPR Inter-State complaints (article 41): No CEDAW 13 June 1985 OP-CEDAW 22 November 2004 Inquiry procedure (articles 8 and 9): Yes CAT 28 June 2001 Inter-State complaints (article 21): No Individual complaints (article 22): No Inquiry procedure (article 20): Yes CRC 19 April 1991 Core treaties to which Nigeria is not a party: ICCPR-OP1, ICCPR-OP2, OP-CAT, OP-CRC-AC (signature only, 2000), OP-CRC-SC (signature only, 2000), ICRMW, CPD (signature only, 2007), CPD-OP (signature only, 2007), and CED. Other main relevant international instruments Information relating to other relevant international human rights instruments, including regional instruments, may be found in the pledges and commitments undertaken by Nigeria before the Human Rights Council, as contained in the note verbale dated 24 April 2006 sent by the Permanent Mission of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the General Assembly, Note No. 125/06. Ratification, accession or succession Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide No Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Yes Palermo Protocol Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Refugees and stateless persons 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, 1954 Convention relating to the status of Stateless Persons and 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. Yes, except 1954 and 1961Conventions Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Additional Protocols thereto Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (First Convention); Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (Second Convention); Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (Third Convention); Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (Fourth Convention); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II); Protocol additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem (Protocol III). For the official status of ratifications, see Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland, at www.eda.admin.ch/eda/fr/home/topics/intla/intrea/chdep/warvic.html. Yes, except Protocol III ILO fundamental conventions International Labour Organization Convention No. 29 concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour; Convention No.105 concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour, Convention No. 87 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize; Convention No. 98 concerning the Application of the Principles of the Right to Organize and to Bargain Collectively; Convention No. 100 concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value; Convention No. 111 concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation; Convention No. 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment; Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour. UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) encouraged Nigeria to ratify ICRMW, CPD and CED and to accept the amendment to article 20, paragraph 1. The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) strongly recommended that Nigeria consider the possibility of making the optional declaration provided for in article 14, and ratify the amendments to article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention. The Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) recommended that Nigeria immediately ratify and implement OP-CRC-SC and OP-CRC-AC. In 2006, Nigeria undertook to accede, as soon as practicable, to ICRMW and to examine the possibility of signing, ratifying or acceding to other human rights instruments. B. Constitutional and legislative framework A 2001 Common Country Assessment (CCA) report noted that economic, social and cultural rights are enshrined in Chapter II of the Constitution, while these rights are non-justiciable as section 6 (6) (c) of the Constitution prevents the courts from looking into whether they have been implemented. CRC was also concerned that much of the existing legislation at federal, state and local levels, in particular the religious and customary laws, did not fully comply with the principles and provisions of the Convention. In 2005, CERD noted with concern that the main principles of ICERD had not been incorporated in domestic law. While Nigeria reaffirmed in 2006 its commitment to accelerate the process of full domestication of relevant international human rights conventions, CEDAW noted the rejection by the National Assembly of a 2005 draft bill on full domestication of the Convention. It underlined that principal responsibility for implementation lies with the federal Government. C. Institutional and human rights infrastructure The National Human Rights Commission of Nigeria (NHRC) was accredited by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions (ICC) with "A" status in 2000. While Nigeria reaffirmed in 2006 its commitment to strengthen and actively support the work of the NHRC, a special review of the NHRC was conducted by the ICC Sub-Committee on Accreditation due to the dismissal of the Executive Secretary of the NHRC. In June 2006, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders sent a joint communication regarding this removal. The Special Representative expressed deep concern that this measure represented a means to obstruct the work of the NHRC. Subsequently, the NHRC was downgraded to "B" status at the October 2007 meeting of the ICC Sub-Committee. CRC welcomed the appointment of a Special Rapporteur on Child Rights within the NHRC but remained concerned that its mandate was not provided with sufficient resources. CRC was seriously concerned about the apparent lack of coordination among national and State level authorities and by the serious lack of resources allocated to the Department of Child Development in the Ministry of Women's Affairs and Social Development, and to the National Child Rights Implementation Committee. D. Policy measures While CERD and CRC welcomed the adoption, in 2004, of the National Plan of Action on the promotion and protection of human rights, CRC remained concerned that it did not cover all areas of the Convention. CEDAW welcomed the adoption of the National Gender Policy and of a number of strategies, policies, and programmes in areas such as education, health, reproductive health and nutrition since the consideration of Nigeria's fourth and fifth periodic report in 2004. CERD encouraged Nigeria to expand and strengthen existing efforts regarding human rights education. Furthermore, particular attention should be paid to general recommendation XIII (1993), according to which law enforcement officials should receive specific training. II. PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE GROUND A. Cooperation with human rights mechanisms 1. Cooperation with treaty bodies Treaty body CERD Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination CESCR Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights HR Committee Human Rights Committee CEDAW Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women CAT Committee against Torture CRC Committee on the Rights of the Child Latest report submitted and considered Latest concluding observations Follow-up response Reporting status CERD August 2005 Overdue since 2006 Combined nineteenth and twentieth report overdue since January 2008 CESCR May 1998 Second report overdue since 2000 HR Committee March 1996 Second report overdue since 1999 July 2008 Combined seventh and eighth reports due in 2014 First to second reports overdue since 2002 and 2006 respectively January 2005 Combined third and fourth reports received in 2008, scheduled for consideration in 2010 2. Cooperation with special procedures Standing invitation issued Latest visits or mission reports Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief (1-10 March 2005); Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights defenders (3-12 May 2005); Special Rapporteurs on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (27 June to 8 July 2005); on the question of torture (4 -10 March 2007). E/CN.4/2006/5/Add.2. E/CN.4/2006/95/Add.2. E/CN.4/2006/53/Add.4. A/HRC/7/3/Add.4. Visits agreed upon in principle Special Rapporteurs on independence of judges and lawyers; on violence against women; on trafficking in persons. Representative of the Secretary-General on internally displaced persons; Visits requested and not yet agreed upon Special Rapporteur on adequate housing; requested in 2005. Facilitation/cooperation during missions The Special Rapporteurs and Special Representative acknowledged the invitations and appreciated the Government's cooperation during the respective visits. Follow-up to visits Responses to letters of allegations and urgent appeals About 27 communications were sent within the four year periodicity. In addition to communications sent for particular groups, 64 individuals, including 2 women, were considered by these communications. The Government replied to 1 communication (3 per cent). Responses to questionnaires on thematic issues The questionnaires included in this section are those which have been reflected in an official report by a special procedure mandate-holder. Out of the 12 questionnaires sent by special procedures mandate holders during the period under review, Nigeria responded to none within the deadlines. See (a) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education (A/HRC/4/29), questionnaire on the right to education of persons with disabilities sent in 2006; (b) report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants (A/HRC/4/24), questionnaire on the impact of certain laws and administrative measures on migrants sent in 2006; (c) report of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children (A/HRC/4/23), questionnaire on issues related to forced marriages and trafficking in persons sent in 2006; (d) report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders (E/CN.4/2006/95 and E/CN.4/2006/95/Add.5), questionnaire on the implementation of the Declaration on the Right and Responsibility of Individuals, Groups and Organs of Society to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms sent in June 2005; (e) report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people (A/HRC/6/15), questionnaire on the human rights of indigenous people sent in August 2007; (f) report of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children (E/CN.4/2006/62) and the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (E/CN.4/2006/67), joint questionnaire on the relationship between trafficking and the sent in July 2005; (g) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education (E/CN.4/2006/45), questionnaire on the right to education for girls sent in 2005; (h) report of the Working Group on mercenaries (A/61/341), questionnaire concerning its mandate and activities sent in November 2005; (i) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (A/HRC/4/31), questionnaire on the sale of children's organs sent on July 2006; (j) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (E/CN.4/2005/78), questionnaire on child pornography on the Internet sent in July 2004; (k) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (A/HRC/7/8), questionnaire on assistance and rehabilitation programmes for child victims of sexual exploitation sent in July 2007; (l) report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises (A/HRC/4/35/Add.3), questionnaire on human rights policies and management practices, and (m) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education (A/HRC/8/10), questionnaire on the right to education in emergency situations sent in 2007. 3. Cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights Nigeria made voluntary contributions to support the work of OHCHR in 2004 and 2005. In 2008, Nigeria hosted the African regional meeting in preparation for the Durban Review Conference on racism, xenophobia and related intolerance. B. Implementation of international human rights obligations 1. Equality and non-discrimination CEDAW expressed concern at contradictions and inconsistencies created by the application of statutory, customary and sharia laws in Nigeria's tripartite legal system. It also noted with concern the existence of discriminatory provisions within these sources of law with regard to marriage, divorce, custody of children and inheritance. CEDAW made recommendations in this regard. CERD was concerned about the absence of a legal definition of racial discrimination in domestic law and noted that the guarantees against racial discrimination contained in section 42 of the Constitution do not extend to noncitizens. In 2008, CEDAW was concerned about the persistence of patriarchal attitudes and deep-rooted stereotypes concerning women's roles and responsibilities that discriminate against women. CEDAW also expressed serious concern about the persistence of entrenched harmful traditional and cultural norms and practices. CEDAW welcomed efforts undertaken in the area of legal reform but noted that a draft bill on "Abolition of All Forms of Discrimination against Women in Nigeria and Other Related Matters" was not approved by the National Assembly. It recommended inter alia the repeal of section 55 of the Penal Code of Northern Nigeria, which allows wife battery as "chastisement" as long as grievous harm is not inflicted. CERD in 2005, and CEDAW in 2008 noted with concern that the provision regarding the acquisition of nationality as laid down in the Constitution did not appear to comply fully with the Convention, since it stipulated that a foreign man was unable to acquire Nigerian nationality in the same manner as a foreign woman. CERD remained concerned that members of ethnic communities of the Muslim faith, in particular, Muslim women, could be subjected to harsher sentences than other Nigerians. While welcoming the initiatives taken to reform the laws relating to children, in particular the adoption of the Child Rights Act in 2003, CRC remained concerned that, to date, only 4 out of 36 states have enacted this Act. In 2005, CRC reiterated its previous concern that children belonging to vulnerable groups, including girls, children living in poverty, children with disabilities and children belonging to minority groups, continue to face serious and widespread discrimination. A 2008 UNICEF report noted that only 30 per cent of children are registered at birth. CRC urged Nigeria to adopt a short and a long-term approach to ensure such registration. A 2004 UNDP report noted Nigeria's work with UNESCO which relies on preventive education to counter ignorance and misconceptions associated with HIV and AIDS and to provide adequate knowledge on all aspects of HIV and AIDS, in order to defeat prejudice and discrimination. 2. Right to life, liberty and security of the person In 2005, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions found a number of serious problems in relation to the application of the death penalty. CRC was seriously concerned about the applicability of the death penalty to persons below 18 under the sharia law. The Special Rapporteur noted in 2008 that, although amnesty and the commutation of some sentences for death row inmates were announced, such measures were not fully implemented. According to him, despite claims for many years by Nigeria that it has had a moratorium on the death penalty, it has become apparent that the death penalty has in fact been carried out in secret. The Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions reported in 2005 that extrajudicial executions by police were widespread, and included the killing of suspected criminals, excessive and arbitrary use of force, and deaths in custody. CERD also expressed deep concern about numerous reports of illtreatment, use of excessive force and extrajudicial killings as well as arbitrary arrests and detentions by law enforcement officials in attempts to quell incidents of intercommunal, interethnic and interreligious violence. The Special Rapporteur further stated in 2008 that, on some issues, the situation has deteriorated. The problem of violence by vigilantes and criminal organizations has significantly worsened. CRC was deeply concerned at the impact of communal conflicts on children. It was alarmed by the reports of indiscriminate extrajudicial killings in communal conflicts, where children as well as adults are routinely killed, shot to death and burnt. CRC made recommendations in this regard. A 2001 CCA report indicated that the most serious allegations against the police are the routine use of torture to extract confessions from suspects. In 2007, the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture noted that torture and ill-treatment are widely practised in police custody; they are particularly systemic in the Criminal Investigation Departments. He noted that torture is an intrinsic part of the functioning of the police in Nigeria. He also stressed that conditions in detention are appalling. In 2005, the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief noted that punishments such as stoning or amputation constitute, if not torture, at least cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, which is prohibited in absolute terms by various international conventions to which Nigeria is a party. CRC raised similar concerns with regard to the sentencing of persons below 18 years. In 2005, CRC was deeply concerned at traditional and discriminatory attitudes and behaviour towards women and children, contributing inter alia to violence, abuse, including sexual abuse, killing, torture and extortion, and the generally high level of acceptance of domestic violence among law enforcement officials and court personnel. In 2008, CEDAW was concerned at the continuing prevalence of violence against women and the absence of a comprehensive national law on this issue. A 2001 CCA report noted the prevalence of harmful traditional practices, including female genital mutilation (FGM). In 2005, CRC reiterated its concern at the widespread and continuing existence of FGM, as well as scarification and ritual killing of children. In 2008, CEDAW also noted the continued high incidence of FGM in some areas of the country. CEDAW urged Nigeria to enact national legislation to prohibit FGM. In 2005, CRC took note that article 221 of the Child Rights Act prohibits corporal punishment in judicial settings. Nevertheless, it remained concerned that corporal punishment was still widely practised in the penal system, as well as in the family, in schools and in other institutions. While CEDAW, CERD and CRC acknowledged the measures taken to combat trafficking in women and children, CEDAW and CERD were concerned that trafficking remains a serious problem. CRC remained concerned at the significant number of children working as domestic servants, in plantations, in the mining and quarrying sector, and as beggars on the streets. CRC was also gravely concerned by the reports of forced child labour. While acknowledging efforts made, it regretted that the outcomes of such efforts have been poor. CRC was deeply concerned that the number of children who fall victim to sexual exploitation was on the increase. It noted with concern the increase of reports of sexual assaults and rape of young girls, especially in the North. 3. Administration of justice, including impunity, and the rule of law The Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief noted in 2005 that certain provisions as well as the practice of some sharia courts appeared to be in contravention of the principles of nulla poena sine lege and of equality before the law. CRC remained gravely concerned that the juvenile justice system, in particular, the sharia court system, does not conform to international norms and standards. In 2005, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions reported that the police enjoyed impunity for extrajudicial executions; the Nigerian criminal justice system was found to be inadequate at nearly every level; and these problems facilitated "vigilante justice" by criminal organizations. He noted that virtually every component part of the system functions badly. The result is a vicious circle in which each group contributing to the problem is content to blame others. The Special Rapporteur further stated in 2008 that police continue to kill with impunity. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders also expressed concerns about impunity for perpetrators of human rights violations. CERD noted the establishment of numerous bodies to investigate cases of illtreatment, use of excessive force and extrajudicial killings as well as arbitrary arrests and detentions by law enforcement officials in attempts to quell incidents of intercommunal, interethnic and interreligious violence. However it was concerned that most of the investigations have failed to produce prosecutions and sentences commensurate with the gravity of the crimes committed, leading to the appearance of impunity. A 2001 CCA report indicated that corruption is believed to be widespread and endemic in Nigeria; however, only a few cases of bribery and corruption are reported to the police yearly. In 2005, the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions noted that the fight against corruption at all levels is closely linked to issues of extrajudicial executions. While he noted initiatives that have succeeded in targeting some of the most prominent cases, he stated in 2008 that police corruption is rampant. In 2007, the Special Rapporteur on torture also noted that corruption is endemic. A 2001 CCA report noted that bringing charges of wife-battering and similar crimes to court is difficult since the entire system of justice reflects the gender bias that tolerates domestic violence. A 2001 CCA report noted that the federal Government had, in 1999, set up the Human Rights Violations Investigation Panel to probe the gross violations of human rights committed since 1966. In 2008, an ILO Committee of Experts noted the Government's indication that this Panel had concluded its assignment and forwarded the report to the federal Government, which was supposed to release a white paper on it. 4. Right to privacy, marriage and family life CRC was particularly concerned at the reports of a large number of young women suffering cases of vesico-vaginal fistula. CRC recommended that the State amend existing legislation to prevent early marriage and develop sensitization programmes to curb the practice of early marriages. In 2007, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders, the Special Rapporteur on racism, the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, and the Special Rapporteur on the right to health expressed deep concern about the draft "Bill for an Act to Make Provisions for the Prohibition of Relationships between Persons of the Same Sex, Celebration of Marriage by Them, and for Other Matters Connected Therewith". According to their statement, provisions of the draft Bill discriminate against a section of society, and are an absolutely unjustified intrusion of an individual's right to privacy. In addition to clear elements of discrimination and persecution on the basis of sexual orientation, the Bill contains provisions that infringe freedoms of assembly and association and imply serious consequences for the exercise of the freedom of expression and opinion. 5. Freedom of religion or belief, expression, association and peaceful assembly, and right to participate in public and political life The Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief pointed out that increasingly societal attitudes are translated into religious terms, which exacerbate the differences between religions and creates a climate of religious intolerance. The possibility, at least in theory, that Muslims could be convicted and sentenced to death because they converted to another religion would constitute a clear violation of the right to freedom of religion or belief. The Special Rapporteur also noted that a particularly alarming development in the implementation of sharia has been the institutionalization of enforcement bodies known as Hisbah. Their activities have resulted in a number of violent, arbitrary and other illegal acts, especially against non-Muslim women, which in many cases amounted to human rights violations. In the period under review, approximately 27 per cent of communications transmitted by the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders to the Government related to concerns about freedom of expression, in particular regarding the work of journalists and human rights defenders. In 2005, the Special Representative expressed concern over the situation of journalists working on corruption and good governance, the situation of trade unions and of labour activists. She noted the difficulties encountered by economic, social and environmental rights activists particularly in the Niger Delta region and those encountered by women's rights activists. She observed that there is a lack of response from the authorities to the issues raised by human rights defenders and that the level of impunity remains high which greatly increases their vulnerability. While noting the Federal Character Commission, CERD remained concerned about reports of continuing practices of patronage and traditional linkages based on ethnic origin, leading to the marginalization of certain ethnic groups in Government, legislative bodies and the judiciary. While noting the efforts made to increase the number of women in both elective and appointed positions in public office, in the diplomatic service and in international organizations, CEDAW was concerned that women continue to be seriously underrepresented in political and public life. It noted that women's representation in the National Assembly currently stands at 6.9 per cent in the House of Representatives and 8.3 per cent in the Senate, far below the 35 per cent minimum representation stipulated in the National Gender Policy. It made recommendations in this regard. 6. Right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work In 2008, an ILO Committee of Experts referred to the Government's indication that the Labour Standards Bill covers discrimination on the grounds of race, colour, religion and social origin. The Committee noted the concerns expressed by CERD over persistent allegations that members of the Osu and other similar communities are still subject to discriminatory treatment, including in employment. While noting a draft Labour Standards Bill, CEDAW was concerned at the persistent wage gap between men and women, women's higher unemployment rate and discriminatory legislation. It also noted with concern discriminatory practices in the private sector, with respect to maternity and marital status. CEDAW further noted the prevalence of sexual harassment in the workplace and the absence of legislation and measures to address this. 7. Right to social security and to an adequate standard of living While noting comprehensive development and poverty reduction strategies, CEDAW was concerned that widespread poverty among women, as well as poor socio-economic conditions were among the causes of the violation of women's human rights and discrimination against women. It also noted with concern that discriminatory practices with regard to land ownership, administration of property and inheritance, limited women's access to economic resources, as well as credit and loan facilities. In 2008, CEDAW was especially concerned at the very high maternal mortality rate, the second highest in the world, and regretted that there has been no progress in reducing the maternal mortality rate. CEDAW called upon Nigeria inter alia to improve the availability and affordability of sexual and reproductive health services and to assess the impact of its abortion law on the maternal mortality rate, and to give consideration to its reform or modification. A 2002-2007 United Nations Development Assistance Framework report noted that available data has shown that the availability and accessibility to quality health care services in Nigeria is poor. CEDAW urged Nigeria to continue its efforts to improve the health infrastructure. It also urged the State to improve women's access to quality and affordable health-care and health-related services, particularly at the primary level and in rural areas. In view of the high proportion of children living in poverty, CRC noted with concern the lack of reliable information regarding the coverage of the social security plans in place vis-à-vis the needs of children and their families. CRC recommended that the State ensure that street children are provided with adequate nutrition, clothing, housing, health care, and educational opportunities. A 2008 WHO/UNAIDS/UNICEF report indicated there is limited knowledge about how HIV is transmitted and can be prevented, particularly amongst young people. CRC was particularly concerned that according to UNAIDS estimates, there are over 1 million AIDS orphans, making Nigeria the country with the highest number of AIDS orphans worldwide. CRC recommended that Nigeria continue its efforts in preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS and providing treatment and urgently increase alternative-care opportunities for children. 8. Right to education In 2005, CRC welcomed the fact that education was given the highest priority in the annual budget. It also noted with appreciation the development of the Strategy for Acceleration of Girls' Education. However, CRC remained concerned about the various numbers of problems in the education system. CRC recommended inter alia that Nigeria take appropriate measures, in order to ensure that primary education is compulsory; and take additional steps to address the high illiteracy rates. A 2007 UNESCO report noted that, in recent years, Nigeria has taken measures to compensate relatively underdeveloped and under-resourced regions, which generally have the lowest levels of educational provision and attainment. 9. Minorities and indigenous peoples A 2001 CCA report noted that the underdevelopment of the oil-rich communities constitutes violations of the rights of ethnic groups. Through various laws, ethnic groups are being denied access to appreciable degree of the natural resources within their geographical boundaries. In 2005, the Working Group on Minorities noted reports received that the Niger Delta is home to several minority ethnic groups, that they are marginalized culturally and economically, and that they are denied access to political participation as there are no mechanisms protecting them from the intimidation of the dominant ethnic groups. In 2006, the Working Group on Minorities noted reports received from minority representatives referring to loss of land, property and resources, through confiscation by the dominant groups. CERD remained concerned about persistent allegations that members of the Osu and other similar communities were still subjected to social exclusion, segregation and mistreatment, as well as discrimination in employment and marriage. 10. Migrants, refugees and asylum seekers CRC noted that Nigeria was host to a large group of refugees from neighbouring countries. A 2008 UNHCR report indicated that Nigeria hosts more than 6,500 refugees. CRC was concerned about the situation of refugee and internally displaced children living in refugee camps. It was particularly concerned about reports of sexual exploitation of refugee girls and women within and outside of the camps. CRC recommended that Nigeria inter alia seek to ensure that all displaced and refugee children and their families have access to health and education services. Internally displaced persons CRC noted that communal clashes linked to political, religious and ethnic differences had led to a large population of internally displaced persons. CEDAW requested the State to pay particular attention to the needs of internally-displaced women. Following the 2002 ruling of the International Court of Justice transferring the Bakassi peninsula from Nigeria to Cameroon, a 2008 OCHA report noted that up to 100,000 Nigerians displaced from Bakassi in southern Nigeria are sheltering in makeshift camps. 12. Situation in or in relation to specific regions or territories In 2005, CERD was deeply concerned about the adverse effects on the environment of ethnic communities through largescale exploitation of natural resources in the Delta Region and other river states, in particular, the Ogoni areas. It was concerned at Nigeria's failure to engage in meaningful consultation with the concerned communities, and about the deleterious effects of the oil production activities on the local infrastructure, economy, health and education. CERD recommended inter alia that Nigeria repeal the Land Use Act 1978 and the Petroleum Decree, and adopt a legislative framework which clearly sets forth the broad principles governing the exploitation of the land, including the obligation to abide by strict environmental standards as well as fair and equitable revenue distribution. CERD was alarmed at the reports of assaults, use of excessive force, summary executions and other abuses against members of local communities by law enforcement officers as well as by security personnel employed by petroleum corporations. III. ACHIEVEMENTS, BEST PRACTICES, CHALLENGES AND CONSTRAINTS CERD welcomed the establishment of the National Interreligious Council and of the Institute for Peace and Conflict to promote interethnic, intercommunal and interreligious harmony. A 2007 UNDG report noted important advances in polio eradication, and an 80 per cent reduction recorded in 2007 compared to beginning of 2006. CRC acknowledged challenges faced by Nigeria, namely the longstanding ethnic, religious and civil strife, economic constraints including poverty, unemployment and the heavy debt burden, which may have impeded progress to the full realization of children's rights enshrined in the Convention. A 2008 UNAIDS report noted that Nigeria has the largest HIV epidemic in West Africa with 2.6 million people living with HIV, which disproportionately affects women. IV. KEY NATIONAL PRIORITIES, INITIATIVES AND COMMITMENTS A. Pledges by the State In 2006, Nigeria pledged to cooperate with the treaty-monitoring bodies and reaffirmed its preparedness to welcome human rights inspectors, special rapporteurs and representatives. B. Specific recommendations for follow-up In 2005, CERD requested Nigeria to provide, within one year, information on measures taken in response to its recommendations related to inter-ethnic, intercommunal and interreligious violence; numerous reports of ill-treatment, use of excessive force and extrajudicial killings as well as arbitrary arrests and detentions by law enforcement officials; and large-scale exploitation of natural resources in the Delta region and other River States. The follow-up report has been overdue since August 2006. The Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions issued recommendations to the Government related to commissions of inquiry; the death penalty; impunity; police reform; vigilantism; development assistance; and accountability of the armed forces. Since his visit, the Special Rapporteur concluded in 2008 that very little progress has been made regarding the follow-up to the recommendations. He stated that for the majority of the recommendations made, Nigeria has failed to make any progress at all. While he noted that the positive initiatives implemented over the last two and a half years are encouraging, Nigeria should continue to promote their effective follow-through. The Special Rapporteur on torture issued recommendations related to impunity; safeguards during arrest and detention; conditions of detention; corporal punishment; capital punishment; violence against women; and prevention of torture and ill-treatment. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General on human rights defenders recommended that the Government inter alia review the provisions and implementation of the Public Order Act; and expedite the process of adopting an adequate legislative framework for freedom of information. The Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief recommended that the Government inter alia strengthen education on religious tolerance in schools; ensure that Shariah penal codes are in conformity with international human rights; monitor and protect the rights of religious minorities; and ensure justice is done concerning instances of inter-religious conflict. V. CAPACITY-BUILDING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CRC recommended that Nigeria seek technical assistance from among others: UNFPA and UNICEF with regard to adolescent health problems; UNICEF and WHO with regard to violence, abuse, neglect, killing, torture and extortion of women and children; and with regard to drug abuse by children; UNICEF with regard to prevention and control HIV/AIDS; and UNICEF and UNESCO with regard to the right to education. CRC recommended that Nigeria continue its cooperation with, inter alia, UNICEF and IOM with regard to trafficking in women and children. The 2002-2007 United Nations Development Assistance Framework report listed three priority thematic areas: promoting good governance and human rights, reducing poverty, and reducing the incidence and impact of HIV/AIDs, malaria, tuberculosis, and other infectious diseases. A 2007 UNDG report indicated that UNDAF is set to guide the United Nations' programmatic work in Nigeria from 2009 to 2012. Notes 