%%%PEACEBUILDING|FUNDS|GUIDELINES|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 June 2009 [without reference to a Main Committee (A/63/L.72 and Add.1)] 63/282. The Peacebuilding Fund The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 60/180 and Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) of 20 December 2005, as well as its resolution 60/287 of 8 September 2006, 1. Takes note of the arrangements for the revision of the terms of reference for the Peacebuilding Fund as contained in the report of the Secretary-General and the revised terms of reference for the Fund contained in the annex thereto; 2. Notes that the broad objectives of the revision of the terms of reference for the Peacebuilding Fund are to enhance the capacity of the Fund to serve as a flexible, responsive and focused resource for peacebuilding support and to enhance and maximize the synergy between the Peacebuilding Commission and the Fund; 3. Affirms the respective roles of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission and the independent Advisory Group to provide policy guidance on the use of the Fund to maximize its impact and improve its functioning; 4. Welcomes the contributions and financial pledges made to the Fund, and emphasizes the necessity of sustained contributions in order to enhance the capacity of the Fund to provide the predictable and catalytic resources needed to launch post-conflict peacebuilding activities; 5. Urges all Member States to consider making voluntary contributions to the Fund; 6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit an annual report to the General Assembly on the operation and activities of the Fund; 7. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in his annual report on the operation and activities of the Fund to be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session the findings and recommendations from the next comprehensive independent evaluation; 8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session the item entitled "Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund". 90th plenary meeting 17 June 2009 