%%%DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS|

CONFERENCE ON DISARMAMENT ENGLISH FINAL RECORD OF THE ONE THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING Held at the Palais des Nations, Geneva, on Friday, 7 August, at 10.20 a.m. President: Ms. Caroline MILLAR (Australia) The PRESIDENT: I declare open the 1149th plenary meeting of the Conference on Disarmament. There are currently no speakers on my list. Are there any delegations who would wish to take the floor at this stage? I see none. Yesterday, you received a copy of draft decision CD/1870/Rev.1 on the appointment of Working Group Chairs and Special Coordinators and on a balanced timetable of activities for the remainder of the Conference session for 2009. The revised text included a revised timetable of activities to provide for three weeks of substantive work and three weeks for consideration of the report - following a request by some member States. I think it fair to say that many delegations and indeed my P6 colleagues would have preferred to allow me more time for substantive work. But we agreed to the threeplusthree formula in the interests of achieving the consensus we all seek. On Tuesday, I also circulated a short Presidential statement to reflect some other issues raised by delegations. These have been the subject of very broad consultations. Our sense was that all could support the Presidential statement as drafted. But yesterday, several delegations asked for the fourth paragraph of the statement to be deleted. That paragraph refers to consultations on the programme of work being undertaken by the outgoing and incoming Presidents for 2009 and 2010 respectively. The text was drawn from the Conference rules of procedure and language used previously in the report of the Conference to the General Assembly. As such, it would seem uncontroversial. But in the spirit of accommodation to achieve consensus, I have agreed to remove this paragraph from the Presidential statement. It is now my intention to put draft decision CD/1870/Rev.1 to the Conference for adoption. After that I would propose to read the Presidential statement amended along the lines I have just mentioned. Following that I propose to open the floor for any delegation who wishes to speak. My consultations have shown that all concerns raised with the President by delegations have now been met. I therefore put CD/1870/Rev.1 to the Conference now for decision. Is there any objection to the adoption of CD/1870/Rev.1 by consensus? Pakistan, you have the floor. Mr. AKRAM (Pakistan): Madam President, you circulated document CD/1870 along with the draft complementary Presidential statement on Tuesday, as you said, on the implementation of the programme of work. Yesterday we received a revised version of 1870, Rev.1, with some modifications in the schedule of activities. We deeply appreciate your efforts in this regard. We have sent these documents to our capital, and these documents are being reviewed through our inter-agency process, which, as in most cases, is a time-consuming process, unfortunately. We hope to receive instructions shortly. I assure you that we will not waste a single minute. As soon as we have received those instructions, I will inform you, as well as share our views with all members of the Conference on Disarmament, so that we can reach a consensus decision in this regard. In view of this - the question whether any delegation has an objection to the adoption of CD/1870/Rev.1 at this stage - I would simply submit to your consideration that my delegation is not yet ready to join the consensus. I may add, and as you know, Pakistan has actively and constructively engaged in the process of the implementation of the programme of work. We will continue to do so. We have shared our views with all Conference members in a transparent manner in order to build a solid foundation for substantive work. We believe a cautious and careful approach will help us build that foundation. We have clearly stated our position on substance as well as on procedure. For us, both procedure and substance are linked and are extremely important. Therefore, the process itself has serious implications for us. In all this, we are guided by our national security compulsions. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Pakistan for his statement. As I mentioned yesterday, the basic information in these documents has been around for quite some time, so I would hope that the inter-agency process might not need to be too prolonged, given that the information is very familiar and that the language in the Presidential statement, including that which refers to national security, was consulted upon by me with many delegations, including your own. So I would propose to delegations that we reconvene on Monday morning, and I do hope we can take this decision then, because if we do, the existing timetable will stand. If we do not, it will not, and we will have to revise that, which will be actually quite a performance, and will leave even less time for substantive work. So I would really appeal to you if you can in your consultations with your capital to get some speedy instructions so that we can proceed, and I thank you for all the consultations that we have had. Is there anyone else who would like to take the floor at this stage? I see none. The meeting is adjourned. Our next meeting will be on Monday morning at 10 a.m. The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m. 