%%%WOMEN'S STATUS|WOMEN'S ADVANCEMENT|SEYCHELLES|PERIODIC REPORTS|

Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women Pre-session working group Forty-sixth session 12-30 July 2010 List of issues and questions in the absence of initial and periodic reports Seychelles The pre-session working group decided, in accordance with the decision of the Committee at its thirty-seventh session (15 January-2 February 2007), and in the absence of the State party's initial report due in 1983, as well as its periodic reports, to proceed with the preparation of the present list of issues and questions. General 1. Please explain why no initial and subsequent reports were submitted to the Committee, as required by article 18 of the Convention. Considering that the drafting of the report is not only an obligation, but also an opportunity for the State party to assess the situation of women in the country, please describe any efforts undertaken to date in order to prepare the reports. Has the State party considered requesting the assistance of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Division for the Advancement of Women and other bodies of the United Nations system in order to achieve the preparation and submission of the CEDAW report as soon as possible? 2. Please submit general and factual information about the country, to the extent possible, in accordance with the harmonized reporting guidelines under the international human rights treaties, including the Convention (HRI/GEN/2/Rev.5). Data collection 3. Please provide information on the status of data collection and analysis in the country in general, and in particular, with regard to the situation of women, disaggregated by age, sex, rural and urban areas. Please indicate how the Government intends to improve the collection and analysis of such data pertaining to the areas of the Convention and the general recommendations of the Committee so as to support policymaking and programme development and to measure progress towards implementation of the Convention. Legal status of the Convention and incorporation of its provisions in domestic law and policies 4. Please provide information on the status of the Convention in the domestic legal order. Please provide information on whether the Convention is directly applicable and whether there are instances of cases where the Convention has been cited by the courts. Has the Convention been disseminated and translated into local languages and has it been given visibility so as to make women aware of their rights? 5. Please indicate whether there are any laws or policy statements that define acts of discrimination against women. If so, please explain whether the definition is sufficiently broad so as to include prohibition of any act by public and private actors which causes, or results in, distinctions, exclusions or restrictions on enjoyment or exercise by women, on equal basis with men, of human rights in all areas and under each provision of the Convention. 6. Please explain whether there are any sanctions imposed for discrimination against women. Please provide information on their nature and actual application. Please also provide information on remedies available to women whose rights have been violated. 7. Please provide information on legislation, policies and programmes that address the modification of customs and practices resulting in direct or indirect discrimination against women or perpetuating such discrimination. National machinery for the advancement of women 8. Please explain the status and functions of the Social Development Division within the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment, its current level of funding and staffing. Please provide information on other institutions, such as commissions or ombudspersons established to promote and protect human rights, including the rights of women and/or to oversee the Convention's implementation. Please explain the measures the Government is taking or intends to take to provide the national machinery for the advancement of women with adequate decision-making capacity, financial and human resources and explain the coordinating and monitoring mechanisms in place. Programmes and action plans 9. Please provide information on programmes and action plans adopted and implemented, or envisaged, to ensure the implementation of the Convention or its specific articles. Please also provide information on the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and gender equality elements of the Millennium Development Goals. Please explain why the National Gender Steering committee set up in 1993 to implement post-Beijing recommendations has been inactive since 1998. Temporary special measures 10. Please explain whether any temporary special measures, in accordance with article 4, paragraph 1 of the Convention and general recommendation No. 25, either in the form of affirmative action, or otherwise, have been adopted to accelerate the achievement of equality of women with men. Please include information on the inequalities that these measures aim at redressing, on whether they are enforced and monitored, as well as on results achieved. Stereotypes and cultural practices 11. Please provide information on the cultural and traditional practices or ways of life which hamper women's advancement in society. Please provide information on measures, if any, which have been taken to change social and cultural patterns that lead to stereotyping, reproducing or reinforcing the traditional roles of women and men within the family and society in general, and to eliminate customs and cultural practices which discriminate against women. Violence against women 12. Please provide information on the Family Violence Act of 2000 and on any other law or measures that have been taken to combat violence against women. Please also indicate the extent to which women who are victims of violence have access to counsel and legal aid services. Please supply data on the cases prosecuted and the sanctions pronounced under the Family Violence Act of 2000 including the cases of marital rape which are now punished under articles 130 to 153 of the Penal Code. 13. Please provide information on the remedies, including rehabilitation services, available for victims of domestic violence. Please indicate whether there are shelter services available for women who are victims of violence within the family and whether there are enforcement units to deal with domestic violence. Is there a sex-disaggregated database on incidences of violence against women? Are there any public campaigns to raise awareness about violence against women as a problem? Is corporal punishment prohibited in both the school and home environments? Trafficking 14. Please provide information on the extent of trafficking and exploitation or prostitution of women and girls in the country. Please indicate what legislation is aimed at preventing trafficking in women and girls, in particular, whether such legislation applies penalties for trafficking and whether it is implemented effectively. Please provide information on any legislation which protects women and girls from labour agencies which are essentially engaged in trafficking as well as information on the policies and programs addressing protection, assistance and legal support for victims of trafficking. Participation in decision-making and representation at the international level 15. The election and appointment of women to key posts in the Government, the National Assembly and local governments is an encouraging development which shows the growing realization by the national authorities of the important role women play in the political process. Please provide information on the percentage of the members of political parties that are women and what percentage of public offices is held by women. Please explain which concrete measures have been taken, or are envisaged, to achieve women's full and equal participation and representation at all levels of Government, the legislative branch and the judiciary, as well as at the decision-making level in the public sectors and institutions and at the international level, taking into account article 4, paragraph 1 of the Convention as well as the Committee's general recommendation No. 25 and general recommendation No. 23. Nationality 16. Please provide information on whether the legislation provides for equality of women and men with respect to acquiring, changing or retaining nationality based on their marital status and transmission of their nationality to their children, in accordance with article 9 of the Convention. Education 17. Taking into consideration the revision of the State party's Education Policy, please inform the Committee of the causes which were identified to explain girls discontinuing their education and gender imbalances in performance between boys and girls at the primary school level. Please indicate the measures adopted to address those problems as well as the measures taken to provide equal opportunities for access to post-secondary education and address the growing problem of children, mostly girls, who complete the compulsory 10 years of education and still find themselves with no skills to enter the labour market. 18. Please outline the measures taken to combat gender stereotyping in the education system through the revision of academic curricula and detail the impact such measures have had. Employment and poverty 19. Please provide updated statistical information disaggregated by sex on women's participation in the labour force, including any differentials in wages and benefits in comparison with men. 20. Considering that women continue to have lower status jobs, are clustered in unskilled and lower paid occupations and represent 60 per cent of jobseekers, please indicate the existing legal provisions as well as the concrete measures taken by the State party to combat discrimination against women in employment, including those addressing sexual harassment and violence against women in the workplace? Please describe those measures and results achieved in the elimination of sexual harassment in the workplace. 21. Considering the feminization of poverty in the State party, in particular in respect of single-women-headed households, predominantly unskilled teenage mothers, please provide information on how women's poverty is addressed. Please also indicate the measures adopted to create employment opportunities as well as educational, technical training and empowerment programmes for unskilled women. Health 22. What health facilities and personnel are available for women to respond to their specific health needs, including family planning? What health facilities and packages are available to vulnerable groups of women, with particular regard to older women and women with disabilities. 23. Please provide detailed and updated information on women's access to affordable reproductive and sexual health services and educational programmes, including their content and availability for particular groups, such as adolescent girls and rural women. Please also provide information on the measures taken to strengthen mental health services, as well as steps taken to address noncommunicable diseases such as myocardial infections, cancer and diabetes which are growing challenges in the country. 24. Please indicate the concrete measures taken to reduce the high rate of teenage pregnancies and abortion, including unsafe abortion among young women. 25. Please explain what measures have been introduced in the country to increase public awareness of the risk and effects of sexually transmitted diseases, particularly HIV/AIDS. Please indicate whether any of these measures are aimed specifically at women and girls. Social and economic benefits 26. Please provide information on the existence of family benefits, including access to bank loans, mortgages and health insurance and indicate whether women have equal rights to those benefits. Rural women 27. Please indicate the percentage of women living in rural areas. Please provide information on any rural development strategy, including whether it incorporates a gender perspective and includes targeted support for rural women to increase their access to health, education, justice, employment, economic development projects, credit and the ownership of land, and to promote their participation in decision-making. Please explain whether rural women are aware of their rights under the Convention and whether there are information strategies to that effect. Please also provide information on whether a gender perspective has been incorporated into national disaster relief strategies and national policies aimed at combating the negative impact of climate change. Equality before the law 28. Please explain whether women are treated equally with men under the law with respect to their legal capacity to conclude contracts and administer property, as well as in court. Please indicate whether the State party has given effect to the obligations in article 15 (3) of the Convention, which requires that all contracts and other instruments aimed at restricting women's legal capacity be deemed null and void. Family relations 29. Please explain which law (civil law, customary law, or a combination of these) govern family relations. Please explain whether women are treated equally with men under these laws, including in relation to inheritance rights. 30. Please explain if upon dissolution of marriage women have the same rights as men with respect to property. Optional Protocol and amendment to article 20, paragraph 1 31. Please indicate any progress made with respect to ratification of/or accession to the Optional Protocol to the Convention and acceptance of the amendment to article 20, paragraph 1. 