%%%DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES|COUNTRY PROGRAMMES|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|PROGRAMME PLANNING|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|ECONOMIC COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|FUNDS|INTERNAL OVERSIGHT|AUDITING|FIELD VISITS|

United Nations DP/2009/26 Second regular session 2009 8 to 11 September 2009, New York Item 1 of the provisional agenda Organizational matters Report of the annual session 2009 (26 May to 3 June 2009) Contents Chapter Page Organizational matters 2 UNDP segment Statement by the Administrator and annual report of the Administrator 2 Funding commitments to UNDP 6 IV. Evaluation 7 Human Development Report 8 UNDP country programmes and related matters 9 United Nations Capital Development Fund 10 United Nations Development Fund for Women 10 United Nations Office for Project Services 11 Joint segment Internal audit and oversight 12 Field visits 17 UNFPA segment Statement by the Executive Director and annual report of the Executive Director 18 Funding commitments to UNFPA 23 UNFPA country programmes and related matters 23 Evaluation 24 Other matters 26 The annual session 2009 of the Executive Board of UNDP and UNFPA was held at United Nations Headquarters, New York, from 26 May to 3 June 2009. The Executive Board approved the agenda and workplan for its annual session 2009 (DP/2009/L.2), and approved the report of the first regular session 2009 (DP/2009/9). The Executive Board agreed to the following schedule of future sessions of the Executive Board in 2009: Second regular session 2009: 8 to 11 September 2009. The Executive Board took an oral decision to postpone, from the second regular session 2009 to the first regular session 2010, consideration of the UNDP and the UNIFEM biennial support budgets, 2010-2011, and of the UNDP midterm review of the programming arrangements, 2008-2011. Decisions adopted by the Executive Board at the annual session 2009 were included in document DP/2009/27, accessible at www.undp.org/execbrd. Statement by the Administrator and annual report of the Administrator In her first statement to the Executive Board, the new Administrator, Helen Clark, acknowledged the Secretary-General, the Associate Administrator, and the Executive Board President and Vice-Presidents for their support as she took up her new duties with UNDP. She reaffirmed the important role of the Board in providing guidance to the organization and spoke about the future direction of the organization in light of the numerous crises facing the international community. A top priority, she said, would be to sharpen the focus of UNDP on poverty reduction and achieving the Millennium Development Goals, the latter of which is at the very centre of the mission of the organization and enshrined in the UNDP strategic plan. The Administrator spoke about the deadline to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, just six years away, and the obligation by the international community to meet its promises. She referred to the 2005 Gleneagles G8 summit where countries promised to increase official development assistance by $50 billion by 2010, a promise that remains unfulfilled. As a follow-up to Gleneagles, the Administrator provided details about the work of UNDP with partner governments, the African Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to develop `Gleneagles scenarios' to scale up action towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals from macroeconomic and developmental perspectives. While publication of the Gleneagles scenarios is imminent, she conveyed her hope that at the upcoming July 2009 G8 summit, previously pledged resources could be mobilized in order to implement them. The Administrator provided some insight into the first annual report on the strategic plan, speaking about its significance as an accountability mechanism and noting that it reflects a collaborative approach between UNDP and its sister funds and programmes, the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the United National Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) and the United Nations Volunteer programme. She also explained that it included analytical information about strategic results, including programme and project results, as requested by the Board. She stressed that, because UNDP contributions are in the areas of capacity-building and capacity development, actual outcomes are often generated over a decade or more; reporting on actual outcomes can be difficult. She reiterated that UNDP cannot be a `super non-governmental organization' and that the strategic plan moves the organization away from undertaking smaller and less strategic projects. The Administrator spoke about the efforts of UNDP in other critical areas, including: gender equality; South-South cooperation; United Nations reform; and managing for results. She stressed the need for adequate, predictable core resources, which were even more important given the current economic circumstances and their effects on the world's most vulnerable. The Administrator assured delegations that UNDP would continue to pursue efficiencies and make decisions about what to prioritize. She thanked Executive Board members for their support in sustaining and guiding UNDP, and reaffirmed her commitment to making a difference and meeting common development goals. She invited the Associate Administrator to update the Board on UNDP initiatives and processes requiring attention. The Associate Administrator highlighted the decision by the General Assembly to modify the comprehensive policy review of operational activities from a triennial to a quadrennial cycle, which also urged United Nations funds and programmes to align strategic planning cycles accordingly. He suggested the Executive Board extend the UNDP strategic plan, 2008-2011, by two years, until the end of 2013. He spoke about decision 2008/24 in the context of implementing a pilot policy on direct budget support and pooled funds. Headquarters was working closely with country offices wishing to pilot the policy, he said, and with the guidelines and procedures released. Headquarters would also dedicate time to pursuing harmonized approaches across the United Nations development system and elaborate on assessment criteria for this type of development support. He informed the Board of efforts being made to strengthen results-based management. The Associate Administrator specified four challenges requiring attention from management in order to ensure that UNDP remained an effective contributor to development results and supporting infrastructure: staff excellence; surge readiness; organizational readjustment; and budgetary efficiency. He indicated that while those were painstaking challenges, they were indispensable to managing a complex organization such as UNDP in a way that builds trust in the abilities and effectiveness of the organization. Delegations welcomed the new Administrator and congratulated her on her appointment, a number of them stressing the significance of the occasion. Delegations expressed their appreciation of the vision presented in the statement of the Administrator, confirming that it was very much in line with their overall view of the direction that UNDP should take. They thanked the Associate Administrator for his briefing. Many stressed the need for UNDP to continue to be responsive to the wishes and interests of programme countries, and remain focused on its core development mandate - particularly capacity-building and development - to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals. Some delegations called upon UNDP to work on the basis of operational principles that have universal acceptance and application, and also reaffirmed the importance of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation. Nearly all delegations expressed concern that the economic and financial crisis could hamper progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals. In the light of the present situation, numerous delegations encouraged donor countries to meet crucial funding commitments to UNDP, despite the crisis. A number of delegations called upon UNDP to continue to focus its work in least developed and most vulnerable countries. They asked UNDP to concentrate on its areas of comparative advantage, focus its brand image through improved communication, and sharpen its reporting to the Executive Board on concrete results from on-the-ground interventions. Many delegations, pleased at the adoption of a UNDP management accountability framework in 2008, asked that the organization continue improving its accountability and transparency. Several recognized that ongoing reforms at the country level and the `delivering as one' pilots helped increase efficiency, effectiveness and coherence; they called for similar reforms at headquarters by modifying rules, regulations and procedures that impeded coherence among United Nations organizations. The importance of the relationship between anti-corruption measures, eradicating poverty and fostering sustainable development was touched upon and UNDP was asked to bear in mind the United Nations Convention against Corruption in its country-level work on governance. Some delegations asked UNDP to strategically develop its expertise in democratic governance, focusing on areas where the organization could make the greatest impact. Others asked UNDP to ensure that the requirements agreed upon in decision 2008/37 for the disclosure of internal audit reports was strictly followed to ensure confidentiality. One delegation expressed concern that a larger share of UNDP resources went to the democratic governance area than to the poverty reduction area. Several delegations asked UNDP to improve its effectiveness in the areas of early recovery and peacebuilding, climate change mitigation and adaptation, capacity-building, technical assistance, and policy advice. Some delegations stressed the importance of clearly defining the role of UNDP in the area of climate change so that the organization could maximize its relevance and impact at the United Nations Climate Change Conference, to take place in Copenhagen in December 2009. Numerous delegations raised the issues of gender equality and gender mainstreaming, reiterating the importance of gender as a cross-cutting developmental and organizational issue. One delegation thanked UNDP for its active role in the Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender Equality and for its gender strategy, which included concrete development and institutional mechanisms for strengthening women's empowerment and gender equality. Another took note of systematic UNDP efforts to emphasize gender equality in crisis prevention and recovery activities, throughout in its operations, across its four focus areas, and in its work on the global gender and climate change alliance, incorporating gender viewpoints into climate change policies and finance mechanisms. The Administrator thanked delegates for their support of the work of UNDP, as well as for their best wishes to her as the new Administrator. She assured delegates of follow-up action in response to their comments, and reaffirmed the commitment of UNDP to adhere to the priorities set out in its strategic plan and to integrate climate change priorities into its development activities. She pledged to improve efficiency; maintain strong support to United Nations reform and `delivering as one' for, and with, developing countries; and report on results in a robust and ongoing manner. She acknowledged the importance of establishing partnerships within and outside the United Nations family, including with donors, the Bretton Woods institutions, non-governmental organizations and civil society. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/9 on the annual report of the Administrator, including the operationalization and extension of the UNDP strategic plan, 2008-2011; the Executive Board took note of the UNDP report on the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit in 2008 (DP/2009/11/Add.1), and the statistical annex (DP/2009/11/Add.2) and its corrigendum (DP/2009/11/Add.2/ Corr.1). Funding commitments to UNDP The Administrator called upon delegations to give UNDP the tools to respond to the global recession and prevent the reversal of hard-won development gains, namely adequate, predictable funding. She referred to the successful attainment of the 2008 core income target of $1.1 billion, adding that UNDP would like to meet core income targets in 2009 and beyond. She cautioned that, funding predictions for 2009 were a concern, with core contributions estimated to reach just $965 million - short of the strategic plan target of $1.25 billion. She pledged to work with current donors to sustain current commitments and consider how to expand the range of member states who would consider contributions. The Assistant Administrator and Director, Partnerships Bureau, summarized the UNDP budget numbers, highlighting total regular resources contributions, the top five contributors, the number of countries contributing to regular resources, those contributing $1 million or more to UNDP regular resources, and those that had increased regular resource contributions to the organization. Regarding the $3.6 billion in `other resources' contributions, he provided a breakdown of the total between bilateral, multilateral, and local resources contributions. He mentioned that the 2009 budgetary situation was a cause for concern as regular and other resources were projected to decrease. He identified five fundamental issues for consideration by the Executive Board: (a) the 2009 budget falling short of original projections in the strategic plan; (b) the imbalance between regular and other resources; (c) the vulnerability of voluntarily funded programmes and funds, including UNDP, in crisis situations; (d) the volatility of the financial situation and the dearth of concrete information with which to programme resources; and (e) the predictability of funding (or lack thereof). One delegation took the opportunity to announce contributions to UNDP and its associated funds and programmes for 2009 - $3.5 million for UNDP core resources, $850,000 for the South-South cooperation trust fund, and $30,000 for UNCDF and the United Nations Volunteer programme, respectively. That delegation expressed that it actively supported UNDP and had, to its best ability, expanded contributions to core resources. Another delegation asked several questions in relation to the facts and figures presented by the Assistant Administrator and Director, Partnerships Bureau, namely: what was the reason for reductions in government local office cost contributions, and what were the impacts and pressures being experienced by UNDP in connection with its regular resources and programming arrangements. That delegation called upon all donors to provide stable, multi-year funding. The Assistant Administrator and Director, Partnerships Bureau, thanked the delegation for its announcement of monetary contributions to UNDP. He clarified that the reduction in local government contributions was linked to programme cost-sharing and not government local office contributions. The 20 per cent reduction stemmed from a decision to remove procurement-focused initiatives, in consultation with governments, when they did not contribute directly to the goals of the strategic plan. In response to the question about pressure on regular resources and overall programming arrangements, he explained that this was why the Administrator had requested additional time for study and review. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/10 on the status of regular resources funding commitments to UNDP and its funds and programmes for 2009 and onwards. Evaluation The Director, Evaluation Office, briefed the Executive Board on independent evaluations. She spoke about the evaluation of the third regional cooperation framework for Arab States, the global cooperation framework and UNDP contributions to energy and the environment. She also provided a status update on improvements in Evaluation Office operations, progress towards creating a culture of evaluation, updates to the 2002 monitoring and evaluation handbook, and challenges in building evaluation capacity in the bureaux and at the country level. She highlighted the workplan for her office for 2009 and 2010. The Director, Operations Support Group, provided a management response on evaluations. Two delegations referred to four areas where they felt UNDP could work to enhance evaluation in the future: evaluation compliance and coverage; quality; resources; and follow-up. One delegation, in the light of outcome evaluation ratings contained in DP/2009/13, expressed concern that more than half of the evaluation reports in the area of evaluation design and follow-up were rated `unsatisfactory' or `highly unsatisfactory' - an unchanged trend. That delegation expressed concern that the Evaluation Office was possibly overloaded with its programme of work. It called on UNDP to make practical use of evaluation results and internal follow-up activities in order to improve results. Another delegation expressed its appreciation of the large amount of useful information presented in the report, but felt it could have been presented in a clearer way. Another delegation, in response to certain paragraphs in the annual report, expressed the opinion that country programme evaluations should be carried out with the agreement of UNDP and the Member State, focusing on how UNDP is encouraging development through its programmes and how evaluation results could be used to improve the programmes. Evaluation of the third regional cooperation framework (2006-2009) for the Arab States Regarding the third regional cooperation framework for the Arab States, delegations reiterated the need for coordination among United Nations actors on the ground. Two delegations asked UNDP to look at the work of the United Nations Children's Fund and UNFPA in order to mainstream a youth perspective into its programmes and projects, rather than undertake duplicative work. Several delegations called for a better tapping of the financial resources, experience and expertise available in the region. Another called upon UNDP to make better use of its regional advisers and their experience in preparing the next regional cooperation framework. One delegation requested a correction to a footnote contained in the full evaluation report, which incorrectly identified regional ethnicity. Others asked UNDP to take better account of the challenges facing the Arab States, including those related to capacity, technology transfer, desertification and sustainable development. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/11 on the annual report on evaluation in UNDP. It also took note of the following documents: (a) Evaluation of the third regional cooperation framework (2006-2009) for the Arab States (DP/2009/14); (b) Management response to the evaluation of the third regional cooperation framework (2006-2009) for the Arab States (DP/2009/15); and (c) Follow-up to management responses on evaluations, including decentralized evaluations (DP/2009/16). Human Development Report In line with General Assembly resolution 57/264, the senior policy specialist, Human Development Report Office (HDRO), provided an update and insight into the consultative processes underpinning the Human Development Report for 2009 on the topic of mobility. Two delegations thanked the HDRO speaker for the topic of the 2009 report on human migration, and welcomed an approach of thorough consultation with, inter alia, civil society, academics and UNDP staff. One reaffirmed the importance of the topic, given the tremendous economic and social impact of human migration, including financial remittances to home countries. The other called for research that could shed light on all the implications of migration and what might constitute appropriate responses. That delegation emphasized, however, that it would be opposed to policies that ran counter to its national principles of highly-skilled labour migrants, or labour migrants filling a particular national labour gap. The senior policy specialist reiterated that the HDRO was committed to maintaining dialogue with stakeholders and policymakers, and confirmed that the report would focus on the effects of the economic crisis on international labour migration. The report would address appropriate policy responses, he said, in the context of a natural reaction by countries to protect and safeguard their people. He added that the report would also provide strategic insight for `sending' and `receiving' countries so that they could benefit from the potential of human migration once the economic recovery process had begun. The Executive Board took note of the update on the Human Development Report consultations (DP/2009/17). UNDP country programmes and related matters The Associate Administrator invited delegations to review and comment on 12 draft country programmes; six one-year country programme extensions; a second one-year country programme extension; and a first two-year extension for three country programmes. Assistant Administrators and Directors of the respective regional bureaux presented their country programmes for consideration by the Executive Board. Delegations whose countries were the subject of new country programmes thanked UNDP and highlighted areas where the interventions of the organization could help increase levels of capacity-building and alignment with national development priorities. Other delegations called upon UNDP to reduce overlap; focus on its areas of comparative advantage; forge partnerships with other multilateral actors in support of its development work; sharpen its support to national development strategies; and improve its priority-setting capabilities. Some delegations reminded UNDP that it should move away from direct execution, where possible, and support greater national execution of projects and programmes. Several delegations commended UNDP for having responded to previous Board requests to ensure that new country programmes were accompanied by an assessment of development results providing outcomes and data from the end of the previous programme cycle for each country. Those delegations felt this helped increase transparency and accountability. Other delegations asked for UNDP to continue to focus on important cross-cutting issues in its programming, such as gender, anti-corruption measures and adaptation to climate change; to continue bolstering its coordination work among United Nations organizations; to leverage regional cooperation as a development tool; and to integrate a monitoring and evaluation component into all its work. The Executive Board took note of the first one-year extensions of the country programmes for Azerbaijan, Chile, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Serbia, Somalia and Zimbabwe (DP/2009/18, table 1). The Executive Board approved the second one-year extension of the country programme for Turks and Caicos Islands (DP/2009/18, table 2) and approved the first two-year extensions of the country programmes for Barbados and the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, Mozambique and the Philippines (DP/2009/18, table 2). The Executive Board took note of the draft country programme documents and comments regarding Afghanistan, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Burundi, Ecuador, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. United Nations Capital Development Fund The Executive Secretary, UNCDF, introduced the agenda item, focusing on two important areas: the strategic nature of the UNDP and UNCDF partnership and UNCDF results in 2008. Delegations were pleased with the performance, growth and confidence enjoyed by UNCDF, reaffirming its vital role in the United Nations system. Delegations asked UNCDF to focus on high-quality interventions to provide capital where needed, to promote local capacity and ownership in development processes, and to draw on the experience and expertise of a variety of partners. Haiti asked why UNCDF was not working more in its country, the only least developed country in the hemisphere. One delegation asked why UNCDF had missed delivery targets and financial institution reporting targets. Another delegation, confirming a $30,000 contribution, called upon the organization to expand its donor base. The Executive Secretary thanked delegations for their support and confirmed that the organization was on the upswing. He spoke of `UNCDF Project 2010' and its goal of examining operational systems to continue improving performance. He explained to the delegations asking about delivery rates that UNCDF works in the most difficult conditions and provides funding to emerging institutions that are not always - at least initially - up to international standards. He mentioned the rigorous oversight and evaluative controls used by UNCDF, and drew attention to its `thought leadership' abilities. He indicated that microfinance opportunities in Haiti would be expanded in the future. He reiterated that the organization was having difficulty meeting the demand for microfinance activities from Angola, Afghanistan, Haiti and other countries. Ongoing efforts, in collaboration with UNDP, would help expand the reach of UNCDF in the area of microfinance, he said. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/12 on the annual report of the United Nations Capital Development Fund and the progress report on the implementation of the strategic partnership between UNCDF and UNDP. United Nations Development Fund for Women To show support and recognition of the work of UNIFEM, the Administrator opened the agenda item, reiterating the importance of gender equality and women's empowerment in achieving internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. The Executive Director of UNIFEM reported to the Board on the implementation of the UNIFEM strategic plan, while the Deputy Executive Director outlined the operational activities of the organization and of the UNIFEM management results framework. Delegations thanked UNIFEM for its work, progress and initiatives, and expressed the need to continue creating an environment of increased economic opportunities for women, with greater inclusion in decision-making and political processes. Delegations recognized UNIFEM as an essential source of support in ending violence against women worldwide, and encouraged it to continue working in support of Security Council resolutions 1325 and 1820. Several delegations appreciated the growth of resources, but noted the disparity been regular and other resources. Many delegations asked UNIFEM to move toward results-based management and report more on the impact of its work. At least two delegations increased support to UNIFEM core resources. The Executive Director of UNIFEM was encouraged by delegations' comments on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325 and 1820, and on another priority of UNIFEM: ending sexual violence as an instrument of conflict. She spoke of UNIFEM support to the creation of a new gender entity proposed by various United Nations organizations, and the need for greater resources to sustain it. She referred to the growth of the organization, not only in a monetary sense, but in a political sense as well. She acknowledged calls to expand the financial support base and confirmed that UNIFEM would continue to work in that area. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/13 on the annual report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Development Fund for Women and the extension of its strategic plan. United Nations Office for Project Services The Executive Director of the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) introduced the annual report, and summarized the progress made in 2008, including the delivery of $1.06 billion through project implementation and an almost $5 million contribution to its operational reserve. Many delegations recognized the important role of UNOPS in Africa, particularly in post-conflict recovery processes, peacebuilding, peacekeeping and development. They called upon UNOPS to increase its presence in developing countries. One delegation recognized the organization for having increased its operational reserve and establishing its management accountability framework. That delegation requested further information on the way in which UNOPS responded to tenders in markets where it might have special advantages. Two delegations recognized UNOPS compliance with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), while another called upon UNOPS to diversify further and improve its financial stability. The Executive Director thanked delegations and noted the encouragement by some delegations to reach out to developing country governments to build capacity and assist in procurement. He said that UNOPS was increasing its presence in United Nations country team meetings so as to provide more strategic assistance in its areas of comparative advantage. He mentioned changes in perception revealed by the last two UNOPS partner surveys and spoke about the oversight and accountability efforts of the organization. He highlighted that UNOPS could bid on international tenders, but that it preferred a sole-source arrangement where UNOPS was invited to bid, adhering to strict guidelines. He said that UNOPS was aiming for close, long-term partnerships with partners, citing an example of the work of the organization with the United Nations Mine Action Service, but added that there would be continued diversification in the future. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/14 on the annual report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Office for Project Services. Internal audit and oversight UNDP The Director, Office of Audit and Investigations, introduced the report on internal audit and investigations in UNDP (DP/2009/23), prepared in line with Executive Board decision 2008/13, which contained a list of key findings and audit ratings, a table containing unresolved audit recommendations by year and category, and an explanation of findings that had remained unresolved for 18 months or more. The Associate Administrator provided a management response that covered accountability, monitoring and guidance, and the delay in IPSAS implementation. They were joined on the podium by: the Director, UNDP Ethics Office, who briefed the Board on the activities of her office; the Head of the UNOPS Internal Audit Office, who briefed the Board on UNOPS activities in 2008; and the chairperson of the UNDP audit advisory committee, who was available to respond to questions from delegations. Many delegations reaffirmed the importance of the accountability frameworks of UNDP and UNOPS as a way of gauging contributions to programmes and the effectiveness of expenditures. They requested that each organization be diligent in monitoring and controlling risks. Those delegations were pleased with UNDP audit results overall, and recognized that efforts were being made to address weaknesses. They expressed satisfaction at the first full year of operation of the UNOPS audit office, requesting information about the structure of the office and steps taken by the organization to train its staff throughout the year. Delegations encouraged ongoing reporting to the Executive Board on the implementation of IPSAS. One delegation commended the organizations for working to create a culture of accountability. That delegation asked UNDP senior management and the audit advisory committee whether a certain level of unsatisfactory audit ratings should be considered `routine'; how the internal control framework and enterprise risk management were being implemented and improved; how results-based management was being integrated into UNDP; and the strengths and weaknesses of the UNDP management accountability and oversight policies. The delegation asked whether the IPSAS delay was avoidable, enquired about the UNDP readiness to implement IPSAS, and asked whether the Director, Office of Audit and Investigations, agreed with the `top 11' audit priorities identified by UNDP. Many delegations, recognizing the leadership role of UNDP in adopting new systems for financial management, expressed surprise at the news of a two-year delay in implementing IPSAS. They requested ongoing information from the organization on the expected cost of the delay and status reports on progress towards implementation. Two delegations asked the Administrator to seek ways to reduce the number and gravity of audit issues, and to enhance the ability of project officers to monitor their portfolios from a risk perspective, or develop alternate means of monitoring projects. Those two delegations sought the opinion of the audit advisory committee in two areas: whether there were any shortcomings in the current enterprise risk management system, and whether the accountability framework of UNDP is being integrated into the work of the organization. One delegation suggested that a results-based management culture in UNDP would increase donor confidence, and reiterated the importance of the procedures outlined in decision 2008/37 regarding the disclosure of UNDP internal audit reports. Another delegation expressed its commitment to continue following up on access to audit reports by the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, where UNDP is the principal grant recipient on collaborative projects. The Associate Administrator stressed that efforts were made to ensure there would be no acceptance of any unsatisfactory audit rating, though circumstances could sometimes lead to such an outcome. It was up to management, he said, to recognize and identify areas requiring structural improvements; he cited successful bank reconciliation changes as an example of that approach, adding that capacity levels at the country office level may sometimes require a modified approach. He highlighted the importance of results-based management and its potential to change the management culture in UNDP. He spoke of the need to revisit the UNDP project portfolio and remove smaller projects with less strategic value. He recognized the regret expressed by some delegations at the postponement of IPSAS implementation in UNDP, but reiterated the need to ensure that managers were not stretched beyond their capacity and to prevent `change fatigue' among UNDP staff. The Director, Office of Audit and Investigations, confirmed that results-based management was integrated into the conceptual work of UNDP, but that it could take time for managers to understand, embrace and implement the concept. The same was true for managing nationally executed projects. Determining the `top 11' audit priorities was a consultative process in which the Office of Audit and Investigations agreed with the priorities identified. Regarding the access to audit reports by non-Member States - specifically, a request by the Office of the Inspector General of the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria - he reiterated that Executive Board guidance in this area was clear for Member States and does not cover donors who are not Member States. The chairperson of the audit advisory committee reaffirmed its involvement in developing the UNDP accountability framework. UNDP movement towards its full implementation - including elements such as the enterprise risk management and results-based budget systems - indicated continuous efforts to improve. Regarding the IPSAS implementation delay, she highlighted that the contractual reform mandated by the General Assembly and the modification of associated systems and processes were critical organizational considerations, and that the committee was in agreement with the need to delay. The Head of the UNOPS Internal Audit Office confirmed that his office reported directly to the Executive Director of UNOPS, and to the independent strategy and advisory committee whenever it met. He highlighted the structure of the Office, confirming that staff are fully accredited professionals, and that training is an ongoing and important part of staff development. UNFPA The Director, Division for Oversight Services (DOS), introduced the report on UNFPA internal audit and oversight activities in 2008 (DP/FPA/2009/5). The Deputy Executive Director (Programme) presented the UNFPA management response. The Chair of the UNFPA Audit Advisory Committee (AAC) participated in the discussion. Delegations appreciated the enhanced quality of the UNFPA report and noted that it provided a comprehensive analysis of the risk universe of UNFPA. They commended the management commitment to and the progress achieved in improving accountability, oversight and monitoring in UNFPA. They fully supported UNFPA efforts towards greater transparency. They welcomed the annual report of the Audit Advisory Committee and were encouraged that UNFPA felt well served by the AAC. Delegations commended UNFPA for the implementation of the accountability framework and stressed that such an instrument was essential for the meticulous follow-up of contributions to programmes and to ensure stringent financial propriety and the effectiveness of resources expended. Delegations pointed out that the UNFPA restructuring and decentralization made the work of audit and oversight more complex and also more necessary. They underscored that it was critical to focus audit and oversight resources toward the 11 defined organizational priorities. Delegations appreciated the recent actions undertaken to further strengthen the national execution (NEX) modality. Some delegations noted the challenges in the area of programme design, management and monitoring and wondered if more actions in the area of internal controls and results-based management (RBM) training for staff were needed, especially at the country level. Information was requested on a time frame to address system-related issues pertaining to RBM. Concern was expressed about the current low level of audit coverage, given the growth in the Fund's overall resources. Additional information was requested on how the issue of recruitment of audit staff was being addressed. The Chair of the AAC was requested for her views on the following: what would be entailed in the UNFPA implementation of an enterprise risk management strategy; measures to strengthen DOS; what level of unsatisfactory audit ratings (in a high-risk environment) should the Executive Board accept as routine; measures proposed by UNFPA to address NEX issues; and the strengths and weaknesses of the accountability framework and oversight policy. Delegations reaffirmed their support for IPSAS implementation and encouraged UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS to regularly inform the Executive Board of progress. UNDP and UNFPA were requested to organize a joint informal briefing in the near future on their internal control frameworks and enterprise risk management frameworks. The Deputy Executive Director (Programme) thanked delegations for their support and underscored that UNFPA appreciated the Executive Board's guidance regarding addressing the 11 priorities. She assured the Board that UNFPA was committed to continued strengthening of programme design, management and monitoring, and internal control. She noted that UNFPA was developing a strategy for operations in security-compromised environments. She emphasized that UNFPA took all audit reports very seriously and senior management followed up promptly with country offices and headquarters divisions on audit issues and recommendations. She discussed the components and time frame of the Fund's initiative to optimize RBM and mentioned various ongoing UNFPA learning and training initiatives. Regarding succession planning, she elaborated on such measures as the rosters of pre-screened candidates for key positions; the Fund's annual rotation exercise; functional streams; and focused planning meetings with divisional managers to discuss anticipated retirements and staff movements. She noted that according to a recent survey conducted by the Chief Executives Board for Coordination/Human Resources Network, UNFPA was the only organization with a formal succession planning framework. She stated that, in consultation with UNDP, UNFPA would be happy to organize the requested joint briefing. The Director, DOS, while reiterating the Fund's continuing commitment to strengthening RBM, stressed the importance of evidence-based programming and added that UNFPA was focusing increased attention to monitoring. He underscored that programme activities should be based on a thorough assessment that enabled UNFPA and its implementing partners to have proper indicators to measure results. He elaborated on the work under way regarding NEX and noted that management activities undertaken in 2008 had resulted in a significant decrease in NEX audit reports that were qualified. He stated that UNFPA welcomed the support and guidance of the Executive Board in addressing such issues as NEX and the new aid modalities, including sector-wide approaches, basket funding and direct budget support. He discussed the challenges in recruiting qualified auditors to fill existing vacancies and noted that DOS was exploring ways to ensure adequate audit coverage, including outsourcing some of the DOS work. The Chair, AAC, responded to queries noting that the focus was not the level of unsatisfactory audit ratings but whether recommendations for significant audit observations were implemented and corrective action was taken to address the deficiency. She highlighted UNFPA management's commitment to ensuring such corrective action. Noting UNFPA commitment to RBM implementation, she added that the AAC was visiting country and regional offices to discuss challenges and offer guidance on enhancing effectiveness and efficiency. Regarding NEX issues, she highlighted the importance that the AAC placed on UNFPA commitment to further improving NEX processes. Concerning the oversight policy, she noted that the AAC would look at its impact to see if expected results had been achieved and would make recommendations as needed. She observed that it was critical for the internal audit function to be involved from the beginning in new business processes. Regarding risk exposure, she elaborated on the DOS risk model and noted that together with the fraud assessment programme and other new initiatives a broader understanding of risk exposure had been achieved in UNFPA and would be further enhanced with the adoption and implementation of an enterprise risk management strategy. Regarding strengthening DOS, she observed that the key challenge was recruiting and retaining skilled staff, which was being addressed. She emphasized the importance of succession planning and the need for a strong Deputy Director in DOS. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/15: Reports of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS on internal audit and oversight. Field visits The President called upon the rapporteur of the joint field visit to Cambodia and the rapporteur of the field visit to Nepal to introduce their respective reports. Regarding the joint field visit to Cambodia, one delegation confirmed the usefulness of the visit, noted the accommodating nature of the United Nations country team and thanked the organizers and participants for an engaging visit. The delegation asked that the report be transmitted to the United Nations country team, since it contained useful information. Regarding the field visit to Nepal, the delegation of Nepal was pleased with the outcome of the visit and thanked UNDP and UNFPA for their support to national development. The delegation expressed concern about the heavy focus of the report on political issues, specifically the peace process, while scant attention was paid to the developmental and operational activities of the organizations and coverage of the three-year national development plan. It asked the Executive Board not to lose sight of the United Nations mission already in place, with a Security Council mandate to assist in the peace process. Two other delegations expressed the opinion that some paragraphs in the report went beyond the mandate of UNDP and UNFPA and asked the organizations to focus on their fields of expertise. The delegation of Nepal and the other two delegations requested certain amendments to the report. One delegation asked about the origin of the recommendation that UNDP and UNFPA work with the Ministry of Health to deliver health services, particularly in the area of reproductive health. The rapporteur for Nepal acknowledged the comments and explained the approach taken in the report. He recognized that there were areas where the language could be modified for greater clarity. The Executive Board took note of DP-FPA/2009/CRP.1, report on the joint field visit to Cambodia; and DP/2009/CRP.2-DP/FPA/2009/CRP.1, report on the field visit to Nepal. Opening remarks by the President of the Executive Board 69. In his opening remarks, the UNDP/UNFPA Executive Board President underscored that a key element in confronting the current economic and financial crisis and ensuring sustainable development was to continue investments in the social sector, ensuring that countries did not experience reversals in the progress attained. He emphasized the importance of pursuing the goals of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) and integrating them in national policies and development frameworks. In stating that UNFPA was uniquely positioned to assist countries in doing that, the President emphasized the key role of UNFPA in scaling up national capacity development. He thanked the Executive Director and the UNFPA staff for their commitment and hard work in assisting countries in the areas of population dynamics; reproductive health, including family planning and HIV prevention; and gender equality. XII. Statement by the Executive Director and annual report of the Executive Director 70. The Executive Director began her statement (available at http://www.unfpa.org/exbrd/2009/2009_annual.html) by welcoming Helen Clark, the new UNDP Administrator, and noting that each of the four funds and programmes was now headed by a woman. She saluted the leadership of Peter Piot, the former UNAIDS Executive Director, and welcomed his successor Michel Sidibé. Noting the challenges facing the world, she stated that no leader, organization or nation could meet the challenges alone: cooperation and understanding among nations and peoples were essential, coupled with a strong spirit of service, a full understanding of global justice and genuine mutual trust. She thanked all the countries that had contributed to UNFPA. She observed that the multiple crises confronting the world provided opportunities to strengthen United Nations reform and to harmonize the response by the United Nations system in support of national development. She emphasized the opportunities for strengthening implementation of the ICPD Programme of Action and supporting attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). She noted that UNFPA placed special emphasis on the achievement of MDG 5 to improve maternal health. She referred to the upcoming substantive session of the ECOSOC and ICPD @ 15 regional meetings as opportunities to advance the global health agenda, including maternal health. She stated that at the recent session of the Commission on Population and Development it was agreed that the MDGs to eliminate poverty and hunger and improve health and education could not be achieved unless greater attention was focused on population dynamics and universal access to reproductive health by 2015. She expressed concern regarding the funding gap for the ICPD agenda. 71. The Executive Director underscored that UNFPA was committed to making greater progress to improve the health of the world's mothers, women and young people and was working with a wide range of partners, including UNICEF, the World Bank and WHO. She stated that "forces are aligning to ensure that no woman dies giving life". She noted that UNFPA was working with partners to reposition voluntary family planning within the context of women's reproductive health and maternal mortality reduction. She elaborated on the progress achieved in 2008 in supporting countries in the 2010 round of censuses; facilitating South-South cooperation and North-South cooperation; building national capacity; supporting HIV prevention and integrating sexual and reproductive health and HIV/AIDS; working to address female genital mutilation/cutting and gender-based violence (GBV); promoting and supporting reproductive health commodity security (RHCS); training service providers; and strengthening effective humanitarian response, transition and recovery. 72. The Executive Director requested the Executive Board to extend the strategic plan, 2008-2011, by two years to 2013, including the integrated resource framework and the global and regional programme, to allow alignment with the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, as requested by the General Assembly. Noting the improved availability of baseline data in 2008, she stated that UNFPA would focus on improving the analytical quality of reports and sharpening the focus on development results. She noted that UNFPA continued to strengthen systems for results, oversight and accountability. Underscoring UNFPA commitment to accountability, she referred to the establishment of the UNFPA Ethics Office in 2008 and to the Fund's financial disclosure programme. She stated that UNFPA was taking a phased approach to the roll-out of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) and aimed to have UNFPA financial statements fully IPSAS-compliant by 31 December 2012. She updated the Executive Board on the Fund's reorganization and stated that UNFPA would continue to focus on change management and business continuity and even stronger management of results and risks. She concluded by thanking the Executive Board members for their continuing support to UNFPA and the visionary ICPD agenda. 73. Delegations congratulated the Executive Director and UNFPA staff on their achievements in 2008, a period of significant organizational change for UNFPA, and noted that UNFPA staff worked in some of the most challenging environments in the world. Delegations commended the leadership of the Executive Director in chairing the High-level Committee on Management and in moving the United Nations reform agenda forward, including on "Delivering as One" and the harmonization of business practices. Delegations were pleased to note that UNFPA had given increased attention to population dynamics and its relation to sustainable development. UNFPA support for the 2010 round of censuses, as well as for building capacity for data collection analysis and use was commended. One delegation requested further information about the methodologies applied in data collection and use. The need to prioritize universal access to sexual and reproductive health and rights information and health care services was emphasized. 74. The ability of UNFPA to advance vital development issues globally was commended and UNFPA was encouraged to focus greater attention on the roles and responsibilities of boys and men and the multisectoral needs of youth. Delegations commended the strong UNFPA focus on national-level actions such as supporting ownership, capacity development and strengthening national health systems. Delegations welcomed the focus on national execution (NEX), including the establishment of a NEX unit at headquarters. The critical importance of reproductive health commodity security, including as an integral part of national health policies, was emphasized and the progress becoming visible in several countries was noted. 75. Underscoring the crucial interlinkages between the ICPD goals and the MDGs, delegations emphasized the key role of UNFPA in implementing the ICPD Programme of Action, which at 15 continued to be of utmost importance. The longer term challenges in relation to the MDGs and the climate change agenda were noted. Delegations expressed deep concern about the prospect of reaching MDG 5 on maternal health and noted that of all the reproductive health indicators the least progress had been made in reducing maternal mortality. Noting that the Human Rights Council could constructively raise awareness of the human rights implications of maternal mortality and morbidity, one delegation stated that it was introducing a resolution on preventable maternal mortality, morbidity and human rights at the forthcoming session of the Council. Some delegations expressed concern about female genital mutilation/cutting and its permanent negative consequences on women's health. Concern was also expressed regarding the decrease in funding for family planning. One delegation noted that to achieve MDGs 4 and 5, the H4 (UNFPA, UNICEF, WHO and the World Bank) should urgently develop a single strategy that clearly illustrated the division of labour between the H4 members. It was underscored that the work of UNFPA made a difference to people all over the world. Furthermore, in light of the financial crisis, UNFPA was urged to continue to give voice to those most affected, including women, young people and poor people. Recognizing the need for stronger advocacy at the political level, one delegation appreciated UNFPA support for parliamentarian activities. Delegations from the Africa region appreciated the commitment of UNFPA to help African women and young girls to achieve a better and healthy life and encouraged action to link HIV/AIDS efforts and sexual and reproductive health. 76. One delegation requested information on the steps taken to ensure that women who have unintended pregnancies have access to safe abortion services, including post-abortion family planning. The delegation emphasized the importance of UNFPA working with other United Nations agencies to link HIV prevention to other sexual and reproductive health services; ensuring that interventions at the country level make strategic impact; enhancing monitoring and evaluation of country programmes; and ensuring effective analysis of the challenges in implementing the UNFPA strategic plan. Noting that UNFPA had a special responsibility as the lead multilateral organization promoting the implementation of the ICPD Programme of Action, another delegation expressed support and encouraged UNFPA efforts to expand access to family planning and maternal health services in order to save the lives of women and children in Africa. The delegation also encouraged UNFPA to enhance its ongoing efforts to strengthen effectiveness, accountability and transparency. One delegation noted that several countries in the Latin America and Caribbean region required resources even though they were "C" category countries under the UNFPA resource allocation system. Maternal mortality was a key concern that needed additional support. The delegation noted that the Latin America and Caribbean region was one of the most "unequal" regions and there was an acute need to address the reproductive health needs of marginalized groups, including indigenous people and adolescents. Another delegation welcomed the strengthening of the institutional capacity of the subregional office in Jamaica, including to better serve the countries of the Eastern Caribbean. Several delegations stated that they supported the extension of the strategic plan to 2013, including the extension of the timing of the midterm review. With regard to reporting on results, delegations urged a greater focus on outcomes and hoped that future reports would compare achievements against targets. One delegation requested a concept paper on the midterm review at the Executive Board's session in January 2010. Given the significant increase of UNFPA activities in the humanitarian field, one delegation requested a more detailed overview at a future Executive Board session. In noting that the annual report was clear and informative, delegations encouraged more analytical reporting on results and a comparison of achievements against targets, with an emphasis on outcomes and not merely output indicators. China announced that in 2009 it would increase its core contribution to $950,000. Finland announced that its 2009 core contribution had increased 31 per cent over the previous year. Japan announced that it would contribute $31.1 million to UNFPA core resources, an increase of 1.3 per cent over the previous fiscal year. The United States of America announced that it would make a contribution of $50 million dollars to UNFPA in 2009. A number of delegations welcomed the return of the United States of America as a donor to UNFPA. Numerous delegations urged the international community to maintain development assistance in the face of the current economic and financial crisis. The Executive Director thanked delegations for their support, contributions and multi-year pledges. She welcomed the return of the United States of America as a donor and thanked the Government for its generous contribution to UNFPA. She thanked the countries that had increased their contributions in spite of the financial crisis, including China, Finland, Japan and New Zealand. She thanked the Executive Board members for supporting the two-year extension of the strategic plan to 2013. She thanked Japan and Italy for their G8 leadership efforts to ensure financial commitments to MDGs 4, 5 and 6 and to strengthening health systems. She thanked New Zealand for its efforts in formulating a resolution on maternal mortality as a human rights issue within the framework of the Human Rights Council. She also thanked delegations for recognizing the efforts to consolidate linkages between ICPD and the MDGs and for underlining the importance of population and development in relation to data collection and census. She noted that at a future Board session UNFPA would provide a briefing on its humanitarian work. Concerning responding to the financial crisis, the Executive Director noted that globally UNFPA contributed to the work of the Chief Executives Board for Coordination on the system-wide response. In its own specific response, UNFPA was focusing special attention on RHCS in the most vulnerable countries and mobilizing resources within emerging initiatives for innovative financing of health systems. At the country level, UNFPA was engaging with partners in supporting countries in monitoring the crisis and response in terms of setting priorities with a focus on vulnerable groups. UNFPA was also ensuring "Delivering as One" in support of national priorities and building on national systems. Referring to the Fund's reorganization, the Executive Director reiterated UNFPA commitment to ensuring a field-focus and effective support to countries. She assured the Board that UNFPA was shifting to an upstream approach and programming tools and training were already in place to facilitate that approach. She clarified that, in accordance with the agreed H4 division of labour, a single workplan was being finalized to engage in selected countries and UNFPA, WHO, UNICEF and the World Bank had agreed to map out the gaps, costs and personnel needs for maternal and newborn health in 25 priority countries. Concerning the query about safe abortion and post-abortion care, she clarified that the only way to reduce recourse to abortion was through universal voluntary family planning. Within the sexual and reproductive health care package, post-abortion care was an integral part of the package. In line with the ICPD Programme of Action (paragraph 8.25) and an earlier decision (85/19) of the Governing Council, UNFPA did not support or promote abortion as a method of family planning. UNFPA worked with Governments to strengthen their national health systems, including to increase access to family planning and ensure reproductive health commodity security. The Deputy Executive Director (External Relations, United Nations Affairs and Management) thanked delegations for their supportive comments, including on system-wide coherence. She elaborated on how UNFPA was monitoring its contributions to United Nations reform and noted that lessons learned were fed back into programming, including in the new generation of United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks. She assured the Executive Board that UNFPA was committed to achieving efficiency gains and was focusing particular attention on change management, accountability and the internal control framework. The Deputy Executive Director (Programme) appreciated the support of delegations and clarified that the linkages between reproductive health and HIV were emphasized in the Fund's programmatic work, including through use of the linkage assessment tool which was being rolled out in 60 countries. Regarding prevention of mother-to-child transmission, she noted that UNFPA was working with several partners and was leading in the areas of primary prevention in women and girls; and prevention of unintended pregnancy in women living with HIV. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/16: Report of the UNFPA Executive Director for 2008: Progress in implementing the strategic plan, 2008-2011. XIII. Funding commitments to UNFPA The Chief, Resource Mobilization Branch (RMB), introduced the Report on funding commitments to UNFPA (DP/FPA/2009/3) and updated the Executive Board on the latest estimates for UNFPA regular and co-financing resources, as of 20 May 2009. Delegations appreciated the detailed introduction. While pleased to note the growth in the Fund's resource envelope, one delegation inquired about the ratio of core resources to non-core resources. Noting that the proportion of non-core resources was on the rise, the delegation asked if there was something donors could do. The Executive Director noted that UNFPA favoured receiving core resources. However, it was in the hands of the Member States as the trend was towards increasing non-core resources. She reiterated the appeal to Member States to contribute to core resources. The Chief, RMB, noted that part of the growth of non-core resources was due to new funding mechanisms such as joint programmes and "one budgets" within the concept of "Delivering as One". The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/17 on funding commitments to UNFPA. XIV. UNFPA country programmes and related matters The UNFPA Deputy Executive Director (Programme) introduced the 11 new draft country programme documents (CPDs) and 7 programme extensions and noted that the draft CPDs had been developed through a participatory process which had involved the respective governments and other national and international stakeholders, including civil society. The Directors of the regional offices for Africa; Arab States; Asia and the Pacific; Eastern Europe and Central Asia; and Latin America and the Caribbean introduced the draft CPDs and programme extensions from their respective regions. Delegations appreciated that the draft CPDs reflected and responded to national priorities and development needs. They thanked UNFPA for the support and close collaboration. They welcomed the focus on building national capacity and improving sexual and reproductive health (SRH) services. They emphasized the need to strengthen donor coordination. Some delegations noted that the draft country programmes should have more extensive analysis and reflect how lessons learned were fed into the new programmes. A number of delegations provided comments on specific draft CPDs, including on such topics as sexual and reproductive health and rights; HIV/AIDS; maternal mortality; reproductive health commodity security; adolescent SRH; universal access to SRH services, including for poor and vulnerable population groups; the 2010 round of censuses; gender-based violence; addressing the needs of the Roma as a group separate from other vulnerable groups such as women, youth and the elderly; and support for and involvement of non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The following delegations commented on their own respective programmes and thanked UNFPA and the Executive Board for the support provided: Afghanistan; Armenia; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Botswana; Democratic People's Republic of Korea; Ecuador; Iran (Islamic Republic of); Kazakhstan; Lebanon; Mozambique; Occupied Palestinian Territory; Philippines; Tajikistan; Turkmenistan; and Uzbekistan. The Directors of the regional offices thanked the Executive Board for the constructive comments and support and assured the Board that the comments would be conveyed to the concerned countries to take into account in finalizing the CPDs. The regional directors also provided responses to the specific queries raised by some of the Board members concerning the integration of reproductive health and HIV programmes; reproductive health commodity security; the 2010 round of censuses; sharing of lessons learned; improving coordination amongst development partners; increased involvement of NGOs; outcomes and indicators; and the inclusion of the Roma group in a regional programme. The Executive Board approved the two-year programme extensions for Mozambique, Philippines and Kyrgyzstan; and took note of the one-year programme extensions for the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic of), and Azerbaijan. The Board also took note of the draft country programme documents for Botswana, Burundi, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Ecuador and the comments thereon, which would be conveyed to the concerned countries to take into account in finalizing the programmes, as per decision 2006/36. XV. Evaluation The Deputy Executive Director (Programme) introduced the Report on the UNFPA evaluation policy (DP/FPA/2009/4). Delegations noted their support for the focus in the policy on improving programme effectiveness, achieving results and enhancing national capacity. They welcomed the plans to strengthen the Fund's capacity in evaluation, including through regional monitoring and evaluation advisers and coordinated and joint evaluations with partners. They encouraged UNFPA to work more actively through national evaluation systems. Noting that the evaluation function reinforced accountability, oversight and learning, they underscored the need to ensure that the policy enhanced the learning aspect of evaluation. Some delegations stated that while they would have preferred a fully independent evaluation office, given the Fund's size, they saw the practicality of including the evaluation office in the Division for Oversight Services (DOS). They asked UNFPA to ensure the independence of the evaluation function and its separation from the oversight functions of DOS. Delegations requested clarification on the roles and responsibilities of different entities, including regarding reporting to the Executive Board and overseeing implementation of the recommendations and the quality of evaluations; the dual role of DOS; the role of the Programme Division in terms of coordination of evaluation planning; the role and structure of the knowledge management platform; and the terminology in the document. Some delegations requested information on the prioritization and planning of evaluations; targeted areas of coverage and the use of evaluations; the purpose and use of decentralized and independent evaluations; and links between the lessons learned from evaluations and the implementation of results-based management (RBM). Some delegations thought that the operational details of the implementation of the evaluation policy should also be included in the policy document. Regarding the disclosure of evaluations, some delegations called for sharing them as widely as possible and making them public as a general rule. Emphasizing the importance of reporting to the Executive Board, some delegations invited UNFPA to inform the Board on an annual basis on the major thematic evaluations carried out and the related management responses to the recommendations. However, other delegations underscored the need for caution and prudence in dealing with sensitive information and recalled the difficulties that had arisen in the Executive Board in 2008 over the issue of disclosure of internal audit reports. A number of delegations stated that the same policy and approach should be used as adopted for the disclosure of internal audit reports. Those delegations expressed support for the UNFPA evaluation policy as presented. One delegation stated that the Executive Board should take note of the UNFPA evaluation policy and ask the Executive Director to review the policy after a trial period and then report back to the Board on potential areas for improvement. One delegation inquired about support for abortion. In responding to one delegation's query about abortion, the Executive Director clarified that in line with the Programme of Action (paragraph 8.25) of the International Conference on Population and Development and an earlier decision (85/19) of the Governing Council, UNFPA did not support or promote abortion as a method of family planning. It supported voluntary family planning to prevent unwanted pregnancies so as to eliminate recourse to abortion and worked with Governments to strengthen their national health systems to deal effectively with the complications of unsafe abortions, thereby saving women's lives. The Deputy Executive Director (Programme) thanked the delegations for the rich discussion on the evaluation policy. She underscored that UNFPA emphasized capacity-building at the country level and this would include providing guidelines and evaluation tools, organizing training and learning events, sharing lessons learned, as well as working through national evaluation systems. She added that UNFPA had already undertaken joint evaluations, including in India and the United Republic of Tanzania. She emphasized that RBM was an integral part of evaluation. Regarding the query on roles and responsibilities of the Executive Board, she noted that these were defined in General Assembly resolutions 48/162 and 49/128 and were also referred to in the UNFPA oversight policy. She added that in her introductory statement she had elaborated on UNFPA reporting responsibilities to the Executive Board. She underscored that UNFPA was enhancing the evaluation capacity of all managerial staff and increasing the number of monitoring and evaluation advisers in the country offices. The Director, Programme Division, noted that evaluation information was shared through Evalnet (an Internet system). Also, a database was planned to facilitate follow-up on evaluation recommendations. The annual report of the Executive Director would regularly feature a section on evaluation and, in addition, the Executive Board would receive biennially the periodic report on evaluation. He assured the Board that a solid results framework for country programmes would be established at the outset specifying indicators, baselines and targets for the programmes. He noted that the operational details regarding evaluations would be addressed through guidelines and evaluation plans. The Director, DOS, provided the historical context for the development of the evaluation policy while noting the linkages with the Fund's strategic plan, accountability framework and oversight policy. He stressed that the focus should be on the independence of evaluations and not the evaluation function. Regarding the disclosure of evaluations, he recalled paragraph 44 in the UNFPA oversight policy (DP/FPA/2008/14) concerning the disclosure of internal audit reports and noted the need to maintain coherence. He noted that evaluations belonged to all partners in the development process. He recalled that paragraph 129 of General Assembly resolution 62/208 had emphasized that programme countries should have greater ownership in the evaluation of all forms of assistance. The Executive Board adopted decision 2009/18: UNFPA evaluation policy. Other matters Special luncheon event 103. The Administrator of UNDP, the Executive Director of UNFPA, and the Executive Director of UNICEF hosted an ambassadorial-level luncheon event on the response of UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF to the world financial crisis. More than 100 delegations attended. Informal meetings 104. The Executive Board held the following informal meetings: UNDP. (a) Briefing on peacebuilding and early recovery; and (b) Informal consultation on the UNDP biennial support budget and the midterm review of programming arrangements. UNFPA. (a) Briefing on reproductive health commodity security and the female condom; and (b) UNFPA-UNICEF joint programme on female genital mutilation/cutting: Accelerating change. UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS. Joint briefing on the implementation of IPSAS. 