%%%FOOD AID|FOOD POLICY|FOOD SECURITY|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|FINANCING|RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|ORGANIZATIONAL REFORM|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONFERENCES|CAPACITY BUILDING|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|GENDER MAINSTREAMING|CLIMATE CHANGE|

Substantive session of 2009 New York, 6-31 July 2009 * E/2009/100. Item 3 (b) of the provisional agenda* Operational activities of the United Nations for international development cooperation: reports of the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme Annual report of the World Food Programme for 2008 Note by the Secretary-General The Secretary-General has the honour to transmit to the Economic and Social Council the annual report of the World Food Programme for 2008, as approved by the Board of the Programme in its decision 2009/EB.1/2, which is also attached. Decision 2009/EB.1/2 of the Executive Board of the World Food Programme adopted by the Board at its first regular session of 2009 (9-11 February 2009) Annual report for 2008 to the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations The Board approved the annual report for 2008 to the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (WFP/EB.1/2009/4 and Add.1 and Corr.1). In accordance with its decision 2004/EB.A/11, the Board requested that the annual report be forwarded to the Economic and Social Council and the FAO Council, along with the Board's decisions and recommendations for 2008 and the present decision. 9 February 2009 Annual report for 2008 to the Economic and Social Council and the FAO Council, including implementation of the reform programme of the Secretary-General and the triennial comprehensive policy review Executive Summary Climate change continued as a major United Nations system-wide cooperation issue in 2008, while the global food crisis emerged as a new United Nations challenge in 2008: WFP's funding requirements rose from US$3.1 billion in January to US$5.7 billion in September. WFP recast its original Programme of Work for 2008 to meet the increasing costs of food and fuel and to provide for the larger numbers of people in need of immediate assistance; it raised the target for people assisted from 69 million to 89 million, and responded swiftly to new emergencies. The Secretary-General's High-Level Task Force on Food Security and the Comprehensive Framework for Action underlined the need for coordination among stakeholders. The Rome-based agencies were prominent in promoting the twin-track approach to global food and nutrition security. With regard to humanitarian reform, WFP continued its role in evaluating the cluster system and enhancing its operational response. As lead agency for the logistics cluster, WFP assumed the lead in seven new emergencies and shared the lead of the emergency telecommunications cluster, which was activated in two new emergencies. In the field of development, the 2007 Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review gave further impetus to ongoing reform: WFP increased its involvement in five of the eight Delivering as One pilot countries, particularly in linking joint programmes aligned with national priorities. In 2008 WFP participated in 84 joint programmes in 31 countries, of which over a third were being implemented in the Delivering as One pilot countries. The main areas of cooperation were education, health and nutrition, and HIV and AIDS. This report is in accordance with streamlined reporting to the Board and WFP's parent bodies (see WFP/EB.A/2004/5-F) and consistent with the format for annual reports to the United Nations Economic and Social Council on the basis of the 2004 General Assembly resolution on the Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review of Operational Activities for Development. It takes into account Board comments on the 2007 Annual Report. Because it has to be submitted to the Board's 2009 First Regular Session, it does not include statistics for all of 2008: statistics on partnerships in the section on collaboration with partners are from 2007 because 2008 data were not available. Complete statistical information will be available in the 2008 Annual Performance Report submitted to the Board's Annual Session. Section 1 - Structures and Mechanisms Inter-Agency Standing Committee, Clusters and Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs . Following completion of the evaluation of clusters in late 2007, the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) prepared the second phase, which involves WFP and focuses on country-level impacts and operational effectiveness, including the role of global clusters. IASC also finalized and disseminated the cluster guidance notes in 2008. . WFP continued to be the lead agency for the logistics cluster in seven humanitarian crises in the Central African Republic, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Somalia, the Sudan and Zimbabwe. WFP assumed the lead in seven new emergencies in Chad, Georgia, Haiti, Kenya, Mozambique, Myanmar and Tajikistan. WFP provided logistics training for WFP and partner staff; the global logistics support cell has so far trained 125 staff from 27 partners. . WFP has discussed with stakeholders the feasibility of a single lead agency for the global emergency telecommunications cluster (ETC) to replace the current three - the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and WFP. In 2008, the ETC was activated in new emergencies in Kenya and Myanmar; WFP took the lead in Myanmar and led jointly with UNICEF in Kenya. As part of the cluster roll-out project, WFP assessed 23 of 26 countries with a Humanitarian Coordinator (HC) and made recommendations for cluster activation. WFP organized training in emergency preparedness and response management for 38 information and communications technology (ICT) staff from organizations such as the Swedish Rescue Services Agency, the Norwegian Refugee Council, Islamic Relief Worldwide, Medical Emergency Relief International, World Vision International, Irish Aid and the Danish Refugee Council. . To date, 19 humanitarian country teams have implemented the cluster system, of which 17 created food aid/food security/nutrition clusters. WFP is leading eight and jointly leading another nine with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and UNICEF. . WFP continues to co-chair the IASC Sub-Working Group on Preparedness and Contingency Planning, working with UNICEF and others. It has a leading role in developing a system for enhancing socio-political early warning among agencies and helps support the global platform Humanitarian Early Warning Service (HEWSweb). . WFP continues to work through the Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs (ECHA) on coordination, operations, funding, policy and the safety of staff in insecure environments. Consolidated Appeals Process . There were 11 Consolidated Appeals Processes (CAPs), 10 flash appeals and 13 other appeals in 2008. WFP participated in all of them and remains the largest appealing agency under the CAP. Total requirements amounted to US$7 billion, of which WFP's needs accounted for US$2.9 billion or 41 percent, followed by UNICEF - 9 percent - and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) - 7 percent. The three largest appeals were for the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Occupied Palestinian Territory, followed by Somalia and Uganda. WFP was the largest appealing organization in four of these appeals; in the Occupied Palestinian Territory appeal WFP was the second largest after the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). WFP resourced 90 percent of its requirements through the 2008 CAP. United Nations Development Group . WFP served its turn as chair of the United Nations Development Group (UNDG) Management Group, which focuses on achieving efficiencies through coherence in operations at the country level. WFP participated in working groups that prepared issues for consideration by the Management Group such as ICT, common premises, human resources policies, administration of joint programmes and trust funds, financial policies and procedures, adoption of the harmonized approach to cash transfers and support for Delivering as One countries. A team chaired by WFP prepared the successful proposal to restructure UNDG as a pillar of the Chief Executives Board (CEB): the enhanced coherence in inter-agency management issues at the country and Headquarters levels should increase WFP's involvement in matters related to United Nations reform and coherence, as mandated by the Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review (TCPR), and help to deliver effective programmes. Section 2 - Funding and Resources Funding and Resources . The number of people in need of humanitarian assistance rose dramatically in 2008 as a result of natural disasters, conflict and high food prices. WFP's approved programmes were valued at US$3.1 billion at the beginning of the year; by the end of September the requirements for the year had increased to US$5.7 billion. . As of 30 September 2008, contributions to WFP amounted to a record US$4.0 billion. They include funding in response to the March appeal for US$755 million to cover increased costs of food and fuel. The 81 public donors that have contributed to WFP operations include new donors Burkina Faso, Guinea, Iraq, Mali and Mexico. The top ten donors continue to provide 84 percent of WFP's funding. . Donor contributions to WFP received through pooled funding mechanisms and United Nations agencies totalled US$177 million, the fifth largest source of income, of which 90 percent came from humanitarian funding mechanisms such as the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) and the Sudan/Democratic Republic of the Congo Common Humanitarian Funds. . Pooled funding has been useful to WFP in some situations by helping to harmonize responses, increase sectoral coverage of needs and improve field-level coordination, prioritization and joint programming. . WFP's experience supports assessments such as the CERF two-year evaluations. Contributions appear less predictable than direct donor contributions and lead to increased transaction costs for agencies, including lengthy application procedures and non-standard reporting. It is hard to determine the extent to which pooled funding has been additional funding to WFP or a shift from direct donor contributions to contributions through pooled funding mechanisms. Private-Sector Fundraising . Support from private-sector fundraising increased to US$116 million by 30 September 2008, including US$67 million from the Gates Foundation to support Purchase for Progress (P4P) and US$1.4 million in online donations. The Gates Foundation also supported WFP mother-and-child health programmes in Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire and Niger when the high food price crisis was announced. . In February, the Board endorsed a strategy for expanding and diversifying private-sector partnerships and fundraising to include corporations, foundations and individuals. The telecommunications company Vodafone and the United Nations Foundation signed a threeyear agreement with WFP to enhance WFP's telecommunications capacity; TNT extended its partnership for another five years, with increased focus on emergency response. . The private sector increasingly helped WFP to improve its food basket by researching new products and raising awareness of the importance of nutritious food for vulnerable groups. Micronutrient specialists DSM and WFP were awarded the 2008 Brightness Award by the International Conference on Ion Sources, which recognizes innovation in ion-source physics and technology. . Unilever continued to support WFP school feeding programmes with cash and technical expertise for educational campaigns on health, hygiene and nutrition. YUM! Brands held its second World Hunger Relief campaign to raise awareness of hunger and provided cash to support WFP operations. Section 3 - Implementation of United Nations Reform Measures Harmonization of Programmes . The 2007 TCPR gave impetus to WFP's support for United Nations reform, including measures to improve effectiveness and efficiency at the field level. In September, WFP's Executive Policy Council endorsed an internal guidance document on United Nations reform and harmonization of development programming at the country level that established a mechanism to support United Nations work on coherence at the agency and country levels, including the Delivering as One pilot countries. . WFP was a co-convenor of the UNDG Working Group on Programming Issues, which improved the Common Country Assessment (CCA) and United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) guidelines by emphasizing closer links with national planning priorities to ensure that programmes benefit from linkages between development and transition activities such as disaster risk reduction, capacity-building and post-conflict involvement. Common operational documents are being developed to support Delivering as One at the country level. . WFP country programmes, development projects and protracted relief and recovery operations have been integrated into CCAs and UNDAFs; emergency operations (EMOPs) are not normally included because they are short-term and unpredictable. UNDAFs identify rationales and strategies for food assistance, providing the basis for WFP's work and reflecting national strategies and Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs). . WFP's comparative advantages in the process are: i) development and implementation of strategies for alleviating hunger and food insecurity; ii) collection of data on food insecurity and vulnerability, for example through vulnerability analysis and mapping (VAM), as a basis for UNDAFs; iii) expertise in early warning methods, emergency preparedness and needs assessment; iv) experience in designing and implementing food-based social safety nets to protect the poor and other vulnerable groups; and v) experience of in-country conditions. . WFP recognizes that handover strategies are a critical component of good programming. They are required in all WFP programme documents and are integral to PRSP, CCA and UNDAF processes. They describe how WFP plans to phase out an intervention or transition to longer-term programmes to facilitate strategic planning by WFP country offices with governments, communities and partners. Handover strategies position WFP activities in a long-term context with links to work on building government capacity and managing risk. Delivering as One . WFP supports Delivering as One in five pilot countries where it has country offices: Mozambique, Pakistan, Rwanda, United Republic of Tanzania and Cape Verde. . In Mozambique, WFP is in its second year of Delivering as One; it is involved in six of the 11 joint programmes (JPs). In United Republic of Tanzania, WFP participates in six of the seven JPs and two joint initiatives on change management and communication; the Government is taking the lead in many of the JPs, which has strengthened its ownership; WFP helped the Government to develop national guidelines for nutrition in HIV and AIDS programmes. In Pakistan, WFP participates in all five thematic working groups - health, poverty, education, HIV and AIDS and disaster management - each of which has formed a JP. WFP and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) co-chair the disaster risk management theme group. The One Programme in Rwanda is identical to the UNDAF and consists of five thematic areas in which WFP is active, co-chairing education with UNICEF and sustainable growth and social protection with FAO. . In Cape Verde, the Government signed a One Programme document with the United Nations on 1 July 2008 to address the implications of Cape Verde's graduation from the group of the least developed countries and its attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. WFP-supported school feeding is integrated into the new budgetary framework and is being handed over to the Government. WFP supported a review of the outcomes of a stocktaking exercise completed at the end of 2007 and the "evaluability" studies of the pilots carried out by the United Nations Evaluation Group (UNEG) during 2008. Findings included: i) increased government leadership and ownership of the One UN programme and greater alignment of United Nations priorities with national development priorities; ii) increased joint programming among United Nations agencies; and iii) progress in developing One Programme, One Budget, One Leader initiatives and agreement on division of labour among agencies. Implementation challenges included: i) lack of predictability and timeliness of funding; ii) lack of harmonization and simplification of practices among United Nations agencies; and iii) high transaction costs for agencies, especially in reporting. . In Malawi, an ambitious United Nations Business Plan for Delivering as One (20082011) is aligned with MDG development priorities and establishes a One Programme for all 12 United Nations agencies. UNDG recognizes Malawi as an "Enhanced United Nations Coherence Country". Malawi also established the One Fund and received a donor contribution. WFP is engaged in a JP "Support for Strengthening the National Monitoring and Evaluation System in Malawi" with UNDP, UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), FAO, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the World Bank. Joint Programmes . WFP continued to participate in 84 JPs in 31 countries in 2008, of which 33 were in the four Delivering as One pilot countries. The main areas of cooperation were education, health and nutrition, HIV and AIDS, food security, disaster management, capacitybuilding and the environment. Education . WFP, FAO, UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF are implementing two education JPs in Burkina Faso focusing on the minimum package, increasing access to schools in rural areas and enhancing the quality of education. In Bhutan, WFP collaborated with UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF and United Nations Volunteers (UNV) in JPs on human security and school water and sanitation. In Pakistan, WFP is engaged with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), UNICEF and UNHCR in pre-school and elementary education, particularly for girls, and with UNDP, UNESCO and UNICEF in enhancing the education system. WFP is partnering with UNESCO to improve the educational impact of its emergency school feeding under the EMOP to respond to high food prices. Health and nutrition . In Guatemala, WFP worked with UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO, FAO and UNV on reducing chronic malnutrition in children under 36 months of age and pregnant women. In Rwanda, WFP is working with WHO and UNICEF in a JP on the quality, effectiveness and efficiency of the health system and with UNICEF, WHO and UNFPA in healthcare, nutrition and hygiene practices. HIV and AIDS . In Kenya, WFP, UNAIDS, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and UNFPA initiated wellness centres in the Northern Corridor. In Benin, WFP worked with UNICEF providing support to people living with HIV. Food Security . In Liberia, WFP, FAO, UNDP, UNICEF, the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), WHO and the World Bank are cooperating on food security and nutrition. In Zambia, WFP, FAO, UNICEF and the World Bank are cooperating in the rising food prices initiative. Disaster Management . In Colombia, WFP implements humanitarian action against landmines with IOM, UNDP, UNFPA, UNHCR and UNICEF. In Aceh, Indonesia, WFP cooperates with IOM, UNAIDS, UNDP, UNFPA, UNHCR, UNICEF and WHO on support for emergency life savings. Capacity-Building . In Bhutan, WFP, UNFPA and UNDP updated the geographic information system (GIS) on planning and service delivery points and produced socio-economic profiles and poverty maps. In India, WFP worked with the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) providing support to livelihood activities. Environment . In Mozambique, WFP is participating in environmental mainstreaming and adaptation to climate change with FAO, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), UNHabitat, UNDP and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). In Cape Verde, WFP worked with FAO, UNDP, UNEP, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNIDO and WHO in the areas of environment, energy and disaster prevention. . In Mauritania, JPs focused on gender, sustainable growth, the MDGs and communications. WFP, FAO, UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF and WHO are developing Mauritania's United Nations information and documentation centre. Paris Declaration and Sector-Wide Approaches . In Rwanda, WFP signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on a sector-wide approach in the health sector with the Government and development partners. In line with the Rwanda aid policy and the Paris Declaration, partners are committed to employing the Government's disbursement and financial reporting systems. Where financing is not provided through the Ministry of Health, partners will provide information on the cost and implementation status of the health projects. Common Services . Experience with Delivering as One in pilot countries has encouraged the United Nations to review common activities that could be streamlined. WFP chairs the One United Nations ICT team, which provides policy and operational support for the Delivering as One countries. The "One Network" launched in Mozambique in August 2008 is an example of efficiency savings: WFP is implementing a United Nations telecommunications network that links the 20 United Nations agencies in the country; its private automatic branch exchange, very small aperture terminals and potential for common databases and mailing lists are expected to enable savings that can be allocated to programmes. The same process is in progress in United Republic of Tanzania, and Rwanda is considering a similar initiative. . WFP currently chairs the procurement network of the High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM). The harmonization of procurement processes features prominently in its agenda. The network cooperates with the HLCM finance network on common financial rules and regulations that will enable agencies to share contractual agreements and make procurements on behalf of one another. Tools will be developed to assist Delivering as One country offices with planning and implementing joint procurements. A note on sustainable procurement is being finalized; training courses will be offered to procurement staff in January 2009 at Headquarters. . United Republic of Tanzania's current review of agencies' procurement aims at a common procurement system for non-food items and services for all agencies. Streamlining some common services requires action at the headquarters level because financial and human resources systems are not always compatible, which can be a challenge at the operational level. . The vision of the network for procurement across the United Nations and its practical approach to day-to-day procurement are reflected in its work to professionalize the procurement function, increase coherence among agencies and provide a knowledgesharing platform through the United Nations Global Marketplace (www.ungm.org) for United Nations procurement practitioners and potential suppliers. Common Premises . WFP completed its two-year chairmanship of the UNDG Task Team on Common Premises (TTCP) with notable progress in the development of technical tools and guidance for country offices undertaking common premises projects. WFP highlighted to the HLCM management group the increasing difficulties in funding common premises initiatives: construction costs have increased as a result of market pressures from emerging economies, and real estate markets in large cities have become increasingly expensive with fewer suitable properties available. Following the bombing of United Nations offices in Algiers, the security of premises became an increasing concern. Collaboration increased between the TTCP and agency security divisions, and the tools developed under WFP's leadership such as cost-benefit analysis, standard terms of reference and project checklists are being utilized to evaluate options to make premises secure. . In 2008, WFP committed to joining the United Nations house in the Russian Federation. WFP funded its share of the construction of a United Nations house in Bhutan, which has been delayed by changes in local building codes and administrative issues regarding the United Nations lead in the project. . WFP encourages rigorous analysis of the costs and benefits of common premises, with an emphasis on security and suitability, and supports the incorporation of "green building" into common premises projects. United Nations Joint Logistics Centre . The United Nations Joint Logistics Centre (UNJLC), which is staffed by WFP, UNICEF and UNHCR, developed and maintained the cluster website and information platform on logistics, customs, supply tracking in emergencies and GIS/mapping. Complementary logistics information management tools were launched in 2008, including the Customs Information Guide for 51 countries and the United Nations Spatial Data Infrastructure for Transport. . In 2008, UNJLC received an award for achievements in humanitarian GIS from the Environmental Systems Research Institute. UNJLC Sudan continued the activities assigned by the United Nations country team (UNCT) regarding non-food items, emergency shelter, pipelines and GIS/mapping. UNJLC staff were seconded to support inter-agency emergency operations in the Central African Republic, Chad, Georgia, Haiti, Mozambique and Myanmar. . Given the evolution of new humanitarian systems and increased levels of accountability under the cluster approach, UNJLC functions are being absorbed into the Global Logistics Cluster to ensure that core competencies are maintained. On the recommendation of the 2007 IASC cluster evaluation and at the request of cluster partners in April 2008, the Global Logistics Cluster Support Cell (GLCSC) and the UNJLC made an inventory of their functions with a view to enhancing logistics responses in emergencies. The identified areas of complementarity led to a proposal for a team that would unite the core units of GLCSC and UNJLC, which was endorsed by stakeholders in October 2008 and shared in an information note to IASC in November 2008; it is expected to be operational from 1 January 2009. United Nations Humanitarian Air Service . In 2008, the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) chartered 120 aircraft, an increase of 20 percent over 2007. It transported 255,000 passengers from United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in 14 countries and delivered 10,100 mt of cargo for EMOPs in four countries. . WFP's main aviation activities are in Chad, Somalia and the Sudan. The Chad operation was expanded to Cameroon in February 2008 to support Chadian refugees. Projects in west and central Africa remain at the same level; they overcome the challenges of insecure roads, long distances and lack of safe aircraft operators. The Afghanistan air operation provides internal and Kabul - Dubai passenger flights. Since June 2008, WFP has provided the only air links from Niger to other African capitals. . The rapid availability of CERF funding and direct donor contributions for aviation projects was crucial in setting up EMOPs and in supporting humanitarian activities. The Joint Inspection Unit recommends that more sustainable funding should be provided for UNHAS for long-term operations. . A recent report by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) led to improvements in WFP's aviation management, particularly with regard to the appointment of qualified aviation specialists as WFP officers in field operations. Aviation training provided in collaboration with TNT for WFP aviation staff in country offices and for civil aviation authorities and NGOs contributed to capacity-building in countries where WFP has aviation operations. The WFP Aviation Safety Unit helped to enhance the capacity of civil aviation authorities in Africa and to mainstream aviation safety initiatives in collaboration with the ICAO. . WFP air operations use dedicated radio communication and satellite tracking systems to monitor flights of chartered aircraft and ensure safety. A flight management application is being implemented to facilitate monitoring for management overview. . The Aviation Branch (OMLA) has established partnerships in the aviation industry to raise awareness of UNHAS safety and security. WFP is also participating in research on new dirigibles that could provide more economical and environmentally friendly transport. Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator System . WFP supports enhancement of the Resident Coordinator (RC) system and participates in the working groups on management and accountability. A new job description is being prepared for RCs and HCs that will include ways of attracting talent for the RC/HC pool. In 2008, four WFP staff were assigned as RCs to Algeria, Cambodia, Myanmar and Tajikistan; WFP is also preparing new candidates for the RC assessment centres. . The IASC discussions of the HC system focus on greater inclusiveness at the country level, taking into account progress made in the RC system. WFP continues to support interagency work on merging the HC and RC functions and encourages the establishment of a separate HC function in cases such as Myanmar, where an HC was assigned on an interim basis until the arrival of the RC, who is also acting HC. Section 4 - Collaboration with Partners . Partnerships with United Nations and Bretton Woods institutions have enhanced the identification of strategic priorities and aid delivery. United Nations Children's Fund . WFP partnered UNICEF in 149 projects in 72 countries in 2007; in 2008, they collaborated on Essential Package (EP) interventions in 49 countries. Joint WFP/UNICEF regional mapping was initiated in July 2008 in order to analyse the status and progress of the EP, with a senior-level conference scheduled for 2009. Partnership between WFP, UNICEF and WHO to address worm prevalence in school-aged children has been enhanced, particularly in Afghanistan where 5.8 million children have been de-wormed despite insecurity and difficult terrain. . REACH is the denomination of a partnership for ending child hunger; it grew out of the Ending Child Hunger and Undernutrition Initiative (ECHUI) as it re-oriented from global advocacy and mobilization to the country operational level. The goal remains a global reduction by 2015 in the proportion of underweight children, in line with MDG 1. In October 2008, FAO, WHO, UNICEF and WFP pledged support for coordinated work to address child undernutrition; an inter-agency team was formed, hosted by WFP in Rome, to support coordination among REACH partners; it includes staff from WFP, UNICEF, WHO, FAO and NGOs and works with civil society partners and the World Bank. . In 2008 REACH: i) refined interventions in the light of new evidence; ii) developed methods to support countries in readiness analysis, intervention prioritization, costing and planning; iii) launched pilots in the Lao People's Democratic Republic and Mauritania to demonstrate that immediate impact on undernutrition is possible; iv) created knowledge products capturing lessons learned for implementing interventions at scale; v) developed a way for countries to share successes in addressing undernutrition and replicate them; and vi) convened meetings of partners to coordinate work on nutrition. Cooperation among the Rome-Based Agencies . In 2007, WFP and FAO collaborated in 61 countries on 105 projects; WFP and IFAD collaborated in 14 countries on 17 projects. . Further to the Board's decision at its 2007 Second Regular Session (2007/EB.2/33), wherein it "...urged the WFP Secretariat, subsequent to the strategic planning process, to consult with the Romebased agencies on undertaking a joint document on the directions that future purpose-driven operational partnerships could take at the global, regional and country levels...", WFP's Strategic Plan (2008 - 2011) makes collaboration with the Romebased agencies (RBAs) a central element of its partnership approach. The RBAs are preparing a joint document identifying responses to current challenges such as food price rises and climate change for submission to the governing bodies in 2009. . The RBAs continued to participate in and promote the food security theme groups, which are important elements of responses to food insecurity at the country level. The Secretary-General's High-Level Task Force on Food Security and the Comprehensive Framework for Action (CFA) underlined the need for coordination among stakeholders; the RBAs were prominent in promoting the twin-track approach of food and nutrition security. . Joint missions by the RBAs, the World Bank and the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) identified country-specific responses to the food crisis in Benin, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Côte d'Ivoire, The Gambia, Haiti, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Mauritania, Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Zambia. Nineteen countries attended the African Union (AU) and NEPAD workshop entitled "Accelerating Investment in Response to High Food Prices and Food Insecurity" at which WFP provided thematic support in disaster management, safety nets, nutrition and improved food access through economic opportunities. . The Secretary-General's MDG Africa Steering Group, in which the RBAs are active, identified WFP as a major agency for implementing its recommendation for significant increases in school feeding and micronutrient-fortification programmes. The group endorsed an Agriculture and Food Security Business Plan and as a result of advocacy by the RBAs it called on governments to support the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, which provides a framework for national agriculture and food security strategies. . The RBAs are planning to improve disaster risk reduction in the food and agricultural sectors through a partnership on disaster risk management that aims to enhance the resilience of vulnerable people in high-risk, low-capacity countries that are prone to natural hazards. . WFP and IFAD collaborated in a weather risk management facility to reduce the vulnerability of poor rural people to extreme weather events. Building on WFP's weather risk transfer competency, the Chinese Government requested the assistance of WFP and IFAD in designing and piloting drought and flood risk management instruments for vulnerable small-scale farmers. . In 2008, WFP and FAO undertook joint crop and food supply assessment missions in Bangladesh, Ethiopia, the Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea, Myanmar, Southern Sudan, Swaziland, Uganda and Zimbabwe. The main finding was the negative effect of high food and fuel prices on the incidence of poverty and food insecurity. Ethiopia, the Democratic Republic of Korea and Zimbabwe also faced failed agricultural seasons, which increased already high levels of food insecurity. In Bangladesh, favourable weather and high food prices resulted in increased production as farmers increased the areas under production and the use of inputs. . WFP undertook 20 impact assessments of high food prices and is addressing challenges related to assessing impacts on households. The results of these assessments inform the implementation plans of WFP and partners. . WFP launched the groundbreaking P4P initiative at the 63rd United Nations General Assembly with the support of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Howard G. Buffett Foundation and the Government of Belgium. P4P helps poor farmers in developing countries to access reliable markets to sell surplus crops at competitive prices, thereby supporting fragile local economies. The initiative will be piloted in 21 countries over the next five years. The World Bank pledged its support at the country level. Assessments were conducted in most of the target countries; preparations are under way to start buying in the coming harvest season. Mozambique has finalized its first P4P contract for the purchase of 250 mt of cowpeas from IKURU, a cooperative that works with 9,500 small farmers. . In June 2008, the RBAs signed an MOU with the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) to improve food production, food security and rural incomes, particularly in the context of P4P by creating opportunities for small farmers. AGRA and the RBAs will focus initially on Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Rwanda and United Republic of Tanzania. United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS . WFP has been a co-sponsor of UNAIDS for five years; it partnered UNAIDS in 40 projects in 28 countries in 2007. In 2008, WFP's lead role in dietary and nutritional support in the UNAIDS Division of Labour included enhancement of national actions through advocacy, guidance and technical support, which has become more urgent as high food prices jeopardize household food security and the nutritional status of vulnerable people. . WFP supports HIV prevention, treatment and care in 20 of the 25 countries with the highest HIV prevalence, reaching 1.8 million beneficiaries. It has programmes related to HIV or tuberculosis in 50 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America; six staff were recruited to improve the implementation and effectiveness of HIV programming by regional bureaux. By the end of 2007, 38 national HIV plans included food and nutrition components, an increase from 32 in 2005. The number of partners that included food and nutrition in their HIV programmes rose from 440 in 2005 to 546 in 2007. In southern Africa, the number of countries receiving WFP technical support rose to nine, from two in 2005. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees . In 2007, WFP and UNHCR worked on 63 projects in 41 countries. In 2008, WFP and UNHCR continued to implement their annual joint workplan, focusing on operational activities, resources and fundraising, information sharing and communications, and advocacy. This is complemented by the country-level Joint Plan of Action. . In 2008, joint assessment missions were undertaken in Bangladesh, Burundi, Chad, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Namibia and Nepal. A common finding is that refugees' limited mobility, employment opportunities and access to land increase their vulnerability. . WFP and UNHCR revised the 2004 Joint Assessment Guidelines, updating methods for measuring food security and the sections on staff security, internally displaced persons and urban refugees. World Health Organization . In 2007, WFP and WHO worked together on 68 projects in 41 countries. They collaborated in logistics, drawing on WFP's capacity, during humanitarian response operations. WHO emergency health kits were dispatched from WFP-supported United Nations Humanitarian Response Depots in Bangladesh, Chad, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Iraq, Madagascar, Mozambique, the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Peru, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Togo and Uganda. WFP and WHO provided joint training in public health and logistics; two WHO logistics experts are being financed by WFP. . WHO and WFP are cooperating in VAM and health assessments in 25 countries where WHO is developing tools and indicators to monitor health status and vulnerability. World Bank . WFP worked with the World Bank on 18 projects in 14 countries in 2007, mainly to address the impact of food and fuel prices. The World Bank and the RBAs recommended measures to mitigate the effects on poverty and hunger, including discouraging cross-border aid restrictions. At the country level, WFP partnered the World Bank as it rolled out its US$1.2 billion Global Food Crisis Response Programme; some of the funds were channelled to WFP, directly in the Central African Republic, Guinea Bissau and Liberia, and through governments in Burundi and Nepal. An essential element of such interventions was the use of school feeding as a safety net. The planned expansion of the World Bank's annual investment in agriculture from US$4 billion to US$6 billion was aligned with these interventions, and will enhance partnership in agriculture in the transition from emergency to recovery, complemented by ongoing collaboration in mother-and-child health and nutrition, HIV/AIDS, market analysis, vulnerability analysis and disaster risk reduction. WFP and the World Bank collaborated on the Georgia joint needs assessment in September 2008 and in Ethiopia on upgrading the drought index and establishing a livelihood risk management framework. The World Bank committed US$25 million in 2008 in contingent financing; new opportunities have arisen with the creation of the World Bank's Climate Investment Fund. . High food and fuel prices made it more difficult for WFP to secure flexible resources to meet changing needs. A World Bank/WFP task force was established to explore the potential use of World Bank technical tools such as financial risk management to meet the challenges. An action plan should be ready for discussion with the Board in 2009. World Meteorological Organization . An initiative by the World Bank, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), FAO and WFP aims to improve monitoring infrastructures for food security, disaster risk management and adaptation to climate change. A joint mission to Bangladesh in December to review hydro-meteorological infrastructures and institutional needs was a pilot that could be scaled up to other countries. Non-Governmental Organizations . In 2007, WFP partnered with 2,815 NGOs - 230 international, 2,585 local - in 192 projects in 69 countries. NGO partners distributed 1.9 million mt of food, a record 54 percent of WFP's global food aid. . The Executive Director held a consultation in March 2008 with eight NGO partners, the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the International Committee of the Red Cross on joint responses to rising food prices. A technical meeting was held with nine NGOs in June to discuss WFP's response to the global food crisis in terms of cash and vouchers, urban programming, social protection and enhanced collaboration, and WFP's Strategic Plan, P4P, nutrition and school feeding. Section 5 - Follow-Up to International Conferences United Nations Climate Change Conference in Bali . In a statement to the high-level segment of the December 2007 conference, WFP stressed the humanitarian consequences of climate change and held meetings with ministers from recipient countries and other stakeholders. WFP organized a side event on climate change and hunger and participated in a joint side event with the RBAs. Rome High-Level Conference on World Food Security: the Challenges of Climate Change and Bio-Energy . The RBAs and Bioversity International convened this conference in Rome in June. It was attended by 181 nations and 40 heads of state and government. The final declaration called on the international community to increase assistance for safety net programmes to address hunger and malnutrition. Accra High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness . The Accra meeting held in September followed up the fora held in Rome in 2003 and Paris in 2005. The Executive Director attended the event, at which attention was drawn to the global food crisis and the need for renewed commitment to address needs. The Accra Agenda for Action, adopted by governments at the meeting, reinvigorated commitment to development. The Agenda for Action stresses that new global challenges such as rising food prices and climate change threaten progress made in reducing poverty. Doha International Conference on Financing for Development . Member states and international institutions reinforced their commitment to addressing emerging challenges and achieving development goals. The RBAs held a joint side event that drew attention to the factors underlying the ongoing food crisis, drawing on the findings of the CFA and outlining steps needed to achieve a more food-secure world. Section 6 - Other Issues Relevant to Implementation of the Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review Transition from Relief to Development . WFP continued its participation in inter-agency fora on transition, particularly: i) the IASC Cluster Working Group on Early Recovery, ii) the UNDG/ECHA Joint Working Group on Transition Issues, iii) the Cairo Transition Workshop for post-crisis and postconflict situations, held in March 2008; and iv) the Early Recovery Policy Forum in Copenhagen. WFP also contributed to discussions on the direction, functioning and impact of the inter-agency groups. . WFP is committed to working with the Peacebuilding Support Office as part of the interagency contribution to operations in Sierra Leone and is awaiting approval for funding from the Peacebuilding Fund. WFP participated in the initiative led by the United Kingdom on the development of an Early Recovery Fund. WFP developed guidance for targeting in emergencies, and will continue to support country offices' planning and programming for transition, recovery and hand-over. . WFP will continue its review of recent experience in transition with a view to updating its position on transition situations, particularly with regard to national priorities and United Nations support. Preliminary findings from WFP's own review indicate that WFP's contributions to countries in transition go beyond direct food assistance in that they have resulted in "peace dividends", preservation of assets through safety nets, large-scale rehabilitation of infrastructures, food procurement, improvement of local markets and the protection of civilians. . In Latin America and the Caribbean, WFP is implementing two regional capacitydevelopment projects with governments. The initiative entitled "Towards the Eradication of Child Undernutrition in Latin America and the Caribbean by 2015", endorsed at 16 regional conferences, raised awareness and influenced decision-makers. At the Government of Chile/WFP ministerial conference in May 2008, the Santiago Declaration was signed by representatives of 33 countries, paving the way for scaled-up, coordinated action to eradicate child undernutrition in the region and establish a mechanism for South - South and three-way cooperation; WFP has a lead role in policy dialogue and technical assistance. A new study of the cost of hunger in Peru estimated that in 2005 the cost of underweight children under 5 was 3 percent of gross domestic product and 34 percent of social spending in Peru for the year. . WFP assistance was instrumental in the development and launch of national plans to eradicate chronic undernutrition in Belize, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama. WFP led the formulation of United Nations joint plans to eradicate child undernutrition in Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru. National plans for prevention and reduction of micronutrient deficiencies are under way in several other countries; the Government of Panama launched its plan in 2008. WFP supports these plans through partnerships with the Institute for Central America and Panama and the Pan American Health Organization and by providing technical assistance for micronutrient programmes, including through fortification of complementary foods. In 2008, an innovative web-based knowledge management platform called Nutrinet was launched that facilitates South - South cooperation on reducing hunger and undernutrition. Gender Mainstreaming . WFP's recent evaluation of its "Gender Policy (2003 - 2007): Enhanced Commitments to Women" confirmed that WFP has laid strong foundations for gender mainstreaming by enhancing the visibility and inclusion of women. In line with the recommendations, WFP is developing a new gender policy for Board approval in 2009 that builds on the strengths of the past policies and strategies, while addressing remaining challenges. These include gender-related protection issues in relation to food distributions, and the gender dimensions of HIV and AIDS. Priority actions also include capacity development and accountability in line with the United Nations system-wide policy and strategy on gender mainstreaming (CEB/2006/2). . The document "Preparing for Tomorrow Today: WFP Strategy for Managing and Developing Human Resources (2008 - 2011)" identifies actions to improve the representation of women in the workforce: these include changes in recruitment and career development processes that will enable WFP to develop capacities and foster staff exchanges with agencies, governments and NGOs. . WFP continues to participate in various United Nations task forces as part of interagency efforts to respond to gender issues, including gender-based violence. Through the United Nations Task Force on Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian Crises, WFP has contributed to the development of the General Assembly resolution on sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and to the SEA tools repository. WFP also participates in the United Nations Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict ("UN Action") and was cochair with UNHCR and the Women's Commission of the Task Force on Safe Access to Firewood and Alternative Energy in Humanitarian Settings (SAFE). The SAFE Task Force has developed guidance on fuel efficiency and a matrix on agency roles and responsibilities regarding fuel in humanitarian settings. . At the launch in February 2008 of the Secretary-General's intensified campaign to end violence against women, WFP made a commitment to increase capacity-building in protection in WFP operations. Training, which targets WFP staff and partners, including governments, has been given in ten country offices; it will be rolled out to another 20 in 2009. Evaluation . In 2008, WFP presented to the Board an updated evaluation policy and five evaluation reports. A WFP/FAO joint evaluation of information systems for food security will be presented to the Board and the FAO Programme Committee in 2009. WFP participated in the assessments of the Delivering as One pilots and is part of the inter-agency group evaluating United Nations assistance in southern Africa. WFP participates in the joint review by bilateral and multilateral agencies of the independence, credibility and utility of the evaluation office of the Global Environment Facility. WFP is also a member of UNEG and the Active Learning Network on Accounting and Performance. Climate Change . Adaptation to climate change and disaster risk reduction are prominent in WFP's Strategic Plan (2008 - 2011). WFP's experience and capacity as an implementing partner for governments are important elements of global response to climate change, particularly its ability to: i) respond to climate-related emergencies through its logistics apparatus and its 9,000 staff members in the field; ii) provide services such as VAM and weather insurance that take into account the effects of climate change on the most vulnerable; and iii) scale up projects that give communities in developing countries a role in building their resilience to climate change. Social-protection schemes such as cash or food-based employment programmes can be deployed to build climate-proof infrastructures and enhance sustainable management of natural resources to increase resilience and adaptive capacities. Section 7 - Activities of the Executive Boards Joint Meeting of the Boards of UNDP/UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP . UNICEF coordinated the Joint Meeting of the Boards in New York in January 2008. Three main issues were discussed: Progress towards the MDGs, facilitated by UNICEF. Maternal mortality rates had fallen by less than 1 percent, but progress on child mortality was still too low to achieve MDG 4. Many countries were on track to achieve education targets; Delivering as One, facilitated by UNDP and UNFPA. All eight pilot countries employed a flexible model, but Delivering as One should not become too focused on process; collaboration and coherence in fundraising were essential; Disaster risk reduction strategy, facilitated by WFP. Between the 2006 and 2008 joint meetings there had been 967 disasters around the world, hampering development and humanitarian work; the effectiveness of programmes depended on reducing risk and increasing resilience. Joint Field Visit by the Boards . A delegation of the Executive Boards of UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF and WFP visited Haiti in March to observe operations, inter-agency collaboration and contributions to assist Haiti in attaining its development goals. The mission met the host government, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, two Deputy Special Representatives, the UNCT, staff of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), donors, civil society organizations and NGOs. The delegation noted the need to ensure that initiatives are programmed with a view to sustainable development and that dialogue should be maintained between the UNCT and MINUSTAH to provide a smooth transition from short-term activities to sustainable development. The mission encouraged the UNCT to support further South - South cooperation. TABLE 1: GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTIONS FROM THE SIXTY-SECOND SESSION THAT MENTION WFP AS A FOLLOW-UP AGENCY Resolution number Timing Title Action by WFP A/62/L.7 Ongoing The situation in Afghanistan WFP provides inputs on its achievements to the report of the Secretary-General through the Resident Coordinator. A/62/L.34/Add.1 International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development An "Update on WFP Interventions in Disaster Preparedness and Mitigation" (WFP/EB.1/2007/5-B). In October 2008, WFP developed an informal policy document on prevention and mitigation of disasters and set up a Board consultation to discuss its role in supporting and enhancing: i) the capacities of governments to prepare for, assess and respond to acute hunger arising from disasters; and ii) the resilience of communities to shocks through safety nets or asset creation, including adaptation to climate change. A/62/L.36 Assistance to the Palestinian people Same as A/62/L.7. A/62/L.37 Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations See section 1 of the "Annual report for 2007 to the Economic and Social Council and FAO Council" (WFP/EB.1/2008/4). A/62/L.38 Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and protection of United Nations personnel WFP is part of the Steering Committee on Staff Safety and Security established by the HLCM. "WFP Security Report 2007" (WFP/EB.A/2008/13-E). "Information Note on the Implementation of Security Management Arrangements" (WFP/EB.A/2008/13-D). A/62/431 Assistance to refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa WFP. 2007. WFP in Africa, 2007 Facts, Figures and Partners. Rome. A/62/439/Add.2 The right to food WFP supports the right to food and supports government efforts to adopt a right-to-food approach. WFP targets beneficiaries on the basis of need: its limited resources are directed to the most vulnerable individuals and groups. WFP programming principles are similar in effect to those in a rights-based approach. "WFP Strategic Plan (2008 - 2011)" (WFP/EB.A/2008/5-A/1.Rev.1). E/2007/L.18, as orally corrected, and E/2007/SR/44. Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti Acronyms Used in the Document AGRA Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa AU African Union CAP CCA Common Country Assessment CEB Chief Executives Board CERF Central Emergency Response Fund CFA Comprehensive Framework for Action ECHA Executive Committee on Humanitarian Affairs ECHUI Ending Child Hunger and Undernutrition Initiative ECPS Executive Committee on Peace and Security EMOP emergency operation EP Essential Package ETC emergency telecommunications cluster FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations GIS geographic information system GLCSC Global Logistics Cluster Support Cell HC Humanitarian Coordinator HEWSweb Humanitarian Early Warning Service HLCM High-Level Committee on Management IASC Inter-Agency Standing Committee ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ICT information and communications technology IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development IOM International Organization for Migration JP joint programme MDG Millennium Development Goal MINUSTAH United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti MOU Memorandum of Understanding NEPAD New Partnership for Africa's Development NGO non-governmental organization OCHA Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OMLA Aviation Branch P4P Purchase for Progress PRSP Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper RBA Rome-based agency RC Resident Coordinator REACH partnership for ending child hunger SAFE Safe Access to Firewood and Alternative Energy in Humanitarian Settings SEA sexual exploitation and abuse TCPR Triennial Comprehensive Policy Review TTCP Task Team on Common Premises UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS UNCT United Nations country team UNDAF United Nations Development Assistance Framework UNDG UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEG United Nations Evaluation Group UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFPA United Nations Population Fund UN-Habitat United Nations Human Settlements Programme UNHAS UNHCR UNICEF UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization UNJLC UNOPS United Nations Office for Project Services UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East VAM vulnerability analysis and mapping WHO WMO 