%%%WATER-RELATED DISEASES|HEALTH EDUCATION|MALARIA|

Substantive session of 2009 Geneva, 6-31 July 2009 * E/2009/100. Item 2 (b) of the provisional agenda* Annual ministerial review: implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to global public health Statement submitted by All India Shah Behram Baug Society for Scientific and Educational Research, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. * Issued without formal editing. Statement* Topic one: Health and Water Purification For Prevention and eradication of malaria and waterborne diseases the Kazakhstan - Mazdayasnie technology invented by Kazakh Scientist Prof Dr Victor Inyushin and developed in India by our NGO for RURAL AREA WELLS, has been successfully implemented on a trial project on the grounds of Zoroastrian College near Sanjan in India. This Technology uses entirely NATURAL modes of water purification which results in clearing well water, tank water and rivers of anaerobic bacteria. By preventing the reproduction of bacteria and parasites, in waterborne diseases, malaria, cholera and dysentery can be eliminated thereby increasing the health levels of rural people. The technology uses geopathic earth currents, life force energy from trees and sunlight. This technology is cost-effective. Once installed it continues to remain effective for many years without much maintenance cost. The Demonstration technology can be seen at site at Sanjan, India. VIDEO-CD is available on request from medzcong@gmail.com. This technology can provide clean drinking water for rural and urban populations and has many other uses, including purification and recycling of sewage water and factories water. Other methods Dr. N. Sukumaran has discovered a homoeopathic formula for prevention and treatment of Malaria in Mumbai. Dr. Mrs. Shyamala Chandran has successfully based a system of prevention of Malaria on the TASTE of FOOD, and prevention, treatment and cure by change of Food vegetables intake and dietary nutrition. For prevention and treatment of AIDS, APOLONIO LUIS in Goa, India has discovered a herbal source of medicine. This is found in trees growing in the natural forest areas in Goa. The preparation, freshly made and taken daily increases the life force vitality level of the patient, resulting in rapid recovery of the body's immune system. Dr Vinod Marathe in Ahmednagar, Maharashtra, India has developed a system combining Ayurvedic herbal formula and acupuncture. Topic two: Health Education: Establishment of an Open International Research University through United Nations/ECOSOC/ WHO/UNESCO /UNICEF Establishment of such a University open to ALL - persons from all countries, all Governments and all NGO's levels will greatly facilitate the impetus for research and the free flow of research findings at a global level for the universal benefit of humanity. 1. Public Health Awareness for Preventive Health Care through TV, Internet, Press and Media, focusing on daily action for the individual's responsibility for maintaining good health. 2. School and College level curriculum for knowledge of Drugless therapies which can be safely practised by every person at home within the family fold. 3. Establishment of norms for a common medical curriculum for holistic health care education at University level which combines an Integrated Approach to Health Knowledge for Holistic health care, including Allopathic, Homoeopathic, Ayurvedic, Herbal, Unani, Nature Cure Yoga Acupuncture, Complementary and Alternative Medicine Methods. The Syllabus can be arrived at by consensus for implementation in all countries to treat the whole individual and not only the disease. 