%%%PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION|PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|CAPACITY BUILDING|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|

Committee of Experts on Public Administration Eighth session New York, 30 March-3 April 2009 Item 5 of the provisional agenda* Review of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance Review of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance Note by the Secretariat Summary The present note highlights the major activities undertaken by the Secretariat in 2008 under the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance for review by the Committee of Experts on Public Administration and also considers the current process of organizational changes that have been undertaken by the Secretariat with a view to streamlining the operations of the Programme and strengthening its capacities to address the needs of Member States. This note also presents, for review and approval by the Committee, the main activities proposed for implementation during the period 2010-2011. The Committee is requested to provide feedback to the Secretariat on both the scope and direction of the reorganization mentioned above and the proposed activities. Page Introduction Update on major activities Normative work Analytical research Exchange of best practices Capacity-building services Coordination Planned activities for the period 2010-2011 Conclusions Recommendations 1. The present note highlights the major activities undertaken by the Secretariat in 2008 under the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance for review by the Committee of Experts on Public Administration. It also considers the ongoing process of organizational changes that have been undertaken by the Secretariat with a view to streamlining the operations of the Programme and strengthening its capacities in addressing the needs of Member States in their pursuit of efficient and effective public administration systems which are able to achieve national development objectives. 2. This note also presents, for review and approval by the Committee, the main activities proposed for implementation during the period 2010-2011. The Committee is requested to provide feedback to the Secretariat on both the scope and direction of the reorganization mentioned above and the proposed activities, which are intended to assist Member States in meeting their current governance and public administration challenges in a globalized world. In the preparation of this note, the Secretariat took into consideration the Programme's strengths and accomplishments along with recommendations contained in recent evaluation reports of the Programme in particular and requirements for the strengthening of the development Pillar of the Secretariat in general. 3. The Division for Public Administration and Development Management of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs is the administrative unit within the Secretariat mandated to implement the aforementioned Programme in Public Administration and Finance. The Division's mission is to assist Member States in strengthening their governance and public administration capacities and technology systems so as to achieve the national development objectives in the context of the internationally agreed development agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals. II. Update on major activities 4. The activities of the United Nations Secretariat in the area of public administration and finance are implemented under subprogramme 8, Public administration and finance, of section 9, Economic and social affairs, of the programme budget, by the Division for Public Administration and Development Management of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. The following is a summary of the major activities implemented in 2008. A. Normative work 5. The seventh session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration was held in New York from 14 to 18 April 2008. At the seventh session, the Committee dealt with the following substantive items: (a) participatory governance and citizens' engagement in policy development, service delivery and budgeting; (b) compendium of basic United Nations terminology in governance and public administration; (c) review of the activities of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance; and (d) the public administration perspective on the theme of the annual ministerial review held during the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council: Strengthening efforts to eradicate poverty and hunger, including through the global partnership for development. Upon the recommendation of the Committee, the Council adopted resolution 2008/32 of 25 July 2008, entitled "Report of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration on its seventh session". 6. In that resolution, the Economic and Social Council, pursuant to stressing the importance of capacity-building for public administration in respect of the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, requested the Secretariat to enhance its support for capacity-building, including in the public sector, ensuring that available resources were adequate and existing resource levels were maintained. 7. On 14 July 2008, at United Nations Headquarters in New York, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, through the Division for Public Administration and Development Management, organized a panel on public accountability entitled "The role of public accountability in good governance" for States members of the Economic and Social Council. It was organized to support the conclusions of the 2008 annual ministerial review held by the Council on "Implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to sustainable development". The panel also celebrated the sixtieth Anniversary of the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance and highlighted its contributions to the strengthening of accountability and transparency in governance. 8. The panel outlined the following conditions and variables likely to be conducive to public accountability: (a) education in leadership, (b) partnering with the private sector, (c) meaningful engagement and involvement of civil society in audit and governance, (d) effective and independent audit institutions as watchdogs of public finances, (e) political will and (f) financing for development. 9. The panel placed particular emphasis on the fight against corruption and the increased involvement of civil society in governance as two crucial mechanisms for strengthening public accountability. It clarified the links between public accountability and effective public administration. The panel highlighted the role of South-South cooperation in advocating for public accountability, while stressing the importance of the independence of audit institutions and their cooperation with civil society towards the effective achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 10. On 13 November 2008, the Second Committee of the General Assembly held a discussion panel organized by the Division for Public Administration and Development Management on "Post-conflict State capacity: reconstructing public administration for conflict prevention, recovery, and development". It focused on three essential aspects of post-conflict reconstruction of governance and public administration: (a) the challenges of reconstructing the public service after conflict and the role of the public service in building social cohesion through the effective delivery of services, (b) the prospects for reconstructing government after conflict, with emphasis on decentralization for peacebuilding, and (c) how to transform the mindset of government and civil society leaders in divided societies to enable them to work effectively together to achieve development. 11. The panel reached the consensus that the approaches used in conflict situations often did not work and that the decision to call political enemies to the negotiation table immediately to sign agreements often resulted in failure. The Second Committee was advised that diplomats and other peacemakers needed to first address the process and attitudinal dimensions of peacemaking. B. Analytical research 12. The World Public Sector Report is produced biennially as a research and analytical tool to provide policymakers and civil society with relevant research findings and information on issues related to the public sector. In its resolution 59/55 of 2 December 2004, the General Assembly recognized the significant analytical and operational contributions of the Report to public administration. Past editions include World Public Sector Report 2001: Globalization and the State; World Public Sector Report 2003: E-Government at the Crossroads; World Public Sector Report 2005: Unlocking the Human Potential for Public Sector Performance; and World Public Sector Report 2008, entitled People Matter: Civic Engagement in Public Governance. 13. The World Public Sector Report for 2009 will be devoted to "Reconstructing governance and public administration after conflict: challenges, practices and lessons learned" and will contribute to the search for how best to reconstruct governance and public administration after violent conflict, with a view to ensuring security, long-lasting peace, and respect for human rights and development. The Report will be based on both a literature review of the main theories and issues and an analysis of relevant case studies and good practices from all five world regions covering the period from the end of the Second World War to the present day, thus consolidating the existing knowledge within the United Nations system for the benefit of all countries seeking to reconstruct their governance systems and public administration. It will also offer the opportunity to clearly position the work of the Division at the centre of the United Nations development agenda. 14. The United Nations e-Government Survey, which, like the World Public Sector Report, is produced biannually, has, since 2002, provided Member States with a global view and assessment of the online public services delivered by the Governments of 192 countries. The United Nations e-Government Survey 2008: From e-Government to Connected Governance was extremely well received by Member States, a number of which praised the results of the survey and promoted their rankings in their local newspapers. The following countries requested and funded advisory service missions to strengthen their respective e-government capacity: Bahrain, Colombia, Lesotho, Morocco, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Tunisia and Uzbekistan. A number of these countries have already implemented recommendations of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs on egovernment. In addition, the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the Intelligence Economist Unit have requested permission to use the web measure and e-participation indices of the Survey to augment their own analyses. 15. In celebration of its sixtieth anniversary in 2008, the Programme published a booklet entitled The United Nations Contribution to the Improvement of Public Administration: A 60-Year History. The report broadly reviews the global trends in public administration, briefly discusses the establishment of the Programme and the system of general direction and supervision of the Programme provided by the United Nations legislative bodies, summarizes the diverse activities carried out under the Programme during the last 60 years, and details the present position of the Programme and its future perspective. 16. Three ad hoc expert group meetings were held in 2008 on new developments or emerging trends in governance and public administration that are of interest to Member States, providing forums where expert knowledge and experience could be mobilized so as to identify critical issues and begin forging consensus on policy options: (a) Expert Group Meeting on "Lessons Learned in Post-Conflict State Capacity: Reconstructing Governance and Public Administration Capacities in Post-Conflict Societies", held in Accra from 2 to 4 October 2008. Experts discussed key lessons learned which they would include in preparing the World Public Sector Report: Reconstructing Governance and Public Administration after Conflict. The following topics were proposed by the participants: the heterogeneity of post-conflict situations and the need for further research to be conducted on how Governments break down and are reformed and how conflict ends; rebuilding trust in government after conflict; effective leadership; human resource capacity development in post-conflict situations; the need for development partners to engage the population in rebuilding its government so as to create real ownership; service delivery: the visible sign of recovery; and information and communications technology (ICT) and traditional problem-solving mechanisms in post-conflict situations; (b) Expert Group Meeting on Economic and Social Councils, held at the United Nations Office at Vienna on 24 and 25 July 2008. The Meeting aimed to strengthen the promotion of dialogue and exchange of knowledge and innovations relating to civic engagement in national socio-economic policymaking. It provided a platform to enable more than 20 presidents and senior officials from economic and social councils worldwide and international organizations to discuss key concepts and issues related to civic participation and the role of economic and social councils as tools for promoting civil society engagement in governmental policymaking, in pursuit of the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals and fulfilment of the national economic and social agenda; (c) Expert Group Meeting on the e-Government Survey: Getting to the Next Level, held at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 11 and 12 December 2008, with the participation of experts in the field of e-government indicators, to review and validate the Survey questions. The 2010 issue of the Survey will be prepared on the basis of the outcome of the Meeting. 17. In addition to the Expert Group Meetings, the following major meetings were organized by the Programme in 2008: (a) Forum on Sustainable Urbanization in the Information Age, jointly organized by the Global Alliance for ICT and Development, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the American Institute of Architects New York Chapter, and the Regional Plan Association, with the support of the City of New York, and held on 23 and 24 April 2008 at United Nations Headquarters. The event addressed the global challenges posed by rapid urbanization and its impact on global warming and the natural environment -- ranging from poverty and inequality to natural and man-made disasters -- and called, in this regard, for better sustainable planning for urban growth; (b) Pan African Conference of Ministers of Local Government on Leadership Capacity-Building for Decentralized Governance and Poverty Reduction in Africa, with the theme "From Policy to Implementation: Challenges and Strategies for Effective Implementation of Decentralized Governance in Africa", held in Yaoundé from 28 to 30 May 2008. It was attended by ministers and heads of delegations in charge of decentralization and local government, accompanied by senior civil servants, chairpersons of associations of local governments, and mayors representing different countries of Africa. The declaration of the Conference called upon the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat to work with ministries in charge of local governments as well as local governments in Africa to strengthen their capacities to implement effective decentralization processes, with a view to meeting the requirements for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. (c) Seminar for Directors of Schools and Institutes of Public Administration and Management Development in Africa, convened to discuss standards of excellence in public administration education and training, organized by the Programme, in cooperation with the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration (IASIA), the Centre africain de formation et de recherche administratives pour le développement (CAFRAD) and the Africa Management Development Institutes Network (AMDIN), designed by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs/IASIA International Taskforce on Standards of Excellence in Public Administration Education and Training, and held in Kampala from 14 to 18 July 2008. The Seminar called upon the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and other international development partners to provide support to the application of those standards in building the capacities of institutes of public administration and management development institutes in Africa; (d) Joint Department of Economic and Social Affairs-IASIA-Scuola Superiore della Pubblica Amministrazione (SSPA) Euro-Mediterranean Conference on "Redesigning Public Administration Training to Deal with the Global Development Agenda", held in Rome on 13 and 14 October 2008. This was another regional event that aimed at initiating capacity-building of institutes of public administration and management development institutes using standards of excellence in public administration education and training. The main objective of the Conference was to support capacity-building in public administration education and training and to bring together representatives from schools and institutes of public administration in the European Union (EU), the Mediterranean and the Middle East, with a view to raising awareness of the importance of providing quality training to senior civil servants in order to improve public sector performance in delivery in respect of the internationally agreed agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals. C. Exchange of best practices 18. The United Nations Public Service Awards programme was established by the Economic and Social Council in 2000 to promote better delivery of services by Governments. This Award confers the most prestigious international recognition of excellence in public service. It rewards the creative achievements and contributions of public service institutions with respect to promoting a more effective and responsive public administration (further information is available from http://www.unpan.org/dpepa_psaward.asp). 19. The selection process for the 2008 United Nations Public Service Awards brought forth 183 nominations from 39 countries. A total of 12 pioneering projects from the developing and developed world were honoured with the most prestigious international recognition of excellence in public service, focusing on innovative projects that had prioritized accountability and transparency, service delivery and innovative mechanisms of participation in public administration. 20. In an effort to make the path to e-government clearer and more easily accessible, given the complexity of e-government operations, the Programme is involved in an ongoing process of compiling cases of innovative e-government applications from all geographical regions of the world. This has resulted in the publication of the Compendium of Innovative E-government Practices, vol. III, which aims to promote knowledge-sharing and exchange of proved e-government applications among various countries, thereby reducing the costs involved in setting up completely new systems. The Compendium is slated for release in January or February 2009. 21. The United Nations Public Administration Network (UNPAN) (www.unpan.org) is an online network of more than 35 relevant international and regional institutions and more than 10 United Nations-related institutions. Set up in 2000, UNPAN serves as a global network and portal for public administration. Its main objective is to build capacity; bridge the digital divide; promote South-South cooperation; and access, process and disseminate relevant information through the utilization of upto-date information and communications technology for the promotion of better public administration. The portal has registered one of the highest numbers of visitors among the Department of Economic and Social Affairs websites; however, it needs to be promoted consistently in order to reach a greater critical mass of public sector institutions around the world. 22. The new initiative of the Division, the United Nations Global Knowledge Repository for Electronic/Mobile Government (EMGKR), is a global online facility for knowledge transfer, information dissemination, partnership and state-of-the-art research on electronic/mobile government development in Member States. The purpose of the Repository is to promote worldwide knowledge-sharing and collaboration on electronic/mobile government among development stakeholders aimed towards achieving national e-solutions. The value of the Repository lies in its provision of "free" and unimpeded access to knowledge resources on e-government to national policymakers, the private sector and civil society. The Repository responds to the needs of developing countries in respect of building national capacities in electronic and mobile government by providing information and tools for the development of comprehensive electronic/mobile government policies and programmes in support of public sector development. 23. The national economic and social councils represent an emerging framework for multi-stakeholder decision-making at the national level and contribute to policymaking in an informed and participatory manner. In many developing countries, however, particularly in Africa, these Councils, owing to a lack of credibility or lack of the financial resources needed to operate properly, have no significant role in influencing policymaking processes. In this regard, in 2008 the Programme developed a project to support the Councils in Africa, both in francophone Africa where most of them are located and in anglophone Africa, in three main areas of activity: (a) Support for the Councils in improving their institutional framework by improving the laws and regulations that govern them and empower them; (b) enhancement of the capacity of Council members to evaluate public policies and apply participatory governance principles; and (c) building partnerships between the Councils. This should improve service delivery and accountability in public programmes, including enhancing capacities for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. The project has received preliminary approval and should be fully operational in 2009. D. Capacity-building services 24. The Division carries out, through its three substantive branches, capacity-development services in the form of advisory services and training activities on subjects falling within the mandate of the Division. The overall thrust of the programme is to assist, at the request of Member States, in the capacity-building of Government officials and institutions and, increasingly, of civil society organizations for the purpose of reforming and modernizing public administration. It should be noted that the findings and recommendations of advisory missions and the outcomes of training activities, including their publications, feed into the normative and advocacy work of the Division and provide support to the intergovernmental dialogue of the Economic and Social Council and the Committee. 25. Though demand-driven, the Division's capacity-development services conform to the priority themes decided by the Economic and Social Council and by the Committee. In this regard, for 2008, over 50 projects were implemented in the following areas: (a) improvement of transparency and accountability, (b) decentralized governance, (c) participatory and equitable governance, (d) post-conflict governance, (e) ICT application to governance (e-governance) and (f) governance for poverty alleviation (pro-poor governance). 26. A number of training workshops and online training courses for participants from developing countries were organized in 2008. In this regard: (a) The UNPAN Online Training Centre (UNPAN OTC), developed in October 2005, gained traction in year 2008. With the key objective of providing free online training courses to anyone interested in gaining knowledge or upgrading their skills in public administration, 11 new courses were developed and made available in the year 2008 and 3 courses were translated to other languages, contributing to a total of 14 courses in English, 4 in Russian, 3 in Ukrainian and 1 in French. The courses are prepared by the Division with substantive contributions from various partners including United Nations bodies such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations University International Institute for Software Technology (UNU-IIST), and external partners such as the American Society for Public Administration (ASPA), the African Training and Research Centre in Administration for Development (Centre africain de formation et de recherche administratives pour le développement (CAFRAD)), the Eastern Regional Organization for Public Administration (Asia and the Pacific) (EROPA), the African Institute for Economic Development and Planning (IDEP), the Regional Cooperation Office for City Information (Asia and the Pacific) (RCOCI) and the Supreme School of Privatization and Entrepreneurship (Europe) (SSPE). The courses that have been particularly well received include those on "Building a community of practice for electronic governance", "Decentralized governance", "Knowledge management in government organization" and "Results-based monitoring and evaluation for Millennium Development Goals implementation". The UNPAN Online Training Centre utilizes two types of customized software: (i) a learning management system to facilitate management of learning content and monitoring of learners in respect of tracking progress, including the awarding of certification upon course completion; (ii) a course authoring tool to help staff members and partners create online courses quickly and easily with reference to substantive training content. With the increased number of course offerings, the number of online enrolments reached close to 2,000 in year 2008, exceeding the total for the period 2006-2007. Over 400 learners received course certificates following successful completion of the course, two thirds of whom were from developing countries; (b) A seminar for elected women local government leaders on the theme "Strengthening women's leadership in local government for effective decentralized governance and poverty reduction in Africa: roles, challenges and strategies" was held. The Seminar facilitated exchange of experiences on challenges faced by elected women local government leaders and strategies for strengthening their role and leadership capacities in respect of effectively implementing decentralized governance programmes for poverty eradication in Africa; (c) By organizing training sessions, the Division supported human development, pro-poor concepts and national development strategies. Support was provided in the preparation of national human development reports in many countries (including Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Gabon, Mali and Mauritania); and for training sessions organized on human development and/or pro-poor policies in countries such as Cameroon, Chad, the Comoros, Guinea, Mali and Mauritania; (d) The Department of Economic and Social Affairs has been collaborating with the International Association of Schools and Institutes of Administration (IASIA) and institutes responsible for public administration education and training in designing standards of excellence in public administration education and training. The standards were adopted by representatives of institutes who gathered in Kampala (July 2008) during the IASIA Annual Conference. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs has embarked on an undertaking to popularize the standards and has been working with institutes in applying those standards in capacity-building. Two regional workshops have been conducted in this regard: one for Africa and another for the Mediterranean region. Workshops are planned in Asia and Latin America; (e) The Division prepared a two-day workshop to upgrade the policymaking capacities and technical skills of Government officials and practitioners from developing countries in back-office management for electronic and mobile government in Asia and the Pacific. The members of the Asia and Pacific group agreed on the establishment of an open virtual community website to facilitate further discussion on the development of the electronic/mobile government repository in the region. Preparation is under way of a proposal on the composition and functioning of the executive committee for the project and the proposal is to be submitted to the Secretariat for review and approval. An executive committee meeting to discuss concrete ways to advance the implementation of the project is being organized; (f) The Global Alliance for ICT and Development, along with the United Nations Global Compact Office and other United Nations organizations, co-organized the first-ever United Nations Private Sector Forum on 24 September 2008 in New York, gathering together over 85 business, civic and government leaders to work with the United Nations on a long-term response to the global food crisis and endemic poverty, and to connect and share ideas and experiences. At the Forum, technology was clearly recognized as a key instrument for bridging the gaps in poverty reduction and for improving health and education, particularly in countries in Africa and in low-income countries in other regions. ICT was also seen as a transforming factor in the efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. The outcome of the Forum was reported at the high-level event on the Millennium Development Goals convened by the Secretary-General and the President of the General Assembly on 25 September 2008; (g) In support of the International Conference on Financing for Development, and the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha in November/December 2008, the Global Alliance for ICT and Development, in cooperation with the International Chamber of Commerce, organized a high-level working session on innovative financing for digital development. The event brought together high-level participants, including development, finance and technology ministers, industry leaders, and representatives from the private sector, nongovernmental organizations and United Nations organizations, to brainstorm on new ways to mobilize resources for realizing the ICT-for-development agenda including through leveraging virtual mechanisms such as social networking; (h) The Global Alliance organized a Global Forum on Access and Connectivity: Innovative Funding for ICT for Development in Kuala Lumpur on 19 and 20 May 2008 in conjunction with the World Congress on Information Technology. The event brought together about 400 participants who engaged in debates on how to promote affordable connectivity, ICT applications and services for development and how to create the appropriate policy and regulatory environment in small island, developing and least developed countries for accommodating much-needed ICT investments and promoting innovative financing for ICT for development; (i) The International Conference for Africa Parliamentary Knowledge Network Building, held in Cairo on 4 and 5 June 2008, aimed to provide a political and technical platform for parliaments from Africa to enable them to agree on the charter for, and a plan of action outlining the work modalities of, the Africa Parliamentary Knowledge Network, established with the support of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs to promote and enhance the collaborative creation and sharing of knowledge, ideas, experiences and good practices among parliamentary administrations in Africa in the areas of legislation, information, research and documentation, and ICT; (j) The Meeting on "Innovations in Governance in the Mediterranean Region with a Special Focus on Methodologies for the Transfer of Innovations", was held in Dubrovnik, Croatia from 23 to 25 April 2008, having been organized by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs in collaboration with the Central State Office for Administration of the Government of Croatia. The Meeting constituted one of the activities of the Programme for Innovation in Public Administration in the Euro-Mediterranean Region. The Meeting culminated in the adoption of the Dubrovnik Declaration on Promoting a Culture of Innovation in Governance in the Mediterranean Region. 27. Other major ongoing capacity-development services are described below: (a) Strengthening Parliaments' Information Systems in Africa's regional capacity-building initiative aimed at leveraging information and communications technology (ICT) to support regional efforts to strengthen democracy and good governance in eight pilot parliaments in Africa, namely, those of Angola, Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania, and the Pan African Parliament. The opportunity to view the problems of parliaments in a broader regional context made apparent the fact that, despite the differences in parliamentary traditions and languages, many requirements that would otherwise have appeared to be unique were actually common to most or all parliaments. The regional perspective has managed to highlight issues that can be better -- and most effectively -- dealt with at a regional/continental level in order to provide high-quality and sustainable solutions for African parliaments; (b) Given the success of the above pilot project and the need that it generated for strengthening African parliaments using ICT, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the Pan African Parliament and the Africa Parliamentary Knowledge Network are now implementing, with financial support from the Government of Italy, the successor project covering all parliaments in Africa, the "Africa i-Parliaments Action Plan: Strengthening the Role of African Parliaments in Fostering Democracy and Good Governance through Knowledge and Information Management". The programme is expected to promote a new political culture that embraces free and open access to public information, thus creating a favourable environment for the development of the information society. Accessibility to parliamentary information and the exchange of information among parliaments will be greatly facilitated by the adoption of common standards and by the introduction of parliamentary information systems. The wider accessibility of parliamentary activities, together with the enhanced capacity of parliamentary staff and enhanced quality of parliamentary information services, will strengthen the pivotal role of African parliaments as institutions that enforce good governance, promote democratic accountability, and create political legitimacy through the active and informed participation of civil society organizations and citizens; (c) The Measurement and Evaluation Tool for e-Government Readiness (METER) is an online interactive tool designed to assist Governments and decision makers at every level throughout the world in developing, monitoring, refining and improving the context within which information and communications technology is used to transform government. Having been conceived to serve as an advisory tool, METER has been designed to assist Governments in identifying the issues affecting e-government development that need to be addressed. Thus, METER helps to determine and monitor the current state of affairs within a country with regard to the establishment of an environment enabling e-government development. In this way, it guides policymakers and government officials in their e-Government development initiatives by raising their awareness and drawing their attention to key issues that need to be properly addressed. In partnership with the Center for Technology in Government, State University of New York at Albany, and drawing upon advice from Microsoft Corporation, METER is in the process of being finalized as a web-enabled tool; (d) The major activities implemented by the Programme in support of poverty eradication include poverty surveys aimed at establishing profiles and mapping for a successful poverty reduction strategy. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs supported and supervised poverty surveys in countries such as Chad, Mali and Mauritania. In close cooperation with AFRISTAT (l'observatoire économique et statistique d'Afrique subsaharienne), the Division produced a common methodological framework for poverty monitoring and evaluation. This framework is currently being disseminated in African countries. The Division continues to support the implementation of the poverty reduction strategy by using tools such as the public expenditure review; the medium-term expenditure framework; and results-based programming and budgeting; (e) The International Training Programme on Peacebuilding and Good Governance for African Civilian Personnel (ITPPGG), established in 2002 through collaboration between the Legon Centre for International Affairs, University of Ghana, and the International Training Programme for Conflict Management (ITPCM) of the Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy, represents a response to the dearth of trained African civilian personnel for peace support operations. The core objective of the project is to provide a ready pool of trained and skilled African personnel to fill the civilian component of field peace support operations and to complement the work of the military and police personnel. In 2008, the project trained 58 African civilian personnel for peace support missions; and 20 African trainers and 16 persons from 9 African countries for election observation. A curriculum with detailed learning objectives, methodologies and reference material, which trained 23 persons from 16 African countries as human rights field officers, was developed, as well as an active learning package in electronic format for both the foundation and the specialization courses, designed to facilitate a continuing and interactive learning process for the participants on issues relating to peacebuilding and good governance; (f) The Africa Governance Inventory (AGI) Portal is a flexible management tool for assisting Governments in improving management, coordination, programming and monitoring of resources allocated to governance. Since 2003, the Portal has been available on the Internet to support ongoing governance efforts in Africa. The AGI country databases of Benin, Burundi and Tunisia were updated in 2008. The AGI-Benin database in particular contains detailed information on 206 governance initiatives implemented in the country since 1990, mainly in the areas of public administration and socio-economic management. The AGI-Burundi database contains information on 48 governance initiatives implemented since 1998, mostly in the area of peace and security. In addition, the AGI-Burundi home page lists major post-conflict reconstruction efforts and describes the current status of governance in the country. The AGI-Tunisia database contains information on 27 governance initiatives implemented since 1997, primarily in the areas of public administration and socio-economic management. Data collection was carried out as part of the collaboration between the Africa Governance Inventory and the Programme for Innovation in Public Administration in the Euro-Mediterranean Region; (g) To tackle challenges associated with inadequate capacity for managing human resources in the public sector of African countries, there is a need to adopt a model of the human resources management function that will best enable Governments to manage their staff so as to achieve their key objectives. The Division has been working with the group of public sector managers of human resources in Africa to establish the Africa Public Sector Human Resource Managers Network (APS-HRMnet), through which professional capacity-building in human resource management in the public sector in Africa can be enhanced. The objectives of the Managers Network are to: promote excellence, integrity and professional standards in the practice of human resources management in the public sector in Africa and to support continental and regional efforts to implement harmonized public service commitments such as those set out in the Charter for Public Service in Africa; (h) The Department of Economic and Social Affairs has been working with countries in Latin America to train public servants on the implementation of the Charter for Public Service. A number of workshops have been conducted in this regard and it is expected that the training will improve professionalism, transparency and ethics in respect of public service in the region; (i) The Secretariat is organizing, in partnership with Kyung Hee University, the World Civic Forum to be held in Seoul, from 12 to 15 May 2009. The Forum will assist in the development of standards and processes in democratic governance to help create participatory architectures in which citizens can play a more active role by promoting new leadership values and by exchanging successful experiences in public administration. Specifically, the Forum will organize a series of workshops to address global challenges, including climate change, and the promotion of knowledge-sharing to engage civil society in addressing global development goals and partnership-building among civil society, institutions of higher learning and government actors. E. Coordination 28. The Division also undertakes important coordinating activities in the area of governance and public administration within and outside of the United Nations system. They encompass: (a) The Governance and Institution-building Cluster of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs; (b) The system-wide implementation of World Summit on the Information Society action lines C1, C7eGov and C11, with the participation of the multi-stakeholders; (c) The widest network of organizations in the area of governance and public administration, namely, the United Nations Public Administration Network, which is utilized to implement the exchange of knowledge, documentation dissemination and training; (d) The Global Alliance for ICT for Development which continued to serve the Department of Economic and Social Affairs in its multi-stakeholder advisory capacity; (e) The Internet Governance Forum of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, which facilitates the discussions on the main public policy issues related to Internet governance. 29. In order to engender cooperation and promote common approaches among United Nations entities, some of the planned outputs, such as the UNPAN Portal, the United Nations Global Knowledge Repository for Electronic/Mobile Government and training courses, have been developed in cooperation with the members of the Governance and Institution-building Cluster of the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Affairs. As the focal point for the cluster within the Executive Committee, the Division contacted the Cluster partners on 30 October 2008, with a view to holding an exchange on the narratives for activities planned under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011. In addition, the Division enumerated nine areas where collaboration with the Cluster partners has already been further strengthened and new joint initiatives have been agreed upon. A review of the work programmes circulated by Cluster members identified no overlap, duplication or inconsistencies within the programme. Institutional and regional differences require, and justify, the existing degree of flexibility in the formulation of objectives, accomplishments and indicators. 30. In the context of the Executive Committee exercise, the Division received positive responses from a number of partners in respect of collaboration on the following projects: (a) Contribution to UNPAN with respect to building knowledge in the area of governance and public administration issues at the regional level; (b) Building further the knowledge base for electronic and mobile government: collaboration with the Bureau for Development Policy of UNDP; (c) An ad hoc expert group meeting on public sector leadership capacity-building: collaboration with the Bureau for Development Policy of UNDP and the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA); (d) An ad hoc expert group meeting on public sector human resources development: collaboration with the Bureau for Development Policy of UNDP and ESCWA; (e) A capacity-building workshop on reforming institutions of the public sector for development: collaboration with the Bureau for Development Policy of UNDP, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) and ESCWA. (f) A capacity-building workshop on developing human resources management capacities in the public sector: collaboration with the Bureau for Development Policy of UNDP and ESCWA. 31. As part of World Information Society Week in May 2008, the Division for Public Administration and Development Management of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs organized the subsequent facilitation meeting on the progress made during 2008 by all stakeholders in relation to the implementation of World Summit on the Information Society action lines C1, C7eGov and C11, with a focus on the role of public governance authorities and all stakeholders in the promotion of international cooperation on ICT for development and e-government. The meeting provided the participants with a platform for exchanging information and experience, identifying the proprietary areas for implementation within the action lines; and creating synergies among different stakeholders for more effective knowledge-sharing and collaboration in order to ensure the implementation of the Summit action lines at the international, regional and national levels. The participants at the meeting recognized the importance of using the means of communications and exchange created by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs in previous years to facilitate cooperation among stakeholders via the dedicated online platform established within the UNPAN Portal, at http://www.unpan.org/post-WSIS-C1-C7home.asp. 32. The Division has been developing continuously the United Nations Public Administration Network and its portal to fulfil the requests of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly (see Assembly resolutions 59/55 and 60/34 and Council resolutions 2005/55 and 2006/47) and UNPAN clients, in particular those from developing countries. The portal was relaunched after a complete facelift in early 2008. The new Web 2.0 site strategically refocuses on the needs of external users, including Member States, while making itself more useful to UNPAN partners through richer content and self-service options. The website of the Global Alliance for ICT and Development was integrated into the same infrastructure in 2008. Both websites now offer its clients rich collaboration tools such as blogs, search engines, discussion boards, etc. 33. In 2008, the Global Alliance for ICT and Development continued to support and promote, within the information and communication technologies for development (ICTD) community, its flagship partnership initiatives. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the Global Initiative for Inclusive Information and Communication Technologies (G3ict) and the Global Alliance organized a Global Forum in Geneva on 21 April 2008 to explore the impact of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities on the evolution of ICT standards, with the active participation of industry, standards development organizations, non-governmental organizations, and other major parties. A Joint United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR)/Global Initiative for Inclusive Information and Communication Technologies/Global Alliance for ICT and Development Seminar on Implementing the Digital Accessibility Agenda of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: Challenges and Opportunities for Signatory States was held on 3 December 2008 at United Nations Headquarters in New York to contribute to the rapid and effective implementation of the Convention in general and its digital accessibility agenda in particular. 34. The Global Alliance for ICT and Development enhanced its global outreach by launching a Global Alliance for ICT and Development Regional Network for Latin America and the Caribbean on 4 and 5 February 2008 in San Salvador. The launching of the Network, which coincided with the Second Ministerial Conference on the Information Society, eLAC2007, gathered together ICT-for-development policymakers and experts and representatives from Governments, the private sector, academia and civil society from the region who made specific recommendations and proposals to the Ministerial Conference on the role of information and communication technologies in poverty eradication, health, education, youth employment and e-government, in preparation for the discussion on the Regional Plan of Action on the Information Society for Latin America and the Caribbean for the period 2008-2010. 35. The Global Alliance for ICT and Development also strengthened its stakeholder network, in particular by reaching out to youth communities and engaging them in developing a youth-based ICT-for-development agenda. It co-organized, together with the Global Alliance for ICT and Development Committee of e-Leaders of Tomorrow for ICT and Youth and AtHGO International, the Global Innovation Forum for Education and Development, held in Yerevan from 21 to 24 October 2008. The Forum gathered together over 300 young people who designed cutting-edge ICT-based solutions to development challenges in the areas of education, climate change and health. 36. The Internet Governance Forum Secretariat is based in the United Nations Office at Geneva and is mandated to facilitate international deliberations on public policy issues related to Internet governance. It operates under the umbrella of the Division for Public Administration and Development Management which also provides it with administrative support. The Internet Governance Forum Secretariat is funded through extrabudgetary contributions. The Secretary-General established a Multi-stakeholder Advisory Group to assist him in convening the Forum. The Advisory Group members include representatives of Governments, the private sector and civil society, including the academic and technical communities, in all regions. A description of the activities of the Internet Governance Forum is included in the annual report of the Secretary-General on the progress made in the implementation of and follow-up to the outcome of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and international levels, which is submitted to the Commission on Science and Technology for Development at the request of the Economic and Social Council. The first two Forum meetings were held in Athens in 2006 and Rio de Janeiro in 2007. The third meeting, which was held in Hyderabad, India, from 3 to 6 December 2008, focused on the overall theme of "Internet for all". III. Planned activities for the period 2010-2011 37. The programme implementation strategy of the Division for Public Administration and Development Management will be based on an integrated approach comprising advocacy, provision of substantive support to relevant intergovernmental bodies, analytical work, advisory services, technical cooperation and training, with a primary focus in the following three substantive areas: :: Institutional development in the public sector with special emphasis on leadership and human resources development, policy and strategy design, and institutional networking :: Public service delivery improvement through the application of information and communications technologies, e-government and knowledge management :: Public administration in support of the United Nations development agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals. 38. During the conduct of the Seventh Global Forum on Reinventing Government, held in Vienna in June 2007, the participants were encouraged to determine whether their Governments were interested in hosting the next Global Forum. Following the Seventh Global Forum, several countries including Australia, Azerbaijan, Canada and Qatar, as well as the European Union, expressed tentative interest in hosting the Eighth Global Forum. Subsequent follow-up has not revealed a strong commitment on the part of those countries to assuming the responsibilities involved, including an adequate financial commitment of the host Government to organizing the next Global Forum. 39. In the absence of a host and owing to the scarcity of financial and human resources available to the Division for Public Administration and Development Management, it will not be able to carry out the preparations and provide support for the organization of the next Global Forum in the foreseeable future. The biennial work programme of the Division is to be adjusted accordingly. 40. It must be noted that the number of outputs planned for the biennium was decreased in order to consolidate available resources for the conduct of training events of a larger scale and to allow more resources to be allocated for preparation of high-quality outputs with a stronger impact. 41. During the biennium 2010-2011, the following final outputs will be delivered: A. Servicing of intergovernmental/expert bodies: 1. Substantive servicing of meetings (a) General assembly (4): panels as required by the Assembly on emerging issues in the public sector (2); (b) Economic and Social Council (12): (i) Panels as required by the Council on emerging trends in the public sector (2); (ii) Meetings of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (2), including also provision of technical servicing (20 plenary meetings and 8 working group meetings); 2. Parliamentary documentation (a) General Assembly: reports mandated by resolutions adopted by the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth and sixty-sixth sessions on "Public administration and development" (2); (b) Economic and Social Council: report on the ninth session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration (1); and report on the tenth session of the Committee (1); (c) Ninth session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration: (i) Analytical/working papers on selected issues (3); (ii) Analytical/working paper on the theme of the annual ministerial review held by the Economic and Social Council (1); (iii) Report on the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance (1); (d) Tenth session of the Committee of Experts on Public Administration: 3. Other services provided (ad hoc meetings of groups of experts) Six expert group meetings, on: (i) Improved mechanisms for online public service delivery; (ii) Developing human resource capacities for effective delivery of public services; (iii) Improving public service for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals; (iv) The role of government in information and communications technology for development; (v) Public administration in the context of the thematic area to be identified for the annual ministerial review held by the Economic and Social Council in 2010; (vi) Public administration in the context of the thematic area to be identified for the annual ministerial review held by the Economic and Social Council in 2011; B. Other substantive activities 1. Mandated recurrent publications (a) "Compendium of Best Practices and Innovation in Public Administration" (2); (b) Compendium of Innovative E-Government Practices (1); (c) "Compendium of ICT Applications on Electronic Government" (1); (d) World Public Sector Report (1); (e) United Nations e-Government Survey (1); (f) Report on the United Nations Public Service Awards (2); 2. Mandated non-recurrent publications (a) Report on improved mechanisms for online public service delivery; (b) Report on developing human resource capacities for effective delivery of public services; (c) Report on improving public service for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals; (d) Report on the role of government in ICT for development; (e) Report on public administration in the context of the thematic area to be identified for the annual ministerial reviews held by the Economic and Social Council in 2010; (f) Report on public administration in the context of the thematic area to be identified for the annual ministerial review held by the Economic and Social Council in 2011; 3. Special events (a) Support to regional ministerial meetings on emerging trends in the public sector (in cooperation with the regional commissions) (2); (b) United Nations Public Service Awards competition (in its decision 2000/231 of 27 July 2000, the Economic and Social Council endorsed the recommendation of the Group of Experts that prizes be awarded by the Secretary-General for contributions made to the cause of enhancing the role, prestige and visibility of the public service). Created to draw attention to best practices, the Awards are being given every year (2); (c) Provision of substantive and organizational support for the observance of United Nations Public Service Day (2); 4. Technical material (a) Maintenance and improvement of the United Nations Public Administration Network Web Portal (1); (b) UNPAN Newsletter (8); (c) Governance World Watch (24); (d) Maintenance and improvement of online website: United Nations Global E-Government Readiness Knowledge Base (1); (e) Maintenance and improvement of online website: Africa Governance Inventory (1); (f) Public Administration Country Profiles (1); (g) Maintenance and improvement of online website: Ethics, Transparency, and Accountability (1); (h) Maintenance and improvement of online website: Innovation in Public Administration in the Euro-Mediterranean Region (InnovMed) (1); (i) Maintenance and improvement of online website: Global Alliance for ICT and Development (GAID) (1); (j) Maintenance and improvement of online website: Internet Governance Forum (IGF) (1); (k) Maintenance and improvement of Database on Economic and Social Councils (1); (l) Maintenance and improvement of online website: United Nations Global Knowledge Repository for Electronic/Mobile Government (EMGKR) (1); (m) Maintenance and improvement of online database: United Nations Public Service Awards Past Initiatives (1); (n) Maintenance and improvement of online website: Peacebuilding Portal: conflict management organizations, programmes and practitioners (1); (o) Maintenance and improvement of online website: Global Centre for ICT in Parliament (1); (p) Maintenance and improvement of online database: Administration and Cost of Elections (1); 5. Audio-visual resources Online training courses (4); 6. Substantive servicing of inter-agency meetings Support to global and regional technical meetings organized by partner institutions (5). IV. Conclusions 42. The Committee has before it, for its consideration, the proposed activities for the period 2010-2011 under subprogramme 8, Public administration and development management, of programme 7, Economic and Social Affairs, of the biennial programme plan for the period 2010-2011 as approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/247. The Committee is invited to review the proposed programme of work and to provide its comments thereon. 43. The Division for Public Administration and Development Management is responsible for the subprogramme. The strategy in the area of public administration is based on an integrated approach linking the normative and analytical work of the subprogramme with advisory services, technical cooperation and training, focusing primarily on the following three substantive areas: (a) institutional development in the public sector, with special emphasis on leadership and human resources development, policy and strategy design, and institutional networking; (b) public service delivery improvement through the application of information and communications technology, e-government and knowledge management; and (c) engagement in public administration in support of the United Nations development agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals. 44. In implementing the programme of work for the biennium 2010-2011 and beyond, the Secretariat will set its direction based on the provisions of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (see General Assembly resolution 60/1) along with the relevant provisions of Assembly resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council. It also receives guidance from the basic programme of work of the Council for 2010 and 2011 and the specific themes of the annual ministerial-level substantive reviews. 45. In an attempt to effect the streamlining of the operations of the Division for Public Administration and Development Management, which is being undertaken with a view to improving the effective and efficient delivery of mandates given to the Secretariat in the area of public administration and development management, the Secretariat proposed structural and functional adjustments to be carried out in unison with the efforts under way in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, in response to the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General (A/62/708) on the strengthening of the United Nations development pillar. The specifics of the proposed reorganization are contained in the annex to the present report, entitled "DPADM: the way forward", which will be circulated as a conference room paper. V. Recommendations 46. The Committee is invited to comment on the activities carried out in 2008 and to make recommendations on priorities and strategic directions set for the period 2010-2011 by: (a) Taking note of the work of the Secretariat in 2008 in implementing the United Nations Programme in Public Administration and Finance; (b) Taking note of the activities proposed for implementation during the biennium 2010-2011 and making any suggestions thereon; (c) Endorsing the strategic objectives, thematic focus and adjusted structure of the Division for Public Administration and Development Management as outlined in the annex to this report entitled: "DPADM: the way forward". 