%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2009 resumed session 18-27 May 2009 * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. Quadrennial reports for the period 2004-2007 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page 1. Alan Guttmacher Institute 2. Foundation Partners for Local Development 3. International HIV/AIDS Alliance 4. National Association of Negro Business and Professional Women's Clubs 5. Network of Human Development 6. UMUT Foundation (Special; 2000) PART I - Introduction i) Alan Guttmacher Institute advances sexual and reproductive health worldwide through an interrelated program of social science research, public education and policy analysis. For nearly four decades, Guttmacher has demonstrated that scientific evidence -- when reliably collected and analyzed and systematically disseminated -- can make a difference in policies, programs and medical practice. The Institute's work focuses on four key program areas: adolescents' sexual and reproductive health needs, benefits of investing in sexual and reproductive health services, women's possibilities to fully exercise their reproductive rights and responsibilities, and healthy sexuality. PART II - Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nation Meetings. XV International AIDS Conference, 11-16 July 2004, Bangkok, Thailand: Guttmacher's Director of International Research presented a study on condom use among young men in Sub-Saharan Africa and other Guttmacher staff attended the event. 50th session of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), 3 March 2006, New York. The Institute organized two parallel events at the United Nations Church Center: a workshop on how to use research in advocacy and the panel The Non-Medical Benefits of Investing in Women, including contributors from the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the World Bank and the Population Council. XVI International AIDS Conference, 13-18 August 2006, Toronto, Canada: Guttmacher research staff presented four studies on human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) in Sub-Saharan Africa and communications staff held a panel on the Institute's communications strategies for promoting evidence-based policies and programs. 51st Annual CSW, 5 March 2007, New York. The Institute organized two parallel events: Abortion Providers' Attitudes toward Women, co-organized by UNFPA and Human Rights Watch, at the United Nations Church Center and Sexual Violence against Young Women, co-organized by Ipas, Human Rights Watch and Gynuity, at the Dag Hammarskjöld Library Auditorium, United Nations Secretariat Building, New York. Commission on Population and Development 40th session, 10 April 2007, United Nations headquarters, New York. The Guttmacher Institute, UNFPA and the Government of Switzerland organized the panel discussion Safeguarding Adolescents' Healthy Transitions to Adulthood. ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or headquarters. The Institute has worked with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) on a collaborative effort to promote the integration of sexual and reproductive health rights and HIV/AIDS programs. Through this partnership, the Institute has authored two Issue Briefs on the topic, one on the role of reproductive health providers in preventing HIV/AIDS, and another on the reproductive health needs of HIV-positive individuals, 2003-2007. 2004: (i) Event organized to launch the report Adding it Up: The Benefits of Investing in Sexual and Reproductive Health Care, published jointly by the Guttmacher Institute and UNFPA in London, 3 February; (ii) Financial assistance from the World Bank to develop a comparative analysis of abortion rates worldwide, 2004-2005; (iii) Financial assistance from the World Bank to develop a study on the cost of treating post-abortion complications in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2004-2006; (iv) Guttmacher collaborated with the Pan American Health Organization on an analysis of the sexual and reproductive health of adolescents in Central America, with support from the Swedish International Development Agency, 2004-2008. 2005: (i) Technical assistance to the World Health Organization (WHO) on recommendations on birth spacing, 13-15 June; (ii) Technical assistance to WHO Department of Reproductive Health and Research on reproductive health indicators, 21-22 September; (iii) WHO collaborated with Guttmacher staff in organizing abortion sessions for the 18-23 July, International Union for the Scientific Study in Population (IUSSP) General Conference in Tours, France. Guttmacher and WHO staff worked together to select panellists and scope of panels for this conference to include research on the subject of abortion; (iv) Technical meetings with WHO to discuss integration of reproductive health and HIV services, 31 August-2 September; (v) Collaboration with WHO on a research project to produce worldwide, regional and sub-regional estimates of abortion, published in The Lancet, 2005-2007. 2006: (i) Guttmacher collaborated with WHO to release a report containing the proceedings from an expert group meeting on Priorities and Needs in the Area of Unsafe Abortion at a regional conference on unsafe abortion in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 20-23 March; (ii) Guttmacher participated in WHO's global consultation on the rights of people living with HIV to sexual and reproductive health held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 27 March; (iii) WHO staff reviewed Guttmacher's In Brief entitled "Meeting the Sexual and Reproductive Health Needs of People Living with HIV/AIDS", and the document was produced in collaboration with WHO. 2007: (i) WHO collaborated with Guttmacher staff and the International Union for the Scientific Study in Population (IUSSP) committee in preparation for a 7-9 November seminar on methodologies for estimating abortion incidence; Paris, France; (ii) UNFPA provided a grant to the Guttmacher Institute for a six-month pilot study entitled, Assessing the Social and Economic Costs of Unsafe Abortion; (iii) Guttmacher and WHO collaborated in the dissemination of the study Induced Abortion: Rates and Trends Worldwide in London (11 October) and other cities in Europe, including joint interviews with major media outlets; (iii) Financial assistance from the World Bank for "Achieving the MDGs: Reducing Maternal Mortality", a peer-reviewed book chapter. iii) Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed development goals, in particular, the Millennium Development Goals. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals The Guttmacher Institute works with researchers in developing countries across three regions to generate the scientific evidence and new ideas needed to initiate, inform and influence public policy and program development across the spectrum of sexual and reproductive health and rights challenges in order to contribute to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), particularly Goals 5 and 6. From 2004-2007, the Institute, in collaboration with its Southern partners, produced a number of publications designed to inform the development of programs and policies to improve maternal health and combat HIV/AIDS. These are only some examples of Guttmacher's publications: Goal 5 - Improve maternal health Target 1: Reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio. (i) Abortion Morbidity in Uganda: Evidence from Two Communities, Occasional Report, 2006, No. 26; (ii) Embarazo no planeado y aborto inseguro en Guatemala: Causas y Consecuencias, 2006; (iii) Unintended Pregnancy and Induced Abortion in the Philippines: Causes and Consequences, 2006. Target 2. Achieve universal access to reproductive health (i) Facts About the Unmet Need For Contraception in Developing Countries, 2007; (ii) Early Childbearing in Nicaragua: A Continuing Challenge, In Brief, 2006, No 3; (iii) Adding It Up: The Benefits of Investing in Sexual and Reproductive Health Care, 2004. Goal 6 - Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and other diseases Target 1: Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS (i) Protecting the Next Generation in Sub-Saharan Africa: Learning from Adolescents to Prevent HIV and Unintended Pregnancy, 2007; (ii) Meeting the Sexual and Reproductive Health Needs of People Living with HIV, In Brief, 2006, No 6; (iii) The Role of Reproductive Health Providers in Preventing HIV, In Brief, 2004. Activities in Support of Global Principles World AIDS Day: news release on how to better meet the needs of women of all ages, 2004; news release on young people's needs for accurate information to protect themselves from HIV in SubSaharan Africa, 2005; news release including a message sent by Guttmacher's CEO, 2006. International Women's Day: news release on women and HIV/AIDS, 2005. Africa Day: news release featuring the Institute's work on young people in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2006. (Special; 2004) PART i - Introduction The aims and purposes of the organization and its main course of action Foundation Partners for Local Development (FPDL) is a Romanian non-governmental-organization and is operating since 1994. FPDL is member of Partners for Democratic Change International Association of non-governmental organizations from Central and Eastern Europe and South Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Latin American countries established by Partners for Democratic Change. Mission: To enhance the democratic processes of governance, the civil society development, the promotion of a new culture of change and conflict management, in Romania and other Central, East and Southeast European countries, through capacity building activities targeting public administration and non-government representatives in order to be more effective, efficient and accountable, as well as to work better together. Believes and Values: (i) Having an effective, efficient and accountable public administration, a strong, accountable civil society and building bridges between them are crucial for enhancing the democratic processes of governance; (ii) Building the capacity of public administration and civil society representatives is crucial for promoting effectiveness, efficiency and accountability; (iii) Training is an effective capacity building tool to improve public administration and civil knowledge and skills, to change attitudes and stimulate initiative at local level. FPDL fields of expertise: (i) General Management and Leadership; Economic Development and Urban Planning; (ii) Citizen Participation and Community Development; (iii) Communication, Negotiation, Mediation, Conflict Management, including Ethnic Conflicts; (iv) Facilitation of Meetings, Problem-solving, Strategic planning processes; (v) Consulting for Organizational Development; Public Finance Management; Public Policies; (vi) Training Manuals Development; Consulting and Training Skills. Over 200 International and National Organizations, provided FPDL with financial support, knowledge and skills, used its services or collaborated with FPDL as partners. International organizations: United Nations Program for Human Settlements (UN HABITAT), United Nations Development Program (UNDP), Local Government Initiative (LGI), United States Agency for International Development (USAID), World Bank Institute (WBI). United States and European Professional organizations - over 30 with whom FPDL worked as a partner, among them: International Development Institute for Organization and Management (IDIOM), Partners for Democratic Change-United States, Urban Institute, Development Alternatives Inc (DAI), City County Management Association (ICMA), American Bar Association CEE Law Initiative (ABA CEELI), Local Government Initiative Development (LGID), National Democratic Institute (NDI), Conflict Management Group United States of America, Alliance for Conflict Transformation (ACT), IMC Consulting-United Kingdom, International Institute on Governance, Barcelona - Spain, Contact Center Republic of Moldova, Kettering Foundation, American Society for Training and Development (ASTD), Trialog, United States of America Partners Centers from Albania, Argentina, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Georgia, Hungary, Kosovo, Lithuania, Poland and Slovakia. Main Founders and Collaborators, prestigious international organizations: Local Government Initiative, Open Society Institute, Partners for Democratic Change - United States of America, Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Global Opportunities Fund, United Nations Program for Human Settlements, United Nations Development Program Romania, UNDP Republic of Moldova, United Nations Department for Economic and, Social Affairs, United States Agency for International Development, Research Triangle Institute, Chemonix, Urban Institute, International Capital Market Association, United States of America, Department of State and Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Charles Stewart Mott Foundation, European Union PHARE Program, The World Bank, National Soros Foundations in Romania, Moldova, Macedonia, Harvard University, Center for Urban Development Studies, United States of America, New York University, Robert Wagner Scholl for Public Service, United States of America, Pearson Peace Keeping Center, Canada. i) Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings Preparatory NGO/Civil Society Forum, Tunis, Tunisia, 23-26 April 2005. FPDL representative attended and participated at the elaboration of the Tunis Declaration and Plan of Action "Achieving an Inclusive, People Centered, Development Oriented and Knowledgeable Information Society for All" Ten-Year Plan (2005-2015). 50th Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), New York, 27 February-10 March 2006. The FPDL representative attended the 50th CSW events and meetings. 51st Commission on the Status of Women, New York, 26 February-9 March 2007. The FPDL representative attended the 51st CSW events and meetings. ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters Technical assistance to United Nations Development Program Romania to coordinate an intergovernmental working group aimed at creating common ground for the elaboration of a participatory development program and a complex strategy, after the interethnic conflict in Hădăreni, Mureş County, Romania, 1 September - 15 October 2005. Facilitation of the series of workshops for United Nations Development Program-Romania regarding the Rio Conventions Cross-Cutting Issues and National Capacity Self-Assessment Plan, NCSA Action Plan for Romania. The aim of these workshops was to enable Romania to identify country level priorities and to address global environmental issues, in particular those pertaining to the United Nations Conventions of Climate Change, Bio Diversity Conservation and Combat Desertification, catalyzing domestic and/or externally assisted action to meet those needs in a coordinated and planned manner. Bucharest, Romania, 5 -25 June 2005. Collaboration with United Nations Habitat Office in Belgrade since 2005, under Settlement and Integration of Refugees Program (SIRP). Objectives were to ensure long term settlement and integration of the refugee and other vulnerable population and to build capacities at municipal and central levels, putting the Social Housing Sector nearer to the preconditions for European Integration. In 2007 the collaboration included the first thematic conference of the cycle on "Cities in Dialogue", focusing on Facing and Promoting Integrated Local Development, Belgrade, Serbia, 1618 December 2007. Technical assistance to United Nations Development Program Viet Nam in collaboration with City County Management Association (ICMA), within the project Strengthening the Capacity of People's Elected Bodies in Viet Nam, focused on the preparation of the Induction Kit for new members of the parliament, the National Assembly' members (content, layout, and graphics), Hanoi, Viet Nam, 29 April - 6 May 2007. Project in collaboration with United Nations Development Program-Moldova, "Training Programs in Republic of Moldova: Participatory Processes and Project monitoring". FPDL organized the training program series regarding "Participatory Processes and Project monitoring" in Republic of Moldova for civil society representatives, Chişinău, Republic of Moldova, 10-15 April, 17-22 June, 20-25 September and 12-17 October 2007. Technical assistance in collaboration with United Nations Development Program-Yemen, and Partners for Democratic Change, United States of America, regarding the Decentralization and Local Support Program Yemen, for participatory processes/participation (elaboration of a training manual and design of the pilot testing), Sanaa, Yemen, 18-29 April 2007. Participation in the UNDESA "Sharing experience on Peace and Development Building" Workshop for Peace and Development Advisors, Nyery, Kenya, 30 October-3 November 2007. Collaboration with UN-Habitat Training and Capacity Building Branch for "Restore the Health of Your Organization - a program to curing and preventing corruption", since 2005. Participation in UN-Habitat field testing of the training manual on mainstreaming gender issues "Gender Equality - A source book for local government training", Kampala: 14-20 May and Masaka: 20-26 October, Uganda, 2007. iii) Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals The organization contributed to the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) strategy development in Romania, in line with the United Nations MDGs, constantly since 2003 and at the MDGs annual achievements evaluation since 2004. Part 1 - Introduction The International HIV/AIDS Alliance's (the Alliance) primary mission is to support communities to reduce the spread of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and meet the challenges of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Active in over 40 countries, and representing partnerships between hundreds of Community Based Organisations (CBOs), the Alliance acts as a link between local responses and global policies. The Alliance currently operates under a strategic framework for the period 2008-2010, with the following four (4) key goals: (i) scale up quality responses; (ii) strengthen civil society to respond to HIV; (iii) improve HIV policies; (iv) build an effective Alliance. These goals represent a streamlined reiteration and development of the strategic directions for 2005-2007, covering the majority of the period of this report, which were: (i) Increase coverage of effective community focused HIV and AIDS action; (ii) Strengthen the leadership and capacity of civil society to enable it to participate effectively in national responses to HIV and AIDS; (iii) Influence the national and international policy and financial environment to enable more effective civil society responses to HIV and AIDS; (iv) Build up an alliance of national linking organisations working effectively together. Total expenditure across the Alliance family of organisations grew from United States' (US) $35.8 million in 2004 to US$61.8 million in 2007. Significant funding source trends over the period include a growing amount and proportion of funding from the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, from Nordic governments and from the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 2007 saw a significant growth in funding accessed directly by Alliance members incountry, reflecting increased organisational capacity among members of the Alliance partnership. Between January 2005 and December 2007 the Alliance established programmes in 10 additional countries: Peru, Haiti, Bolivia, Myanmar, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Côte D'Ivoire, the Sudan, Malawi and Uganda and a regional programme in central Asia covering, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan. The Alliance's trustees proposed a change in objects in 2007, expanding the links with sexual and reproductive health and human rights and bringing the Alliance's objects into line with current activity and global needs. The original objects were: to promote the relief of persons who are suffering from HIV/AIDS; and to advance the education of the public concerning the symptoms, prevention and consequences of HIV/AIDS. The proposed new objects are: the advancement of health throughout the world, particularly in relation to HIV and to sexual and reproductive health; the promotion of the effective use of charitable resources by civil society organizations advancing health, particularly in relation to HIV and to sexual and reproductive health; the promotion of human rights (as set out in the United Nations conventions and declarations) particularly by the following means: relieving need among the victims of human rights abuse; research into human rights issues; educating the public about human rights; providing technical advice to government and others on human rights matters; raising awareness of human rights issues; international advocacy of human rights and eliminating infringements of human rights; the relief of poverty or other charitable need among people affected by HIV, including their families and dependents, in addition to ensuring that they are healthy; the promotion of equality and diversity by the elimination of stigma and discrimination in relation to people affected by HIV. The new objects were adopted on the 25 April 2008. Part 2: Contribution to the work of the United Nations i) Participation in the work of the United Nations Economic and Social Council subsidiary bodies, major conferences and other United Nations meetings United Nations General Assembly's 2006 High Level Meeting on AIDS 31 May-2 June 2006, United Nations headquarters, New York: The Alliance attended the meeting and supported the participation of civil society. The Alliance was a member of the International Advisory Group for United Nations General Assembly Special Session (UNGASS). Monitoring and Evaluation Project of the International Council of AIDS Service Organizations (ICASO), which supported the development of shadow reports. United Nations AIDS Program (UNAIDS) Programme Coordinating Board (PCB). The Alliance has participated as an observer in the following (PCB) meetings, held on the following dates: 27 June 2005, 14 Dec 2004, 23 June 2004, 27 June 2006, 5 Dec 2006, 25 June 2007 and 3 Dec 2007. ii) Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field The Alliance signed a Collaborating Centre Agreement (CCA) with UNAIDS on 31 October 2004. The agreement set a framework for a stronger partnership between UNAIDS and the Alliance and enabled strong civil society mobilization for HIV prevention intensification, particularly empowering vulnerable women to lead the change on HIV. The Alliance and UNAIDS have worked together to promote a human rights-based approach and evidence based policy. The CCA supports technical and financial resources and country-level public, private and civil society partnerships, such as: (i) UNAIDS HIV Prevention Strategy , 7-8 March 2005: a two-day working meeting with civil society organizations on to share ideas, concerns and experiences in HIV prevention programming and provide collective input into the new UNAIDS HIV Prevention Strategy; (ii) Global Task Team - 2005/2006 rapid consultation of civil society about increasing and improving coordination among multilateral institutions and international donors involved in HIV/AIDS; (iii) Discussion paper - Civil Society and the Three Ones 2005 - in collaboration with International Council of AIDS Service Organizations (ICASO) and UNAIDS, the Alliance developed and disseminated a discussion paper on the `Three Ones' for civil society members interested in this relatively new initiative to optimize and harmonize national HIV/AIDS policies and programmes; (iv) Country level collaboration 2004-2007. The Alliance, through both its United Kingdom Secretariat and country partners and linking organizations, has engaged in collaboration and consultation with UNAIDS Regional Support Teams and UNAIDS Country Coordinators, to enable engagement of multiple civil society stakeholders in planning and implementation of responses to HIV and AIDS; (v) Global Fund on AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria technical support 2007. UNAIDS has provided funding to the Alliance to support civil society in developing effective proposals to enhance respond to HIV prevention needs; (vi) While UNAIDS has been the main United Nations partner the Alliance also worked directly with co-sponsor agencies: for example, we produced `A collection of information, tools and resources for NGOs, CBOs and People Living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) groups on Access to treatment, (Spanish) and with United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) workshops on HIV and sex work. iii) Initiatives undertaken to support internationally agreed development goals Millennium Development Goals Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Other Diseases In pursuit of goal 6, the Alliance partnership delivered the following services in 2007 (2005 figures, where available, in brackets). 719,000 people reached through prevention activities (2005: 425,000) 47.5 million people reached through information and education campaigns 19.7 million condoms distributed (2005: 3.5 million) 55,862 orphans/vulnerable children received care and support (2005: 42,844) 127, 476 people reached by home and community-based care programs (2005: 22,504) 7,782 people trained to build organisational and programmatic capacity of NGO/CBOs Goals 4, 5 and 6 - Child Health, Maternal Health and HIV/AIDS In 2007, the Alliance joined a coalition of thirteen civil society partners across six European countries, called Action for Global Health, to advocate for increased action by donors and governments to meet the three health-related MDGs. Part I: Introduction The National Association of Negro Business and Professional Women Clubs (NANBPWC) is a nonprofit, community-based, social-service organization, headquartered in Washington D.C., United States of America. The purpose of NANBPWC is to impact upon the global community through implementation in the following manner: (i) develop initiatives that will forge alliances and collaborative programs across the globe; (ii) partner with NGOs, governmental and inter-governmental organizations, the private sector, and academic institutions in order to provide effective programs for women and children globally; (iii) develop programs in Africa and the Diaspora and seek members to share their skills and expertise in health, education, and economic development; (iv) support grassroots women's groups in one of more areas mentioned above; and (v) empower women to identify and implement solutions to problems in their communities with support from the International Affairs Division, NANBPWC, Inc. The programs are implemented locally, nationally, and internationally. Locally, individual clubs throughout the United States design programs to support the overall goals and objectives of the United Nations, based on specific needs within their communities. Nationally, the International Affairs Division selects a United Nations theme or goal, and each of the six districts in the United States is responsible for implementing an activity in the designated area. Internationally, a team of members visits several countries a year, first identifying women's organizations that are performing service in the areas of health, education, and/or economic development. The International Affairs Division supports United Nations goals and themes by sharing expertise and skills and by donating funds and specific items that address the needs of the international organization. There has been no change within NANBPWC structure or any new organization's affiliations since the last report. Part II: Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations Participation in Major Conferences: (i) 11 October 2004, International Year of Rice; (ii) 7-9 September 2005, "Our Challenge: Voices for Peace and Sustainable Partnerships and Renewal; (iii) 6-8 September 2006, "Unfinished Business: Effective Partnerships for Human Security and Sustainable Development; (iv) In 2007, representatives attended the DPI/NGO Conference at the United Nations; (v) 5 March 2004, Commission on the Status of Women (CSW): Review of the Beijing Platform for Action: Beijing and the Outcome Document in New York, United States of America. Side Events sponsored and/or co-sponsored during the Committee on the Status of Women Sessions: (i) 1 March 2005, "Violence Against Women: War Crimes and the International Criminal Court", sponsored by the International Federation of Women Lawyers at the United Nations Church Center, New York; (ii) 2 March 2005, "Effects of Racism on the Advancement of Women", sponsored National Council of Women of the United States (NCW/US), Mary Knoll Sisters of St. Dominic, United Nations Church Center, New York; (iii) 2 March 2005, "Poverty Eradication, a Women's Human Rights Approach" held in the United Nations' Dag Hammarskjold Auditorium, New York, sponsored by NCW/US, and The International Council of Women; (iv) 27 February 2006, Health/Environment forum entitled, "Are Neighbourhood Chemicals Blurring the Gender in our Children?" co-sponsored with NCW/US at the United Nations Church Center, New York. Panellists were Obstetrician/Gynaecologist (OB/GYN) physicians and professional environmentalists; (v) 6 March 2006, "Promoting Gender Equality for Women: Health, Education, and Human Rights", sponsored by NCW/US at United Nations Church Center, New York; (vi) 25 February - 7 March 2007, NGO Committees, CSW and UNIFEM, co-sponsored written statement for the Special Session of the General Assembly, entitled, "Women 2000, Gender Equality, Development and Peace for the 21st Century". Part III: Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of internationally agreed Development Goals, in particular the Millennium Development Goals Millennium Development Goals (MDG): The organization contributed to the MDG in Africa, Europe, South America, and the United States of America. Goal 1: Eradicate Extreme Poverty and Hunger. Target: Halve the numbers who suffer from hunger. Actions: (i) Children fed and given nutritional supplements in the Ashanti Region of Ghana: 1,500; (ii) Women were taught how to plant and harvest variety of vegetables in Ghana: 25; (iii) Bags of rice and food baskets were distributed in HIV/AIDS communities South Africa: 500 60 lbs bags of rice, 1,100 food baskets; (iv) Bags of rice, oil and sugar were donated to Nubian village in Egypt: 100 five pound bags of rice, 100 litre-sized bottles of oil and 100 five-pound bags of sugar; (v) Clothing, toiletries and school supplies were delivered to favalo communities in Salvador da Bahia, Brazil: 200 families. Goal 2: Achieve Universal Primary Education. Target: Ensure that children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling. Actions: (i) School bags with school supplies distributed: 1,200; (ii) School fees and uniforms were provided for children in need; 100 students; (iii) Books for libraries, primary to secondary, provided; 1,500 books; (iv) Computers for primary school children in Ghana were donated; 21 computers. Goal 5: Improve Maternal Health. Target: Reduce by three-quarters, the maternal mortality ratio. Action: Improve the building structure of an existing health facility in rural village in Ghana and added a maternity room. In collaboration with the Ministry of Health, 15 full-time staff members were stationed at the Health Center to support birth and prenatal care. Goal 7: Ensure Environmental Sustainability. Target: Reduce by half the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water. Action: During 2004-2007, in cooperation with Zeta Phi Beta Sorority, provided 44 electric-metered or hand-pumped water wells in rural villages in Ghana. Activities in Support of Global Principles: 2004: (i) Through funds received from the Health Plan of New York (HIP) and in collaboration with the National Council of Women/US and the Central Social Service Corp's program, these organizations co-sponsored the program entitled, "The Empowerment of Homeless Women", to address an aspect of poverty of homeless women in New York; (ii) Briefings on "Men and Boys Achieving Gender Equality", and "International Year of Rice" on 11 October at Dag Hammarskjold Auditorium, New York. 2005: (i) International Brunch and Roundtable, "Gender Equality/Empowerment of Women, Health, Education, Leadership and Economic Development" on 6 March a United Nations Church Center; (ii) Ecumenical Awards Luncheon, Health, Education, Leadership, Economic Development" on 10 October at United Nations headquarters, New York; (iii) Special United Nations Youth Conference in cooperation with United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) on 10 October, UNICEF House, New York. 2006: (i) United Nations Forum, "Promoting Gender Equality for Women: Health, Education and Human Rights on 6 March in New York, United States of America; (ii) A speaker from NANBPWC spoke on women issues regarding education, barriers and struggles of women in Africa. Forum was sponsored by the United States Embassy in Ethiopia and United States Department of State; Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 2007: (i) Annual United Nations Briefing and Awards Ceremony at the United Nations headquarters, New York. Theme: "Empowerment of the Girl Child: Health, Education, Employment and Economic Development. 6 October 2007; (ii) Funding from the Global Alliance for Education and Health Services, Inc. enabled 35 girls to attend an all-girl boarding high schools in Ghana. PART I. Introduction Since its inception, in 1990 Network of Human Development - Rede de Desenvolvimento Humano (REDEH) mission of empowering poor women and communities was aligned with the objectives of the United Nations Global Conferences in which the organization actively participated. REDEH has had a very active role specifically in the United Nations Conference for Environment and Development (UNCED) which happened in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. The recommendations of the conference especially chapter 24, "Global Action for Women Towards Sustainable and Equitable Development", shaped a series of activities of REDEH in Brazil and internationally. REDEH was involved in the implementation of the Platform for Action on Sustainable Development, Agenda 21 and on the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC). REDEH has introduced methodologies and best practices in Brazil and around the world that promoted mitigation and adaptation to climate change and poverty reduction. REDEH joined in 2004 the SouthSouthNorth collaborative www.southsouthnorth.org. The coalition has member organizations in 6 countries, (Brazil, South Africa, Mozambique, United Republic of Tanzania, Bangladesh and Indonesia). REDEH is responsible for capacity building. The activities of the organization during the period were aligned with MDG 7: Ensure Environmental Sustainability, as our adaptation projects had as an outcome to ensure safe drinking water and food security in the region. Constitution Amendments: New Consultative Advisory Board was created and members were invited to join the organization. II. Contribution of the Organization to the Work of United Nations During the reporting period REDEH has continued to be very active in the process of discussions of the Framework Convention for Tobacco Control. Besides the international work at the Intergovernmental Negotiation Body of the Convention, REDEH was also active in Brazil. It was the main organization engaged with the task of mobilized civil society for the implementation of the recommendations adopted in the convention. A significant network of NGOs gathered around the issue of tobacco control. In 2007, these NGOs formed a new organization which specific mission to support the network, Brazilian Alliance for Tobacco Control, www.actbr.org.br. REDEH has continued to contribute to the implementation of the platform of action of major United Nations Global Conference during the period of the report such as the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (1992), the United Nations Conference on Population and Development and the United Nations Conference on Women, Development and Peace. During this specific period the organization has focused on the implementation of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). United Nations Related Activities of the period 2004-2007 Since 2004, REDEH focused on a series of activities in Brazil, where REDEH's headquarters is located. These activities focused on building capacity and resilience of underserved communities on adaptation and mitigation to climate change at the same time addressing poverty reduction. Most of our actions were located in the poor drought areas of the Northeast. REDEH has developed a pilot project named Pintadas Solar which has been recognized as a best practice in 2007 by Wisions (www.wisions.org). REDEH has participated in all the Conferences of the Parties (COP) that took place during the period: (i) COP 10 in Buenos Aires, Argentina 6-17 December 2004. REDEH has organized together with International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI) a workshop with Local Authorities of Latin America to help them include gender in their strategies for climate security; (ii) COP 11 in Montreal, Canada, 28 November - 9 December 2005. REDEH was part of the SouthSouthNorth delegation. Several side events were presented and REDEH was part of them stressing the need to include women as a critical player to curb the climate crisis; (iii) COP 12 in Kenya, Nairobi, 617 November 2006. REDEH was part of the SouthSouthNorth delegation. Several side events were presented as well as a video and a primer was launched at the event. Capacity building strategies especially for the sub-Saharan Africa based on the Brazilian experience were discussed and first steps for collaboration were taken; (iv) COP 13 in Bali, Indonesia, 3 -14 December 2007. REDEH was part of the SouthSouthNorth delegation. Besides the side events organized, REDEH also presented lessons learned for leadership. The organization designed with LEAD International (www.lead.org) a capacity building program that was presented at a side event at the Bali COP. Participated at the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD 14) at the United Nations headquarters, New York, 1-12 May 2006. REDEH was one of the women's organizations of the Global South that actively participated in the session, "Energy for Sustainable Development. Industrial Development, Air Pollution/Atmosphere and Climate Change." REDEH organized a workshop together with the coalition of African Women and the organization Energia from Africa and presented to women at the CSD the opportunities that can be identified in the field of climate change. REDEH continued in the period the activities connected with the area of tobacco control. As the organization that started the process of mobilization of society in Brazil, REDEH was active in promoting campaigns, elaborating publications and activities that mobilized the youth. Hip hop groups from all over Brazil were mobilized to develop lyrics with the theme of tobacco control. A CD containing the music was done and launched through out Brazil and internationally took place in 2004 and 2005. REDEH also participated in the following international United Nations related meeting, as a member of civil society and articulated with the other NGOs: (i) 2005: 31 January- 4 February, IGWG2 - Second meeting of the Open-Ended Intergovernmental Working Group, Geneva, Switzerland; (ii) 2006: 6-17 February, COP1 - First Conference of the Parties, Geneva; (iii) 2007: 27-28 February, First meeting of the ad hoc study group on alternative crops, Brasília, Brazil; 30 June-6 July, COP2 - Second meeting of the Conference of the Parties, Bangkok, Thailand; 7-9 November, Meeting of the working group for development of guidelines on implementation of Article 11 (Packaging and labeling of tobacco products), Manila, Philippines; 12-14 December, Meeting of the working group for development of guidelines on implementation of Article 5.3 (Protection of tobacco control policies from commercial and other vested interests of the tobacco industry), The Hague, Netherlands. PART 1 - Introduction The purpose of the Umut Foundation is to "bring up young people, the guarantee of our future, as helpful to the development of our country and for the good of humanity by earning them the personality and skills to lead after Atatürk; make individuals acknowledge the rule of law, and ensure their contribution to its practice; following Atatürk's understanding of "Peace in Country, Peace in World", make them choose peaceful ways to settle disputes; and teach and make individuals in this context internalize skills of compromise and maintaining and improving peace...". Our mission is to contribute to the raising of our young people as individuals believing in the rule of law, trusting in justice, settling their disputes in peaceful ways and by compromise, and having consciousness and responsibility of being a citizen. Our vision is to ensure our young lead proud lives as citizens being aware of, demanding, and practising their rights and liabilities, to leave a world to our children without violence and with a dominant peace culture; organize academic studies related with the rule of law, peace and compromise, public awareness, violence and individual disarmament, as well as trainings and campaigns. It performs public opinion forming, information, and consciousness-raising activities. Adopting an interdisciplinary approach in every field of study, it is in interaction and communication with all sections of society. It regularly informs the public about its activities. With an active and participative understanding of citizenship, it aims at the following for a sustainable, peaceful, and high-quality social life, which can be established with the participation of all individuals and institutions: Spreading the mission it adopted throughout all sections of society and thereby having a broad group of supporters, drawing attention to the dangers of individual armament for a society without violence, developing solution suggestions and exerting pressure for its practice, contributing to raising "awareness of citizenship" through trainings, meetings, and other activities, developing national and international networking and cooperation, constituting a source of information in the fields it focuses on, and being a reference in determining social policies and strategies. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations The Umut Foundation was not able to actively participate in studies and conferences of Economic and Social Council in this reporting process. 