%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2010 regular session 25 January-3 February 2010 * Reports submitted by non-governmental organizations are issued without formal editing. Quadrennial reports for the period 2005-2008 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Adventist Development and Relief Agency Institute for Policy Studies Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association Simply Help S. M. Sehgal Foundation Yad Sarah (General; 1997) I. Introduction Aims and purposes of the organization: The Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) is a private voluntary agency (PVO) that has a presence in more than 125 countries worldwide. Founded in 1956 by the Seventh-day Adventist Church, ADRA's purpose is to develop human capacity, increase self-reliance, and empower communities to meet crisis or chronic distress. The United Nations granted General Consultative status to ADRA International in 1997. In implementing its programs, ADRA coordinates and, at times, partners directly with appropriate United Nations agencies in developing countries to provide services. Indirectly, ADRA's community-based programs support country-specific goals of United Nations agencies at the field level. In addition, ADRA consistently participates in United Nations conferences, special events, consultation processes and workshops related to development and relief. ADRA works to achieve positive change without regard to ethnicity or religious affiliation. ADRA seeks to build a future that is characterized by equity, opportunity, and freedom of choice, responsible stewardship of resources, and individual and collective security. Globally, ADRA is organized as a network of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). In developing countries implementing ADRA offices are locally constituted, have their own boards, and are staffed primarily by local personnel. Supporting offices in international donor countries assist in mobilizing resources and provide technical and administrative backstopping for program planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and financial compliance. Core portfolios include food security, primary health care, economic development, disaster response and basic education, with particular emphasis on women and children. II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations Participation in the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities 2005: (a) "Commission on Social Development" 8-11 February, New York, United States of America; (b) "M+5 Civil Society Hearings" 23-24 June, New York, United States of America; (c) "ECOSOC High Level Segment" 29 June-1 July, New York, United States of America; (d) "United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Annual Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) Consultation" Fall, Geneva; (e) "World Food Programme (WFP) Annual NonGovernmental Organization (NGO) Consultation" meetings Fall, Rome. 2006: (a) "Commission on the Status of Women" 26-28 February, New York, United States of America; (b) "International AIDS Conference" July, Toronto, Canada; (c) "United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Annual Non Governmental Organization (NGO) Consultation" 25-27 September, Geneva, CH; (d) "Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)/InterAction Monthly Meeting" 14 September, New York, United States of America; (e) "United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Annual NGO Consultation" 2628 September, Geneva, CH; (f) The "World Food Programme (WFP) Annual Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) Consultation" 11-13 October, Rome. 2007: (a) Representatives attended meetings in New York, all hosted by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA): 30 April; 18 May; 22 June; (b) "Commission on the Status of Women" 25-28 February, New York; (c) "Global Forum" 6-8 June, New York; (d) "World Food Programme (WFP) Annual Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) Consultation" 1921 November, Rome. 2008: (a) "Commission on the Status of Women" 25 February - 7 March, New York; (b) "United Nations Innovations Fair" 30 June - 3 July, New York; (c) Representatives attended and participated in the following Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)/ InterAction Monthly Meetings in New York: 28 February; 30 May; 24 July; 8 August; (d) "United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Resident Coordinator System Event" 20 February, Rome; (e) "International AIDS Conference" August 2008, Mexico City, Mexico. 2005-2008: Participation in several caucuses in New York: "Caucus on Girl's Issues and Concerns, Linkage Caucus, and US Caucus"; and contributed to the drafting of the Agreed Conclusions of the US Caucus. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters ADRA maintains ongoing agreements and partnerships with United Nations organizations. It has worked with the World Food Programme to facilitate easy and rapid distribution of food aid. ADRA has also worked with United Nations member nations to implement projects and institute development policies that are commensurate with United Nations plans of action. ADRA has also received funding from the United Nations Global Fund, UNICEF and United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Activities in line with Millennium Development Goals: In five geographic regions: Africa, Asia, Central America, South America and Eastern Europe. Major actions undertaken: Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. Target 3. Halve the proportion of people who suffer from hunger. Actions: (a) Distributed 88,000,000 meals of over 179 million pounds of food; (b) Nutrition training for mothers; (c) Nutritional care for children; (d) Training provided to produce more reliable crops - 4,200,000. Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education: Ensure that children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling. Actions: (a) Distribution of over $22 million worth of books; (b) Distribution of school material/kits. Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women. Target 1: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education. Actions: (a) Implementation of gender based programs that ensure girls education; (b) Female literacy programs. Goal 4: Improve Child Health. Target 1: Reduce the under-five mortality rate. Actions: (a) Implementation of child survival programs; (b) Immunizations provided. Goal 5: Improve Maternal Health. Target 1: Reduce the maternal mortality rate. Actions: (a) Provision of primary health care; (b) Training of traditional birth attendants; (c) Training of community midwives; Target 2: Achieve universal access to reproductive health. Actions: (a) Provision of reproductive health/family planning services; (b) Establishment of health centers. Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS. Target 2: Have halted and begun the reverse spread of HIV/AIDS. Actions: (a) Implementation of HIV/AIDS prevention programs - over 10,000,000; (b) Training for community health workers; Target 3. Have halted and begun to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases. Actions: (a) Training of faith leaders in malaria prevention; (b) Prevention education to communities. Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability. Target 3: Halve the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. Actions: (a) People taught to find clean water - over 4,200,000; (b) About 2,000 wells dug in Africa. Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development. Target 1: Address the special needs of least developed countries, landlocked countries and small island developing states. Actions: (a) Implementation of health and development programmes with global partners in least developed countries around the world. Activities in support of global principles: ADRA observed World AIDS Day each 1 December and contributed to the global discussion of addressing the growing needs of vulnerable populations affected by HIV/AIDS. Each year education materials were distributed to private donors and community organizations to increase awareness. 2. Institute for Policy Studies (Special; 1977) The Transnational branch of the Institute for Policy Studies (TNI) was founded in 1974 as one of the first research institutes to be transnational in name, composition, orientation and focus. Transnational seeks to create and promote international cooperation in analysing and finding possible solutions to such global problems as armed conflicts, poverty and marginalisation, social injustice and environmental degradation. At the heart of the Institute lies a worldwide network of independent researchers and social activists. Close partner relationships have been developed over the years with many non-governmental organizations in Africa, Asia, Latin America, Eastern and Western Europe, and the United States of America. Constituted as a non-profit organization registered in the Netherlands, Transnational receives its funding from a range of donors, including church groups, nongovernmental development funding agencies, European development co-operation ministries, and private foundations in the United States and Europe. TNI has gained a reputation worldwide as one of the leading international drug policy research institutes. As such, the programme is often invited to conferences and seminars to comment on United Nations drug control issues. TNI is also highly regarded by the Reclaim Public Water Network (RPW) for its work on public solutions to the water delivery crisis in developing countries. Participation in the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities: Over the reporting period, TNI participated in the following meetings, co-operated with the following agencies, and undertook the following additional activities: (a) 2006-2008, A TNI representative was included in the Dutch governmental delegation as an NGO advisor at the Commission on Narcotic Drugs meetings. TNI is also a member of the Vienna Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) Committee on Narcotic Drugs, the official non-governmental organization counterpart of the United Nations Office on Drugs and CND; (b) 7-11 March 2005, TNI participated at the forty-eighth session of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna. Prior to the meeting, TNI published a Drug Policy briefing on the United Nations and harm reduction. A new TNI web section was set up on the United Nations and harm reduction; (c) March 2006, TNI participated at the forty-ninth session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna. TNI co-organized and spoke at the parallel NGO Forum on Alternative Development and presented outcomes of the discussion on behalf of the United Nations NGO Committee at the Commission on Narcotic Drugs Thematic Debate on Alternative Development; (d) November 2006, TNI sent four delegates to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) COP12 in Nairobi. Materials distributed to NGO delegates and observers through side events; (e) March 2007, TNI participated at the 50th United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna. Prior to the meeting TNI issued a new publication about the position of the International Narcotics Control Board on the issue of the coca leaf and the United Nations drug conventions, TNI Drug Policy Briefing 21, March 2006; (f) December 2007, TNI sent delegates to the United Nations United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Conference of the Parties 13 in Bali, Indonesia. Materials were distributed to NGO delegates and observers through side events; (g) March 2008, TNI participated at the fifty-first session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna. This Commission on Narcotic Drugs initiated the review of the implementation of the political declaration and action plans of the United Nations General Assembly special session on drugs in 1998. TNI launched on new website - www.ungassondrugs.org - with relevant comments and publications, as well as a regular blog on the issues; (h) December 2008, TNI representatives attended the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Conference of the Parties 14 in Poznan, Poland. Materials were distributed to NGO delegates and observers through side events. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and specialized agencies: (a) 2006, TNI attended a 4-day policy conference on the theme "Development in a drugs environment: beyond alternative development?", organized by the European Commission, the German Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) at the GTZ-Haus in Berlin; (b) November 2007, TNI participated in a global workshop on developing a strategic approach to alternative development, in Bangkok, a policy conference focused on opium cultivation and sustainable alternatives, organized by the FAO, BMZ, GTZ and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and funded by the European Commission. The workshop made several key recommendations to governments, international agencies and civil society, to feed into the deliberations of the United Nations General Assembly review; (c) July 2008, TNI assisted the Dutch delegation in the "Intergovernmental expert working group on international cooperation on the eradication of illicit drug crops and on alternative development" to prepare for the high-level segment of the 52nd session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in March 2009; (d) July 2008, TNI participated in the Beyond 2008 NGO Forum in Vienna organized by the Vienna NonGovernmental Organization Committee on Narcotic Drugs (VNGOC) with support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in which 300 delegates met to provide civil society input for the 10-year United Nations General Assembly special session review. It was the culmination of a series of regional NGO consultations that took place over the past six months all across the globe; (e) 2005 - 2008, Some of TNI's research and publications were featured on the website of the Myanmar country office and the Brazil country office of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime: Downward Spiral: Banning Opium in Afghanistan and Burma, TNI Drugs & Conflict Debate Paper June 2005. Paco Under Scrutiny The cocaine base paste market in Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil , TNI Drugs & Conflict Debate Papers Nr. 14, October 2006. Activities in line with the millennium development goals (MDGs): Goal 6 Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases, Target 1 26 May 2006. TNI released a Drug Policy Briefing on HIV/AIDS and drug use in Burma/Myanmar just prior to the 2006 United Nations General Assembly special session review from May 31-June 1 in New York (the follow-up to the 2001 United Nations Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS). Activities in support of global principles: 2005: (a) June, released a press statement on the occasion the United Nations International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Drug Trafficking; (b) 10 August, TNI participated at the Third National Conference on Drug Policies in Buenos Aires organized by Intercambios. Delivered the keynote speech; (c) 24 October, was invited to speak on the opening day devoted to policy evaluation, in a panel with the Deputy Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime at the annual conference of the International Council on Alcohol and Addictions in Budapest; 2006: (a) February, chaired the session on "Reducing Supply: Dilemmas in Producing Countries" at the Wilton Park conference on the theme "International drugs policy: setting the agenda for United Nations General Assembly special session 2008"; (b) February, presented an expert opinion at a hearing about regulating the supply of cannabis to coffee shops and the United Nations drug conventions in the Dutch parliament; (c) March, World Water Day was celebrated each 22 March through the international Reclaim Public Water network by publicising the concept of Public-Public Partnerships also at the 2007 commemoration. At the 2008 World Water Day, TNI highlighted its support for Global Water Operator Partnerships Alliance (GWOPA); (d) October, TNI and members of its International Coca Commission discussed with government officials of the Plurinational State of Bolivia the necessary steps to de-schedule the coca leaf from the 1961 United Nations Single Convention; 2007: (a) 30 August, participated in the United Nations International Conference of Civil Society in Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace organized by the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People at the European Parliament in Brussels; (b) December, spoke at a response panel to the speech by UNODC executive director Antonio Costa and panels on Latin American and global policy trends at the Drug Policy Reform Conference in New Orleans (United States of America) organized by the Drug Policy Alliance; (j) December 2008, as part of the Transnational Migrant Platform in the Netherlands TNI celebrated International Migrants Day by hosting a forum on "United Nations Conventions and current EU Migrant Policy". 3. Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association (Special; 2005) Aims and purposes: Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association (MBOSCUDA) aims to empower the Mbororo pastoralists to achieve sustainable and equitable development on their own terms, and to secure their human, social and cultural and economic rights as valued active citizens of Cameroon. Its purposes and course of action are to: (a) reinforce unity among its members, as well as with other people, through discussions, cooperation and social integration; (b) promote the economic, social and cultural development of the Mbororos (especially women), with a view to improving their standards of living; (c) promote the education of the Mbororo youths; (d) improve its agro-pastoral practices; (e) ensure maximum protection of the environment; (f) contribute to and participate in all possible undertakings aimed at better management of grazing lands and the environment; (g) promote any form of cooperation with any person, individual or corporation that might help in the realization of Mbororo's aims and objectives. Change within the organization: Constitutional amendment: While Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association's aims and purposes remain the same an amendment of its constitution is underway. New affiliations: Mbororo Social and Cultural Development Association was granted observer status with the following: (i) the World Intellectual Property (WIPO) Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, and (ii) the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights. Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities: (a) African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights side event, fortieth session, November 2006, Banjul, the Gambia. An MBOSCUDA representative attended and contributed in the plenary discussions of the two-day meeting of NGOs; (b) Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues side event, fourth session, April 2005, New York, United States of America. An MBOSCUDA representative delivered a statement on the case of the Mbororo Pastoralists; (c) World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Intergovernmental Committee on Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, eleventh session, July 2007, Geneva, Switzerland. An MBOSCUDA representative delivered a statement and was elected a member of the WIPO Voluntary Fund for Accredited Indigenous and Local Communities; (d) WIPO training on Community Building Capacity to Protect Traditional Knowledge, Cultural Expressions and Genetic Resources, 10 December 2007, Geneva, Switzerland. An MBOSCUDA representatives made a presentation on Mbororo traditional knowledge; (e) WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore, twelfth session, February 2008, Geneva, Switzerland. MBOSCUDA representatives organized a side event on Mbororo traditional knowledge and human rights, land rights and entitlement to self-determination; (f) Expert Mechanism on the Rights and Fundamental Freedoms of Indigenous Peoples, first session, October 2008, Geneva, Switzerland. An MBOSCUDA representative delivered a statement and contributed to the discussions. Activities in line with Millennium Development Goals: Goal 1: Eradicate Extreme Poverty and hunger. Target 1: to halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than 1 dollar-a-day. Actions: (a) Provision of micro loans to start up 392 income generating activities; (b) Provision of grants to 16 women household heads. Target 2: To aachieve full and productive employment and decent work for all, including women and young people. Action: 47 Women and young people were employed. Goal 2: Achieve Universal Primary Education. Target 1: To ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere (boys, and girls alike) will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling. Actions: (a) 240 girls and boys sponsored in primary schools and colleges; (b) 14 classrooms for primary schools were built; (c) 10 schools supported with didactic materials each year. Goal 3: Promote Gender Equality and Empower women. Target 1: To eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and in all levels of education no later than 2015. Actions: (a) 679 women learned to challenge gender roles by participating in household decision making; (b) 679 women trained on leadership and enterprise development; (c) 392 women trained on business management; (d) 476 women trained on gender sensitive participatory approach. Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and other diseases. Target 1 To halt by 2015 and reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS. Actions: (a) 240 students/youths trained on HIV/AIDs; (b) 7 HIV/AIDS patients received grants to secure medications; (c) 38 orphans and vulnerable children supported. Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability. Target 3 To halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and sanitation. Actions: (a) 6 drinking water systems established; (b) 6 water catchments areas protected; (c) 4 pasture plots improved; (d) 5000 economic and water friendly trees planted. 4. Simply Help The SimplyHelp Foundation is dedicated to the mission of empowering people living in poverty through providing education, vocational training, food, shelter and disaster relief. SimplyHelp Foundation attended the following meetings at United Nations Headquarters, New York: 2005: (a) DPI/NGO weekly briefings in April-May; (b) 58th Annual DPI/NGO Conference: "Voices for Peace, Partnerships and Renewal", September; 2006: (a) 50th Session Commission on the Status of Women, 27 February-10 March. SimplyHelp organized a workshop on 1 March, entitled "Empower Women Migrant Workers"; (b) 59th Annual DPI/NGO Conference: "Unfinished Business: Effective Partnerships for Human Security and Sustainable Development", September. 2007: (a) 51st session of the Commission on the Status of Women: "The Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination and Violence against the Girl Child", on 26 February-8 March. SimplyHelp hosted a workshop on 4 March: "Empowering Girls"; (b) 60th Annual DPI/NGO Conference: "Climate Change: How it Impacts Us All", September. SimplyHelp cosponsored the following Midday Workshop on 6 September: "The Impact of Climate Change on Migrants: Current Issues and Future Challenges". 2008: 52nd session of the Commission on the Status of Women, 16th meeting on "Financing for gender equality and empowerment of women", on 26 February. SimplyHelp hosted the following workshop in February: "Financing for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, The Experiences of East Asia", at the Church Center, 11 fl., Hardin Room (44th Street & First Ave). The Founder of SimplyHelp Foundation spoke about "Good practice in Cambodia", and a representative of SimplyHelp was the moderator. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals: four geographical regions: Central America, Asia, Africa, and North America: Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger, Target 2. Actions: (a) 2198 Cambodian students received computer training and an official certificate between 2002 and 2008; 90 per cent of the computer class graduates found a job; (b) 1686 Cambodian students received tailoring training in rural areas since 2002; 95 per cent of the tailoring class found jobs with local manufacturers; 5 per cent started their own businesses; (c) 1000 Salvadoran students received computer literacy classes since 2006; (d) 1440 Salvadoran students received cosmetology training since 2006; (e) 36 Salvadoran homeless seniors have been placed in SimplyHelp Senior Centers, providing them rooms, 3 nutritious meals per day, and healthcare; (f) 20 Panamanian homeless seniors in SimplyHelp Senior Centers were provided with shelter, nutritious food and healthcare; (g) 45-40 ft. containers with aid supplies like blankets, clothes, toys, medicine, school supplies, among other things, were shipped to people living in poverty around the world since 2005; (h) 16 donation distributions in the United States of America were sent to families living below the poverty line and homeless individuals; approximately 3,500 people were served; (i) 10 houses were built in 2007 for earthquake victims in Peru. Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education, Target 1. Actions: (a) 10 elementary schools built in rural China (Jiangxi, Huizhou, Sichuan provinces) since 2003; (b) More than 1,050 Chinese students receive primary education every year through SimplyHelp; (c) 100 computers were delivered to 4 schools in Nicaragua; (d) 100 sewing machines were delivered to 4 schools in Nicaragua. Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women. Actions: (a) The Tailoring School in rural Cambodia has empowered women, raised their social status, and developed a thriving economy in the rural areas they are located in. 5 per cent of the graduates set up their own businesses and are attracting suppliers and distributors from all over Cambodia; 95 per cent of the graduates have been able to find jobs with local manufacturers; (b) 25 new Computers were donated to women centers in Panama; (c) 25 new Sewing Machines donated to women centers in Panama; (d) SimplyHelp will open a Vocational Training Center for women in La Libertad, El Salvador on 15 April 2009. The classes to be offered are: Cosmetology, Gastronomy, Maid services, Bartending, Bakery, Tailoring. Students will be able to start working immediately upon graduation in this city's booming tourist industry. 5. S. M. Sehgal Foundation The Sehgal Foundation was established as a Trust in 1999 to address integrated, sustainable development in India's village communities, through grassroots activities and empowerment of village institutions. Starting as a philanthropic initiative, moving on to direct implementation in 2002, the organization has undergone another leap in order to scale up its model of Integrated Sustainable Village Development (ISVD) through the Institute of Rural Research and Development (IRRAD) in Gurgaon, Haryana. IRRAD envisions rural people across India motivated and empowered to make their lives more secure and prosperous through education, better health, improved skills, and supportive governance. Towards this aim, IRRAD implements ISVD in select village clusters, builds capacity in rural development, undertakes rural research and seeks to serve as a premier knowledge institution for rural development and poverty reduction. All this is done by developing need based strategies and programs for poverty alleviation, undertake research and create knowledge on sustainable and replicable models of development, build capacities through training, and analyse impacts of local, state and national level policies, helping the poor make best use of policies intended to benefit them; and advocate policy reforms when needed. Beginning in 2005, IRRAD became fully operational by April 2008 with four centres serving as resources of talent and infrastructure for the execution of its mission: (a) Programs Implementation; (b) Trainings; (c) Rural Research; (d) Policy, Governance and Advocacy. Leading by Example: IRRAD is housed in a Green campus in Gurgaon, Haryana which combines simplicity of design with environment friendly technologies. Constructed as per the Platinum rating of Leadership in Energy and Environment Design (LEED) standards set by the United Nations Green Building Council, the key features of the building are: (a) 35 kWP photovoltaic solar panels; (b) Rain Water Harvesting, Energy-efficient heating/cooling and lighting; (c) Waste water recycling; (d) Zero water runoff site. The building was inaugurated by The Honorable Governor of Haryana on 2 December 2008. Expanded Area of Activities: While the broad aims and objectives, as well as the nature of activities remain the same, the foundation has taken up nine more villages under development in rural Mewat and Kurukshetra districts of Haryana as compared to eight villages at the time of grant of special status, taking the tally to 17. Since 2005, the organization has also added an Alternative Energy program to ISVD. The area of activities has also widened with new centres strengthening ISVD. The research centre has undertaken assessment of impacts of ISVD programs, determined key indicators of progress and monitored them regularly, analyzed socio-economic and demographic indicators that influence rural development and poverty, at both micro (household/village) and macro (state and national) levels and the policy, governance and advocacy centre has strengthened policy by working closely with a group of 30 people, imparting to them a year long training (June 2008-July 2009) on various government schemes, helping them access their entitlements. The organization did not participate directly in the work of the Economic and Social Council or any of its subsidiary bodies and/or major conferences and other United Nations meetings, but all through, the ISVD Programs undertaken in Mewat and Kurukshetra, Haryana fall much in line with the ECOSOC Priorities - United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Activities in line with Millennium Development Goals (MDGs): Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. Target 2 Halve the proportion of people who suffer from hunger. Actions: (a) Total number of lives affected due to interventions = 32,090; (b) 235 people generated sustainable income through self employment or new job opportunities; (c) 2526 farmers or small scale producers gained access to inputs, supports and markets; (c) 15,178 girls/women supported through empowerment initiatives; (e) 3234 children reached by school feeding programs; (f) 85 people benefited from skills based professional training programs. Income Enhancement: 13 Self Help Groups (SHGs) and three Fruit and Vegetable Growers' Associations (FVGAs) set up. Five Farmers' Resource Centers (FRCs) established which function as information dissemination hubs for farmers. 80 acres area put under horticulture, 109 acres under chisel, 75 vermicompost units, 15 acres under drip irrigation, and 148 acres under new crop (grain legumes and pigeon peas), 288 acres of intercropping, 960 acres under micronutrient, 208 acres under raised bed soil making, 83 exposure tours arranged for farmers, 138 farmer meetings, and 41 demonstrations set up on farmer's fields. Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education. Target 3 Ensure that children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling. Actions: (a) 1150 children gained access to education (formal/non formal); (b) 1265 girls reached targeting female enrolment; (c) 230 people became actively engaged in efforts to promote education. Life Skills Education: (a) An evaluation study of the program undertaken in villages to find out the segment of girls who had not undergone the course, impact of the course on pass outs and areas which need to be strengthened; (b) Youth camps for men 13-25 years of age conducted in seven villages; (c) 499 girls passed out from the Life Skills Education Centers which aim at providing basic literacy and developing life skills among the adolescent girls; (d) Personality development workshops and study scholarships for village students introduced; (e) Village Education Committees (VECs) revived in four villages; (f) In partnership with Development Alternatives, an NGO, the foundation initiated a unique computer based literacy program titled the TARA Akshar Project. The program enables the learning of basic Hindi (reading and writing) within thirty days; (g) Introduction of computer (hardware and software), electrician and mobile repairing course for village youth at Ghaghas community centre in Mewat, Haryana. Goal 5: Improve Maternal Health. Target 6 Reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio. Actions: (a) Number of people with increased access to maternal-child health and survival programs = 7598; (b) training of 40 community midwives. Rural Health: (a) Village Health and Sanitation Committees (VHCs) formed in nine project villages; (b) 439 patients screened and 111 underwent cataract surgeries free of cost organized at eye camps; (c) 113 children from 15 villages registered for the disability camp, of which 29 shortlisted for surgery, 58 provided with disability aids, and 22 advised physiotherapy and 5 referred to nearby hospitals; (d) Increase in latrine coverage in our project villages; (e) 133 patients surgically treated in eye camps and increase in immunization coverage in villages; (f) A Baseline assessment carried out in Nagina block, Mewat for Evaluation of Integrated Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illness (IMNCI) Program in India: An IPEN Study; (g) A delivery hut with round the clock trained personnel set up in Raniyala village of Ferozepur Jhirkha block in Haryana; (h) 1500 disability certificates processed, authorizing the disabled to draw a monthly pension from the government; (i) 599 toilets built as an impact of Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) Campaign conducted in project villages and training of Community Health Volunteers. Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. The organization observes World AIDS Day on 1 December each year. In 2008, tree plantations were done on World Environment Day, screening of documentary film and skit on women empowerment on International Women's Day, 8 March, water awareness rallies were held to commemorate World Water Day on 22 March. Various wall paintings and street plays were conducted to get the message across. Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability. Target 10 Halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and sanitation. Actions: (a) Rain water harvesting systems established = 30 check dams; (b) Structures for safe water disposal and recharging ground water: 45 recharge wells and 609 soak pits. Water Management: (a) Water awareness walk conducted in eight project villages and sessions based on a training module taken with the school children of six villages to prepare them as influencers for judicious usage of water; (b) Design improvement in hand pumps with a surrounding concrete platform and directing the waste water into a soak pit. Six such hand pumps installed; (c) Constructed a Check Dam at village Rangala Rajpur. The dam harvests 159,000 kilolitres of rainwater, saving 40 acres of crops from flooding and helps irrigate 50 acres of Panchayat land that otherwise would have been left uncultivated due to severe dryness; (d) Training and capacity building of other organizations on water management and technical guidance to them for construction of soak pits, plugging of gullies, revival of village ponds and construction of check dams and establishing roof water harvesting structures; (e) In Karheda village, two roof water harvesting systems installed in school buildings to check the severe shortage of drinking water; (f) The Sehgal Foundation has been granted a status of a Premier organization in 2008 to carry out all Watershed Development projects in Mewat by the Mewat Development Agency; (g) Two check dams constructed in village Kotla where water is available only within 200 meters from the Aravali (Asia's oldest hill range) foothills helping in groundwater recharging; (h) 122 taps installed at various points to check the waste water flow into the streets; (i) 30 recharge wells constructed in project villages. Building rain water harvesting structures: 7 other check dams, 4 culverts (masonry obstacles on the upstream side of culvert to check the water flow to a certain level and also enabling it to flow beyond), 107 soak pits, 10 soak wells installed. Alternative Energy: 10 solar lights installed; five in Rangala and five in Notki. Endogenous Tourism Project: The Endogenous Tourism Project was launched by the Ministry of Tourism and UNDP to promote alternative models in rural tourism. Jyotisar was one of the selected sites among the thirty-one sites across the country identified with a view to sustainable livelihoods in endogenous tourism. Tourist Complex, Kriti Kendra was inaugurated by the Deputy Commissioner of Kurukshetra on 23 December 2008. Demonstration Village: Together with villagers and government officials, the foundation is helping Notki village in Mewat, Haryana to develop into a "Demonstration Village". Notki at a glance: (a) Total Population size: 1568; (b) Households: 196; (c) Average Family size: 8. Key Interventions: (a) Infrastructure: Access road (1 km) constructed, Five solar roadside lights placed, Provision of drinking water tank and fixed taps, Provision of electric water motor, Roof water harvesting; (b) Sanitation: Soak wells: 6, Toilets: 92, Construction and repair of toilet blocks; (c) Health care: Construction of pregnancy care and childbirth delivery hut, Provision of equipment, delivery kits and consumables needed for safe, healthy delivery; (d) Education: Improvements in Primary school and appointing female teacher, increasing the enrolment of female students, Revival of Village Education Committees, Painting and whitewashing the school, Wall paintings with educational quotations, Fitting and repairing of doors and windows in classrooms, Construction of cooking area for mid-day meals, Landscaping, pathways and tree plantation in school premises, Raising boundary walls, Repair of play swings, Provision of dustbins, Seating benches; (e) Agriculture: Model orchard on 4.3 acres (897 plants, 13 species), Cost effective drip irrigation system, Cleaning and landscaping of pathway to model orchard and Plantation with 150 Tree Guards. 6. Yad Sarah Introduction Yad Sarah is Israel's leading humanitarian volunteer organization, providing a spectrum of free or nominal cost services designed to make home and community care possible for special needs, sick, disabled, elderly and recuperating people and their families. With over 100 branches throughout Israel run by more than 6000 volunteers, Yad Sarah saves the Israeli economy over $400 million annually in direct hospitalization and medical costs. At an ever-increasing pace, Yad Sarah has deployed a strong infrastructure to complement what is missing in the existing home care programs. It is a volunteer organization committed to a mutual social responsibility, striving to enhance the quality of life for people in difficult circumstances. Along with Yad Sarah staff, volunteers and contributors from every part of the social and communal fabric share this commitment by providing, temporarily or for an extended time, an array of home and community services. These home care support services are provided with reliable advanced technology and human warmth to meet the changing needs of a multi-aged and diverse population. The volunteers, representing the entire range of the social spectrum, are seen as the backbone of the association, its principal resource, and the driving force in its development. Yad Sarah strives to make life easier for the disabled and people with special needs within the Israeli society, and welcomes the opportunity to do the same for people worldwide. It is expanding its activities to other communities/countries, and currently has projects in the pipeline with Jordan, El Salvador and Angola. Participation in the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities: As a volunteer humanitarian organization based in Israel, Yad Sarah does not have the funds to send people to conferences all over the world. Meanwhile, a team of 3 volunteers were recruited from New York to represent the organization at the United Nations Headquarters. Yad Sarah representatives attended Department of Public Information (DPI)/NGO briefings and interacted with other NGOs and took part in the following Annual DPI/NGO conferences at United Nations Headquarters, New York: (a) 58th Annual DPI/NGO Conference on Our Challenge: Voices for Peace, Partnerships and Renewal, held on 7-9 September 2005; (b) 59th Annual DPI/NGO Conference on Unfinished Business: Effective Partnership for Human Security and Sustainable Development, held on 6-8 September 2006; (c) 60th Annual DPI/NGO Conference on Climate Change: How It Impacts Us All, held on 5-7 September 2007. Yad Sarah is very proud to be the first Jewish Israeli organization to be granted special Consultative Status with ECOSOC. We have used the past 4 years to familiarize ourselves with the workings of the United Nations and in making contacts with other NGOs in order to put together common humanitarian programs and projects. 