%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2010 regular session 25 January-3 February 2010 Quadrennial reports for the period 2005-2008 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31* Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page 1. Action contre la faim 2. Agence internationale pour le développement 3. Enfants du monde: Droits de l'homme 4. Scouts musulmans algériens I. Introduction Aims and purposes of the organization: Founded in 1979, Action contre la faim (ACF) is a humanitarian and professional non-governmental organization that specializes in the fight against hunger. For three decades, ACF has remained faithful to its vision of a world without hunger. It employs all the human and material resources necessary to meet people's needs, alleviate human suffering and safeguard human dignity by giving people access to drinking water and by offering them lasting solutions against hunger. Its objective is to combat hunger on all fronts: on the one hand, through emergency operations designed to meet the basic needs of the most vulnerable people and, on the other hand, through post-crisis programmes aimed at promoting self-sufficiency among populations. ACF addresses the underlying causes of malnutrition and its consequences. Furthermore, by integrating its programmes into local and national systems, and through advocacy and research, ACF ensures that short-term responses are transformed into long-term solutions. Moreover, ACF is working to ensure the transfer of skills in all technical response areas by training local personnel and using local response structures. To accomplish its tasks, ACF has developed the capacities required for social mobilization, impact assessments of its work, effective resources management, diversification of its funding sources (public generosity, sensitization of public authorities or international institutions) and also for its professional development. II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies: Major meetings and conferences that ACF participated in or attended from 2005 to 2008 include: (a) Annual participation in the United Nations Standing Committee on Nutrition (thirty-second to thirty-fifth sessions); the co-chairing of working groups on nutrition in an emergency context, with statements regularly delivered by ACF representatives; (b) Participation in the World Food Programme (WFP) annual consultations with non-governmental organizations in Rome, and attendance at several thematic meetings, such as the meeting on higher commodity prices, held in March 2008 in Rome; (c) Regular participation in work and meetings related to the nutrition cluster, the water, sanitation and hygiene cluster and the logistics cluster. ACF representatives were also deployed to the rapid response teams for these clusters. 2005: (a) April: Breastfeeding training course, held in Kabul in cooperation with the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Health Organization (WHO). The course brought together experts from Headquarters, national and international staff of ACF in Kabul, Ministry of Health officials and members of other international organizations; (b) September: ACF attended the annual meeting for non-governmental organizations of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), held in Geneva, Switzerland. 2006: (a) July: Participation in the first dialogue between United Nations and nonUnited Nations humanitarian organizations on the theme "Enhancing the Effectiveness of Humanitarian Action" held in Geneva, Switzerland; (b) September: Statement to the Human Rights Council in Geneva, Switzerland, concerning the murder of 17 humanitarian workers from Action contre la faim in Sri Lanka in August 2006, and submission of the organization's recommendations as part of the investigation of this incident. 2007: (a) February, Paris: Meeting with the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator: Discussion on relationships between the United Nations specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations, the coordination of humanitarian assistance, humanitarian reform and the situation in Chad and Darfur; (b) March: Oral presentation to the Human Rights Council in Geneva, Switzerland, on follow-up of the investigation related to the killing of 17 humanitarian workers from Action contre la faim in Sri Lanka in August 2006; (c) April, Brussels: Meeting with the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Darfur; (d) July: Participation in a meeting of the Economic and Social Council in Geneva, Switzerland. 2008: (a) May: ACF participated in and contributed to the international conference on cholera, held jointly by WHO and UNICEF in Dakar; (b) October: ACF participated in the World Food Summit of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), held in Rome. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters: Donors to ACF include WFP, UNICEF, UNHCR, FAO and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. In the field, ACF is a United Nations implementing partner for programmes. The organization works on a regular basis alongside WFP to distribute food (in Afghanistan, Myanmar and Haiti); in partnership with UNICEF for nutritional surveys (for example, in Haiti in 2008) and projects to provide clean drinking water; and with UNHCR to implement projects for nutritional assistance and food security, as well as water and sanitation projects in refugee camps. ACF is a member of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee task force on mental health and psychosocial support in emergency settings. Initiatives undertaken by the organization in support of the Millennium Development Goals: The organization contributes daily to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. Since its efforts are focused on ending hunger in the world, ACF is first and foremost participating in Goal 1, which is to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. The reduction of child mortality (Goal 4) is clearly linked to the reduction of poverty and hunger. ACF works to prevent acute malnutrition among the most vulnerable people, including young children. Improving maternal health (Goal 5) is another one of the organization's missions, given that malnutrition prevention programmes also target pregnant or nursing women. ACF is also helping to combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases (Goal 6), for people suffering from malnutrition run a greater risk of falling ill and, conversely, people weakened by disease can easily fall victim to malnutrition, which leads to a dramatic decline in their state of health. There is thus a vicious circle of disease and malnutrition. ACF also works to ensure environmental sustainability (Goal 7) through its water, sanitation and hygiene programmes, which are indissociable from the fight against hunger. Between 2005 and 2008, ACF participated in meetings of the European Food Security Group and the Trans-Atlantic Food Aid Policy Dialogue (TAFAD), and also in certain international events, such as the World Water Forum in March 2006. (General; 2001) Aims and purposes of the organization: The purpose of the Agence internationale pour le développement (AIDE Fédération) is to (a) contribute to the many activities undertaken by the specialized agencies of the United Nations and the European Union; (b) support the disadvantaged without distinction and combat all forms of discrimination, whether based on race, national origin, politics, religion or gender; (c) engage in action to promote respect for human rights and democracy; (d) provide emergency food aid, clothing and medical assistance for persons in need; (e) participate in campaigns to prevent and combat poverty and exclusion, racism and all forms of discrimination, sexually transmissible diseases and drug use; (f) participate in economic and social development projects in developing countries in the fields of health, education, training, agriculture and emergency aid; and (g) assist in the implementation of microprojects and artisanal or industrial production units. Activities are designed to improve the social climate by encouraging the active participation of all components of civil society. AIDE Fédération seeks to promote and encourage the exchange of experience and information by every possible means and to publish and/or disseminate articles, journals, books, audio-visual material and newsletters on human development as a whole. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals: AIDE Fédération has organized two international conferences: (a) May 2006, Palais des Nations, Geneva: on the theme "What can be done to overcome the obstacles to achieving the Millennium Development Goals? Overcoming the obstacles with civil society", with the participation of 317 non-governmental organizations; (b) October-November 2008, Rabat: international forum on the theme "How can we act together to achieve the Millennium Development Goals in Morocco by 2015? Obligations and challenges", with the participation of 34 NGOs. Participation and presentations at our various conferences by: (a) The chief of the NGO section, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations; (b) the former Secretary-General of the United Nations and former Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Peru; (c) The Special Rapporteur on the right to food; (d) the former Director of the United Nations Regional Information Centre for Western Europe; (e) the representative of the United Nations Office at Geneva; (f) the Director of the Information Service at the Palais des Nations in Geneva; and (g) the United Nations Development Programme Resident Representative and UN Resident Coordinator in Morocco. Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger: From 2005 to 2008, AIDE Fédération distributed 1,697 tonnes of food and 182 tonnes of clothing for families in precarious situations in Paris and the Paris area. Number of beneficiaries: 15,638 families, or about 62,942 persons. Partners: Ile-de-France regional authorities, Paris City Hall, Food bank and supermarkets. Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education: Target 3: Ensure that by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling. AMAL MOROCCO 2008 (ongoing): AIDE Fédération has put in place a programme to combat insecurity and educational exclusion among 5,902 needy children in 11 public primary schools in priority zones in the city of Mohammedia (Morocco). Activities: (a) Educational assistance and follow-up throughout schooling, including help with homework; (b) Items of clothing and educational materials for 5,902 children; (c) Free health care, with full cover of the cost of medicines, for 5,902 children; (d) 10-day summer camp for 2,125 children. AMAL MOROCCO partners include: (a) The Governor, Chairperson of the Mohammedia Prefectoral Committee on Human Development; (b) The Governor, Chairperson of the Salé Prefectoral Committee on Human Development; (c) Rabat-Salé-Zemmour-Zaer Regional Academy of Education and Training; (d) the Prefectoral Delegation of the Ministry of Education; (e) the principals of 11 public schools targeted by the programme; (f) parents' associations; (g) the Prefectoral Delegation of the Ministry of Youth and Sports; (h) the Prefectoral Delegation of the Ministry of Health; and (i) the Prefectoral Delegation from Entraide Nationale. Activities in support of global principles: AIDE Fédération has organized or coorganized the following events: (a) December 2005, Paris: conference on the theme "What can we do together to fight discrimination in hiring?"; (b) October 2006, Paris, UNESCO: NGO forum on the theme "Issues of diversity in Europe and European citizenship"; (c) December 2006, Paris: conference on citizen involvement: "This time, I'm voting!"; (d) December 2007, Paris: citizen conference on equal rights in practice; (e) December 2008, Paris: conference on citizen equality: civil, political and social; (f) November 2006, Palais des Nations, Geneva: symposium on memory and human rights; (g) May 2007, Paris: conference on slavery: shared history, shared memory; and (h) May 2008, Paris: European symposium on equal rights in the context of cultural diversity. During the period 2005-2008, AIDE Fédération engaged in consciousness-raising and information campaigns using posters (200,000 posters, information leaflets and postcards) in order to bring to people, in the places where they live and work, information on all forms of discrimination. The purpose of these campaigns was to develop the awareness of all stakeholders (civil society, associations and businesses). AIDE Fédération is undertaking wide-ranging action aimed in particular at African NGOs in order to encourage them to participate in United Nations bodies, where they are underrepresented. On 2 November 2008, AIDE Fédération organized, in Rabat, a training and mobilization day on the representation of Moroccan associations in international institutions and in United Nations activities, with particular reference to requests for admission to consultative status with the Economic and Social Council. Number of participants: 318 Moroccan associations; number of application forms for admission to consultative status (in Arabic and French): 318. (Special; 1997) Established in 1986, Enfants du monde: Droits de l'homme (EMDH) works for the protection of children in danger and the promotion of their rights. Its activities are based on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 November 1989. The objectives of EMDH are to raise public awareness of the Convention and to ensure that it is observed in France and abroad. EMDH is a non-profit organization, established under the 1901 Associations Act, and is independent of any political or religious affiliation. It defends all children, whoever they may be, based on the fundamental values recognized in the Convention: the right to life, the right to an identity, the right to an education and the right to recreation. It is developing comprehensive care for children in serious difficulty: each year since 2005, over 25,000 children have benefited directly from socio-educational and psychosocial activities conducted by teams from EMDH. The structure of EMDH is innovative -- it is a cross between an association for the protection of human rights and a humanitarian association. EMDH received the Human Rights Prize from the French Republic in 2004. II. Contribution to the work of the United Nations Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies: EMDH has not participated in the work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies because it has focused its activities on programmes for the protection of children and promotion of their rights in the countries where it has programmes. Furthermore, its limited funds do not allow it to participate in international meetings. Cooperation with United Nations specialized agencies: During the period 2005 to 2008, EMDH received support from various specialized agencies in most of the countries where it has programmes: Collaboration with UNICEF and the Common Humanitarian Fund for Sudan for the following programmes: (a) improved early childhood care and establishment of the Mediterranean Early Childhood Institute in Algeria; (b) psychosocial support and follow-up for children affected by the war in Darfur; (c) support to vulnerable children in Southern Sudan; (d) establishment of a centre for the promotion of the rights of the child in Southern Sudan; and (e) improvement of basic health-care and education services for vulnerable families in the Khartoum region of Sudan. Collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in the agricultural training programme for young women in Southern Sudan (2007-2008); with the United Nations Development Programme in 2005, and with UNESCO in the programme to establish the centre for development and psychosocial assistance for children from disadvantaged families in Kabul, 2005-2006. Collaboration with the UNICEF local capacity-building programme for care of street children in Yemen (2006); support for vulnerable children placed in institutions in Sri Lanka (2006 and 2008); support and assistance to orphanages and learning centres in Burma (2007, 2008); for the children of Madagascar in 2006; and family reintegration for separated children in Iraq in 2005 and 2008. Activities in support of global principles: each of the EMDH programmes in the 12 countries where the association has a presence is for the purpose of mobilizing all actors to promote respect for the rights of the child. Beneficiary parents and children, technical and financial partners, as well as local and national actors are both recipients and stakeholders in activities to promote the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 2008: (a) Mobilization of 28 architects around a common cause: they produced original works on the theme "Draw me the rights of the child!". Each of these works was related to a drawing by a child cared for by EMDH at one of its missions. There was an exposition of those works in Paris in October and November 2008. Large-scale reproductions were displayed in the largest Paris shopping centre from November 2008 to January 2009. The show raised public awareness of the daily life of street children, child victims of conflict, exploited children, children who had violated the law and children living in institutions run by EMDH; (b) Statement at the UNESCO colloquium "Stop Jeopardizing the Future of Iraq", Paris, October and November 2008; (c) Seminar in Amman in November 2008 on the impact of violence on the lives of children, which brought together various stakeholders in the countries of the Middle East, including the National Human Rights Centre of Jordan. 2007: (a) Over 1,200 children from all over France attended courses where EMDH activities were explained to them. Some 29 presentations to raise awareness of the rights of the child were made by local Committees to 1,398 primary and secondary school students; (b) EMDH made presentations in partnership with the Municipal Council of the town of Mureaux (France) in 16 primary schools to CM1 and CM2 classes; the goal was to raise awareness among the pupils of the election for the Children's Municipal Council (over 850 children participated); four sessions were held to train over 60 volunteers and trainers, educators or group leaders in speaking to groups of children to raise awareness of their rights; (c) Some 10 training sessions on the identity of the structure and on the rights of the child were held by EMDH members (125 volunteers, paid staff and international solidarity volunteers) throughout the year; (d) a conference open to the public took place in Paris in November 2007 on the theme: "Afghanistan -- children as hostage to conflict: impact, protection, ethics", followed by a screening of the film "The Kite Runner" at the Auditorium of the Paris Hotel de Ville; (e) the Chorale "Enfants du Monde" gave 17 concerts in France and abroad for audiences of over 3,000; (f) Seminar in April 2007 in Sofia on "The fruits of humanitarian action", led by the EMDH General Delegate as part of the SIETAR EUROPA Global Congress, with the participation of 500 representatives of civil society of 32 different nationalities; (g) The organization's founding president, Yves Buannic, published his memoirs entitled "L'enfant du large" on his commitment to the association and the history of EMDH and its fight for respect and promotion of the rights of the child. 2006: (a) Some 33 informational meetings with youth and 10 meetings with professionals on children's issues in France during 2006; (b) Presentations on international solidarity for over 200 students; (c) some three local committees benefited from specific training and subsequently made presentations or led programmes on the rights of the child in their respective regions. A total of 150 "educational toolboxes" on the rights of the child were distributed in 2006; (d) An exposition on the crisis in Darfur, entitled "Our sun is full of hope" was created and presented in Lomme (France) in February-March 2006 and in Turcoing (France) in November 2006. 2005: A "toolbox on the rights of the child" and the DVD "A little respect, please" were distributed in France; some 30 people were trained to make presentations, and 15 presentations were made to 1,460 children in the Paris region on three subjects: the rights of the child, citizenship and international solidarity. (Special; 2001) The Scouts musulmans algériens (SMA) is a non-profit, non-governmental organization established in the 1930s during the period of colonialism. The organization is a public service organization and is involved in the social, cultural, health and educational fields through social participation and promotion programmes to benefit the people. SMA is a stakeholder in the programme to achieve the Millennium Development Goals in Algeria, and consequently, it is contributing to the country's sustainable development. Scouting in Algeria reaches over 110,000 members led by 15,000 scoutmasters, out of a population of 35 million, including over 8 million school-aged children and 1 million students. Main objective: To help youth and children to develop their physical, intellectual, emotional and social capabilities to the maximum. Activities in support of global principles: (a) social action: the Scouts musulmans algériens have always emphasized community action in their programmes and solidarity activities, for instance the distribution of 400 wheelchairs in rural areas and 10,000 school supply kits for needy children; (b) literacy: the national literacy strategy was adopted by the Algerian Government in January 2007; SMA has over 462 classes with 9,850 enrolled throughout the country, led by 462 instructors. Training of trainers: Training has a primary role in the Scouting programme. It meets a constant need given the mobility of scoutmasters. A series of training sessions are planned each year for educators. During the period under review, over 215 educators were trained with financial support from various partners. All of the staff are volunteers. Seminars and meetings: On the national level, SMA has held several seminars. At the international and regional level, over the past four years the organization has been involved in several educational, environmental and scouting events. Communications activities: Information and awareness days are held regularly for the people and decision makers. National Scouting Day, the observance of world and international days at the central and local levels and open houses are very effective local means of communication; a regular publication is issued, and a Website in three languages maintained. Partnership activities: SMA is a partner of various United Nations institutions in Algeria: the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The organization has been able to benefit from funding for several of the projects it has carried out. Agreements have been signed with the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (Environment). Organizational activities: The organization's ninth national Congress was held in November 2005, and the Congress elected the National Council. Between 2005 and 2008 the organization held five sessions of its National Council, the main governing body between Congresses -- one session per year and 18 meetings of its Executive Board. The organization is represented in the 48 wilayas in the country and in over 1,300 communes. The membership numbers over 110,000 scouts throughout Algeria. Financial activity: The financial resources of Scouts musulmans algériens are essentially based on membership dues and subsidies granted by the various partners under the partnership agreements. Training cycles 2005-2008: SMA held several training sessions for its members or leaders, the most important of which are: (a) training of leaders in Tunis in September 2005; (b) second leader training workshop in Algiers in July 2005 with the participation of 16 scoutmasters; (c) four training sessions on combating poverty, one of the Millennium Development Goals, between July and December 2005, financed by UNDP (Algeria) in Algiers, Oran, Biskra and Annaba; the theme of the sessions was the mechanisms for combating poverty; they brought together 120 active young leaders of local civil society; (d) training session for the National Commission on the project "Integration of the concept of reproductive health in the scouting programme", funded by UNFPA (Algeria) in December 2005 in Algiers; and (e) training session for educators and adolescent educators organized by UNFPA and the Al Kawtar Centre for the Development of Arab Girls in June 2006, with the participation of four scoutmasters in Tunisia. 