%%%DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/15 20 November 2009 Original: English AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON FURTHER COMMITMENTS FOR ANNEX I PARTIES UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL Tenth session Copenhagen, 7 - 15 December 2009 Item 2 (a) of the provisional agenda Organizational matters Adoption of the agenda Provisional agenda and annotations Note by the Executive Secretary* Provisional agenda Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Adoption of the agenda; Organization of the work of the session. Consideration of further commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol. Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its fifth session. Other matters. Report on the session. Annotations to the agenda Opening of the session The tenth session of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (AWG-KP) will be opened by the Chair on Monday, 7 December 2009, at the Bella Center, Copenhagen, Denmark. The provisional agenda for the session will be presented for adoption. Parties will be invited to make any general statements after the adoption of the agenda. Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary Organization of the work of the session Background: At its resumed sixth session, the AWG-KP decided to hold its tenth session from 7 to 18 December 2009, in conjunction with the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) in Copenhagen, Denmark. The Chair of the AWG-KP has made available a scenario note to Parties, containing proposals for the organization of the work of the tenth session (FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/16). Parties are invited to refer to the overview of the session posted on the UNFCCC website and to consult the Daily Programme, published during the session, for a detailed and up-to-date schedule of the work of the AWG-KP. The Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its twenty-fourth session, recommended that meetings should normally end by 6 p.m. but may, in exceptional circumstances, continue no later than 9 p.m. The session will be organized accordingly. Representatives of Parties and international organizations are requested to keep their oral statements as brief as possible. Those wishing to make a written statement available should bring copies for distribution. Action: The AWG-KP will be invited to agree on the approach to the organization of work for the session. The Chair of the AWG-KP will make proposals for furthering work in contact and informal groups with a view to advancing consideration of the documentation prepared for the session, and, in accordance with decision 1/CMP.1, agreeing on the results of the work of the AWG-KP, to be forwarded to the CMP for further action. FCCC/KP/AWG/2008/8 Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol on its resumed sixth session, held in Poznan from 1 to 10 December 2008 FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/16 Scenario note on the tenth session. Note by the Chair Consideration of further commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol Background: At its resumed sixth session, the AWG-KP agreed that at its tenth session it will seek to consider issues relating to rules and modalities of possible improvements relating to items 3, 4 and 5 of its agenda for the sixth session, as well as further consideration of a draft text on agenda item 7 and any draft decisions or draft amendments. These agenda items read as follows: Item 3: Analysis of means to reach emission reduction targets and identification of ways to enhance their effectiveness and contribution to sustainable development; Item 4: Consideration of relevant methodological issues; Item 5: Consideration of information on potential environmental, economic and social consequences, including spillover effects, of tools, policies, measures and methodologies available to Annex I Parties; Item 7: Consideration of further commitments by Annex I Parties. The work programme of the AWG-KP for 2009 also provided for the adoption of conclusions on the scale of emission reductions to be achieved by Annex I Parties in aggregate as well as on the contribution of Annex I Parties, individually or jointly, to this scale at the seventh and eighth sessions of the AWG-KP. As these matters are still under consideration, and given their importance to completing the work of the AWG-KP on further commitments for Annex I Parties, further discussions will be a priority at the tenth session. Action: The AWG-KP will be invited to prepare the relevant draft decisions or draft amendments on the subjects under consideration. FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/10/Rev.3 FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/10/Add.1/Rev.2 Documentation to facilitate negotiations among Parties. Note by the Chair Documentation to facilitate negotiations among Parties. Note by the Chair. Revised addendum. Proposed amendments to the Kyoto Protocol pursuant to its Article 3, paragraph 9 FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/10/Add.2 Documentation to facilitate negotiations among Parties. Note by the Chair. Addendum. Other proposed amendments to the Kyoto Protocol FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/10/Add.3/Rev.3 Documentation to facilitate negotiations among Parties. Note by the Chair. Revised addendum. Draft decisions on other issues identified in paragraph 49 (c) of document FCCC/KP/AWG/2008/8 FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/10/Add.4/Rev.2 Documentation to facilitate negotiations among Parties. Note by the Chair. Revised addendum. A compilation of proposals by Parties for aggregate and individual figures for Annex I Parties FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/12/Rev.2 Consideration of information on potential environmental, economic and social consequences, including spillover effects, of tools, policies, measures and methodologies available to Annex I Parties. Revised note by the Chair Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its fifth session Background: At its resumed fourth session, the AWG-KP agreed that one of its tasks for 2009 will be to forward to the CMP for consideration at its fifth session the results of the work of the AWG-KP on the consideration of commitments for subsequent periods for Annex I Parties under Article 3, paragraph 9, of the Kyoto Protocol, with a view to their adoption. Action: The AWG-KP will be invited to consider the results of its work, based on inputs from the contact groups established under agenda item 3. The AWG-KP will also be invited to agree on forwarding these results to the CMP at its fifth session. Other matters Any other matters arising during the session will be taken up under this item. Report on the session Background: A draft report on the work of the tenth session will be prepared for adoption by the AWG-KP at the end of the session. Action: The AWG-KP will be invited to adopt the draft report and authorize the Rapporteur to complete the report, under the guidance of the Chair and with the assistance of the secretariat. Documents prepared for the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol at the tenth session Documents prepared for the session FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/14 Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol on its ninth session, held in Bangkok, from 28 September to 9 October 2009, and Barcelona, from 2 to 6 November 2009 FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/MISC.16 Organizational matters. Submissions from Parties 