%%%DOCUMENTATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2009/9 2 September 2009 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION Thirty-first session Copenhagen, 7 - 18 December 2009* * Exact dates within the sessional period are subject to confirmation. Item 2 (a) of the provisional agenda Organizational matters Adoption of the agenda Provisional agenda and annotations Note by the Executive Secretary Provisional agenda Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Adoption of the agenda; Organization of the work of the session; Election of officers other than the Chair; Election of replacement officers. National communications and greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention: Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990 - 2007; Status report on the review of fourth national communications and preparations for the review of fifth national communications. National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention: Provision of financial and technical support; Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention; Further implementation of Article 12, paragraph 5, of the Convention. Financial mechanism of the Convention: Fourth review of the financial mechanism; Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Global Environment Facility; Assessment of the Special Climate Change Fund. Matters relating to Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention: Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10; Matters relating to the least developed countries. Development and transfer of technologies. Capacity-building under the Convention. Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol. Reporting and review of information submitted by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol. Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol. Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol. Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol. Administrative, financial and institutional matters: Budget performance for the biennium 2008 - 2009; Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat; Privileges and immunities for individuals serving on constituted bodies established under the Kyoto Protocol. Other matters. Report on the session. Opening of the session The thirty-first session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) is scheduled to be opened by the Chair. The exact date is subject to confirmation. The provisional agenda for the session will be presented for adoption. Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary Organization of the work of the session Background: The thirty-first session of the SBI will be held in conjunction with the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP) and the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP). A detailed schedule of the session will be posted on the UNFCCC website. Given that several bodies will be meeting during the sessional period, the time available for contact groups and informal consultations will be very limited. To maximize the use of meeting time, the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies may propose that the co-chairs of negotiating groups facilitate agreement by tabling initial draft conclusions at the first meeting of the negotiating groups, based on relevant submissions and statements made during plenary meetings, and taking into account any previous negotiations and/or conclusions. In addition, the Chairs may, in consultation with Parties, propose additional time-saving measures and identify items that could be referred to future sessions without in-depth consideration or the need to establish negotiating groups. The Chairs may also seek to identify items that may result in procedural conclusions without establishing negotiating groups. The SBI, at its thirtieth session, agreed that all meetings end by 6 p.m., particularly to give Parties and regional groups sufficient time to prepare for daily meetings, but may, in exceptional circumstances, and on a case by case basis, continue for two to three hours. The session will be organized taking this into account. In order to enable delegations to participate fully in other meetings taking place in parallel, the SBI will be invited to conduct its deliberations as efficiently as possible, including to optimize time used for plenary and for informal negotiations, and to finish its work within the time foreseen. Priority will be given to issues requiring a decision or action at SBI 31, the fifteenth session of the COP or the fifth session of the CMP. Items that are not concluded at this session will be forwarded to the SBI for consideration at its thirty-second or thirty-third session. In accordance with the conclusions adopted by the SBI at its twenty-fourth session, representatives of Parties and international organizations are requested to keep their oral statements as brief as possible. Those representatives wishing to make available a written statement should bring copies for distribution. Parties are invited to refer to the overview of the session posted on the UNFCCC website and to consult the Daily Programme, published during the session, for a detailed and up-to-date schedule of the work of the SBI. When considering relevant agenda items, Parties are also invited to take into account information contained in document FCCC/SB/2007/INF.2, on the relationship of various provisions of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States to the work of the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. Action: The SBI will be invited to agree on the organization of the work of the session. Election of officers other than the Chair Background: Pursuant to rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the SBI shall elect its Vice Chair and Rapporteur. At the request of the President of the COP at its fourteenth session, consultations with the coordinators of the regional groups were initiated at SBI 30, together with the consultations on the election of members of other Convention and Kyoto Protocol bodies. If necessary, further consultations will be held during the session. Parties are invited to recall decision 36/CP.7 and to give active consideration to the nomination of women for elective posts in any body established under the Convention or its Kyoto Protocol. The current officers of the SBI will remain in office until their successors are elected. Action: The SBI will be invited to elect its Vice Chair and Rapporteur at the earliest opportunity following completion of consultations. Election of replacement officers Background: Pursuant to Article 15, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol, when the SBI exercises its functions with regard to matters concerning the Kyoto Protocol, any member of its Bureau representing a State that is a Party to the Convention but, at that time, not a Party to the Kyoto Protocol, shall be replaced by an additional member to be elected by and from among the Parties to the Protocol. If necessary, further consultations with the coordinators of the regional groups will be undertaken. Action: If necessary, the SBI will be invited to elect additional officers to replace the Vice-Chair and/or Rapporteur representing a State that is a Party to the Convention but not a Party to the Kyoto Protocol. National communications and greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention Report on national greenhouse gas inventory data from Parties included in Annex I to the Convention for the period 1990 - 2007 Background: The COP, by its decision 19/CP.8, requested the secretariat to provide information relating to greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory data submitted by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) taken from the latest available inventory submissions for consideration by the COP and the subsidiary bodies. The secretariat has prepared such a document annually since 2003, containing statistics on inventory submissions from Annex I Parties, summaries of GHG emissions/removals data for individual Annex I Parties, and some indicative trends for all Annex I Parties taken together, for Annex I Parties with economies in transition and for remaining Annex I Parties. This year's document covers the period from 1990 to 2007. : The SBI will be invited to take note of the document mentioned below. FCCC/SBI/2009/12 National greenhouse gas inventory data for the period 1990 - 2007. Note by the secretariat Status report on the review of fourth national communications and preparations for the review of fifth national communications Background: The COP, by its decision 7/CP.11, requested the secretariat to organize centralized reviews of fourth national communications, submitted in accordance with decision 4/CP.8, and to conduct an in-country, in-depth review of the communications for those Parties that request one. In May 2009, the secretariat coordinated centralized reviews of 11 national communications, which concludes the review of all submitted fourth national communications. The report on the status of submission and review of fourth national communications is contained in document FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.9. The COP, by its decision 10/CP.13, requested Annex I Parties to submit to the secretariat a fifth national communication by 1 January 2010 in accordance with Article 12, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the Convention, with a view to submitting the sixth national communication four years after this date. Each fifth national communication will be subject to an in-depth review in accordance with decisions 2/CP.1, 6/CP.3 and 11/CP.4. This includes in-depth reviews of each fifth national communication submitted by Annex I Parties and compilation and synthesis by the secretariat of information contained in the fifth national communications for consideration by the COP, and of supplementary information under Article 7, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol for consideration by the CMP. The COP, by the same decision, agreed to consider the date of submission of sixth national communications of Annex I Parties at its fifteenth session, at the latest. Action: The SBI will be invited to take note of the report on the status of submission and review of fourth national communications mentioned below. The SBI will also be invited to prepare a draft decision on the compilation and synthesis of fifth national communications and the date of submission of sixth national communications by Annex I Parties for adoption by the COP at its fifteenth session. The SBI will be further invited to prepare a draft decision on the compilation and synthesis of supplementary information under Article 7, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol, contained in fifth national communications, for adoption by the CMP at its fifth session. FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.9 Status of submission and review of fourth national communications and of reports demonstrating progress. Note by the secretariat National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Provision of financial and technical support Background: In accordance with decision 10/CP.2, paragraph 1 (b), the secretariat is requested to make available to the SBI, at each of its sessions, details of the financial support made available to Parties not included in Annex I of the Convention (non-Annex I Parties) by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) for the preparation of their national communications. The SBI, at its thirtieth session, invited the GEF to continue to provide information on its activities relating to the preparation of national communications by non-Annex I Parties, including information on the dates of approval of funding and disbursement of funds. This information will be presented to the SBI at its thirty-first session. The SBI also reiterated the request to the GEF made by the COP in its decisions 7/CP.13 and 4/CP.14 to assist, as appropriate, non-Annex I Parties in formulating and developing project proposals identified in their national communications. The SBI invited the GEF to report on such project proposals to the COP at its fifteenth session. Action: The SBI will be invited to consider the information provided by the GEF, contained in the documents below, and to make recommendations thereon. FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.11 Information on financial support provided by the Global Environment Facility for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Note by the secretariat FCCC/CP/2009/9 Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties. Note by the secretariat Information contained in national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Background: At SBI 24, Australia, on behalf of the Umbrella Group, the European Community and its member States, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, and Switzerland, proposed that, in accordance with the requirements of Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Convention, the SBI should consider the information communicated by non-Annex I Parties in all of their national communications, including their second and, where appropriate, subsequent national communications. Action: The SBI will be invited to provide guidance on how to further develop the process for considering information contained in national communications from non-Annex I Parties, in accordance with the requirements of Article 10, paragraph 2, of the Convention. Further implementation of Article 12, paragraph 5, of the Convention Background: The COP, by its decision 8/CP.11, decided to discuss the further implementation of Article 12, paragraph 5, of the Convention at its fifteenth session. Action: The SBI will be invited to undertake deliberations on the further implementation of Article 12, paragraph 5, of the Convention. Financial mechanism of the Convention Fourth review of the financial mechanism Background: The COP, by its decision 3/CP.14, decided that the fourth review of the financial mechanism shall be conducted on the basis of the guidelines contained in the annex to decision 3/CP.4 and in the annex to decision 6/CP.13. It requested the SBI to recommend, in accordance with decision 2/CP.12, a draft decision on the review for adoption by the COP at its fifteenth session. The SBI considered this request at its thirtieth session but was unable to finalize its deliberations. It decided to continue its consideration of this matter at its thirty-first session on the basis of draft text contained in annex I to the report of the SBI at its thirtieth session. At the same session, the SBI invited Parties to submit to the secretariat their views on the operation of funds under the GEF as an operating entity of the financial mechanism, as well as the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) and the Least Developed Countries Fund, for compilation into a miscellaneous document to inform the fourth review of the financial mechanism. These submissions are compiled in document FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.10. Action: The SBI will be invited to continue its deliberations on this matter with a view to recommending a draft decision for adoption by the COP at its fifteenth session. FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.10 The operation of funds under the Global Environment Facility as an operating entity of the financial mechanism, as well as the Special Climate Change Fund and the Least Developed Countries Fund. Submissions from Parties Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties and guidance to the Global Environment Facility Background: The COP, by its decision 4/CP.14, requested the GEF to make available in its regular reports to the COP information in response to the guidance the COP had provided to the GEF. In particular, it requested the GEF to provide information relating to the co-financing of projects and funding for projects identified in the national communications of non-Annex I Parties. By the same decision, the COP requested the GEF to address issues relating to allocation of, and access to, GEF resources and to ensure that adequate resources are made available to support the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties and the implementation of capacity-building. It further requested the GEF to work with its implementing agencies to continue to simplify their procedures and improve effectiveness and efficiency in processing project funding. Action: The SBI will be invited to consider the annual report of the GEF below with a view to recommending a draft decision for adoption by the COP at its fifteenth session. Assessment of the Special Climate Change Fund Background: The COP, by its decision 1/CP.12, decided to assess, at its fifteenth session, the status of implementation of paragraph 2 (a - e) of that decision, with a view to considering further guidance on how the SCCF shall support concrete implementation projects relating to response measures, in accordance with paragraphs 22 - 29 of decision 5/CP.7. In this context, the SBI, at its thirtieth session, invited Parties to submit to the secretariat their views and recommendations on the aforementioned assessment. These views and recommendations are compiled in document FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.9. Action: The SBI will be invited to prepare a draft decision on this sub-item for adoption by the COP at its fifteenth session. FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.9 The assessment of the implementation of paragraph 2 (a - e) of decision 1/CP.12 (guidance for the operation of the Special Climate Change Fund). Submissions from Parties Matters relating to Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention Progress on the implementation of decision 1/CP.10 Background: The SBI, at its thirtieth session, noted the views of Parties on the status of implementation of Article 4, paragraph 8, of the Convention and decisions 5/CP.7 and 1/CP.10 and acknowledged that further work is needed on this matter. At the same session, the SBI requested its Chair to prepare a draft decision on further actions, based on the draft text prepared by the chair of the contact group on this matter at SBI 29, the Chair's summary of the round table held at SBI 29, submissions from Parties and relevant organizations, documents referred to in annex III to the report of the SBI on its twenty-eight session, and further submissions as mentioned in paragraph 34 below. The SBI invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 28 September 2009, their views on possible further actions on this matter. These submissions are compiled in document FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.11. Action: The SBI will be invited to consider the draft decision text prepared by its Chair mentioned in paragraph 33 above, with a view to recommending a draft decision for adoption by the COP at its sixteenth session. FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.11 Possible further action on the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 8, of the Convention and decisions 5/CP.7 and 1/CP.10. Submissions from Parties and relevant organizations Matters relating to the least developed countries Background: The COP, by its decision 8/CP.13, extended the mandate of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG) under the terms of reference adopted by decision 29/CP.7. In accordance with its mandate, the LEG is scheduled to conduct its sixteenth meeting in Bangkok, Thailand, from 24 to 26 September 2009. At this meeting, the LEG will take stock of its work programme for 2008 - 2010 and plan specific activities for the rest of 2009 and 2010, taking into account further guidance provided on the work programme of the LEG at SBI 29 and SBI 30, as well as the decision 5/CP.14 and the conclusions of the SBI at its twenty-ninth session on the Least Developed Countries Fund. Action: The SBI will be invited to consider the report of the LEG below and provide guidance thereon. FCCC/SBI/2009/13 Report on the sixteenth meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group. Note by the secretariat Development and transfer of technologies Background: The COP, by its decision 3/CP.13, agreed to reconstitute the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (EGTT) for a further five years with the terms of reference contained in annex II to that decision. The SBI and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA), at their twenty-eighth sessions, endorsed a two-year rolling programme of work of the EGTT (2008 - 2009) as specified in its terms of reference. The EGTT will propose its next two-year rolling programme of work for endorsement by the SBI and the SBSTA at their thirty-first sessions, in line with the terms of reference contained in annex II to decision 3/CP.13. The programme of work of the EGTT for 2010 - 2011 is contained in document FCCC/SB/2009/INF.6. At the same session, the COP requested the EGTT to make available a draft report with a set of performance indicators to the SBI and the SBSTA for consideration at their thirtieth sessions, in order to make its final report available to the COP at its fifteenth session. The SBI and the SBSTA, at their thirtieth sessions, noted that the final report of the EGTT on performance indicators would be made available for their consideration at their thirty-first sessions, and that the report will contain a set of indicators that could be used by the SBI as one of the tools to conduct the review and assessment of the effectiveness of the implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 1(c) and 5, of the Convention, and to regularly monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of the technology transfer framework, as requested by decision 4/CP.13. The final report of the EGTT on performance indicators is contained in document FCCC/SB/2009/4 and Summary. The COP, by its decision 2/CP.14, welcomed the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer proposed by the GEF. It requested the GEF to provide interim reports to the SBI at its thirtieth and thirty-first sessions on the progress made in carrying out the strategic programme, with a view to assessing its progress and future direction in order to help inform Parties in their consideration of long-term needs for implementation of the programme. At its thirtieth session, the SBI requested the GEF to expedite its work in carrying out the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer, particularly in providing financial support for developing country Parties in conducting and updating their technology needs assessments and in acting on the results. The second interim report of the GEF is contained in document FCCC/SBI/2009/14. Action: The SBI will be invited to: Endorse the two-year rolling programme of work of the EGTT for 2010 - 2011 and to provide further guidance to the EGTT on its future work; Consider the final report on performance indicators of the EGTT and determine any appropriate action arising from it; Consider the interim report of the GEF and determine any further actions arising from it. FCCC/SB/2009/INF.6 Report of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer for 2009. Note by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer FCCC/SB/2009/4 Performance indicators to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of the technology transfer framework. Final report by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer FCCC/SB/2009/4/Summary Performance indicators to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of the technology transfer framework. Final report by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer. Summary FCCC/SBI/2009/14 Second interim report of the Global Environment Facility on the progress made in carrying out the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer. Note by the secretariat Capacity-building under the Convention Background: The COP, by its decision 2/CP.10, decided to initiate a second comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries adopted under decision 2/CP.7 at the twenty-eighth session of the SBI with a view to completing it at the fifteenth session of the COP. The COP, by its decision 6/CP.14, requested the SBI to prepare, at its thirtieth session, in accordance with the terms of reference for the second comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework, a draft decision on the outcome of this review for adoption by the COP at its fifteenth session. By the same decision, the COP decided to take into account, in the second comprehensive review, recommendations made by the SBI at its thirtieth session on further steps to regularly monitor and evaluate capacity-building activities undertaken pursuant to decisions 2/CP.7 and 4/CP.12. The SBI, at its thirtieth session, considered this item on the basis of reports prepared by the secretariat in response to requests from the SBI at its twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth sessions and other documents containing information and views submitted by Parties, intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The SBI was unable to finalize its deliberations and decided to continue consideration of matters under this item at its thirty-first session. The COP, by its decision 4/CP.12: Invited Parties to submit annually information on activities undertaken to implement decisions 2/CP.7 and 2/CP.10, including elements such as needs and gaps, experiences and lessons learned; Requested the secretariat to produce an annual synthesis report in accordance with decision 2/CP.7, paragraph 9, drawing upon submissions from Parties and information contained in national adaptation programmes of action, technology needs assessments and national capacity self-assessments; Requested the GEF to provide an annual report on its progress in support of the implementation of the capacity-building framework in its reports to the COP. Action: The SBI will be invited to continue its deliberations on this matter, taking into account the documents referred to in paragraph 46 above and listed below, with a view to recommending a draft decision on the outcome of the second comprehensive review of the capacity-building framework for adoption by the COP at its fifteenth session. FCCC/SBI/2009/4 Analysis of progress made in, and the effectiveness of, the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries in support of the second comprehensive review of the capacity-building framework. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/5 Synthesis of experiences and lessons learned in the use of performance indicators for monitoring and evaluating capacity-building at the national and global levels. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.1 Information on experiences and lessons learned in the use of performance indicators for monitoring and evaluating capacity-building at the national and global levels. Submissions from Parties and intergovernmental organizations FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.2 Additional or updated information and views relevant to the completion of the second comprehensive review of the capacity-building framework. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBI/2009/10 Synthesis report on the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.8 Activities to implement the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under decision 2/CP.7. Submissions from Parties and relevant organizations Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol Background: The COP, by its decision 2/CP.10, decided to initiate a second comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework at the twenty-eighth session of the SBI with a view to completing it at the fifteenth session of the COP. The CMP, by its decision 6/CMP.4: Acknowledged that the comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework under the Convention is also applicable for capacity-building relating to the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol; Requested the SBI to prepare, at its thirtieth session, in accordance with the terms of reference for the second comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework, a draft decision on the outcome of this review for adoption by the CMP at its fifth session; Decided to take into account, in the second comprehensive review, recommendations made by the SBI at its thirtieth session on further steps to regularly monitor and evaluate capacity-building activities undertaken pursuant to decisions 2/CP.7, 29/CMP.1 and 6/CMP.2. The SBI, at its thirtieth session, considered this item on the basis of reports prepared by the secretariat in response to requests from the SBI at its twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth sessions and other documents containing information and views submitted by Parties, IGOs and NGOs. The SBI was unable to finalize its deliberations and decided to continue consideration of matters under this item at its thirty-first session. The CMP, by its decision 6/CMP.2: Invited Parties to submit annually information on activities undertaken to implement decision 29/CMP.1; Invited relevant multilateral and bilateral agencies and the private sector to provide annual reports on their support of the implementation of capacity-building activities undertaken pursuant to decision 29/CMP.1, in accordance with national priorities and with the knowledge of relevant national authorities; Requested the secretariat to produce a synthesis report based on the annual submission of information, as well as information on activities of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism (CDM) relating to regional distribution of CDM project activities and related capacity-building. Action: The SBI will be invited to continue its deliberations on this issue, taking into account the documents referred to in paragraph 51 above and listed below, with a view to recommending a draft decision on the outcome of the second comprehensive review of the capacity-building framework for adoption by the CMP at its fifth session. Reporting and review of information submitted by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol Background: The CMP, by its decision 22/CMP.1, decided that each review prior to the first commitment period (known as the initial review) shall be initiated upon receipt of the report under the Kyoto Protocol submitted by Annex I Parties in accordance with decision 13/CMP.1 (known as the initial report). The CMP also decided that this review shall be completed within 12 months of its initiation and that a report shall be forwarded expeditiously to the CMP and the Compliance Committee. As at 31 August 2009, 39 Annex I Parties had submitted their initial reports. Expert review teams coordinated by the secretariat have conducted 38 initial reviews. The report on the status of submission of the initial reports and the review thereof, including publication dates of the reports and the dates of their submission to the CMP and the Compliance Committee, is contained in document FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.8. The CMP, by its decision 15/CMP.1, decided that each Annex I Party, bearing in mind Article 7, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol and the needs of the review under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol, shall start reporting the information under Article 7, paragraph 1, of the Kyoto Protocol with the inventory submission due under the Convention for the first year of the commitment period after the Protocol has entered into force for that Party, but may start reporting this information from the year following the submission of the initial report on a voluntary basis. The CMP also decided, by its decision 22/CMP.1, to start the annual review in the year following the submission of the initial report for those Annex I Parties that started reporting information under Article 7, paragraph 1, on a voluntary basis earlier than required under Article 7, paragraph 3. Document FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.8 contains information on the status of submission, on a voluntary basis, of the annual information required under Article 7, paragraph 1, and its review, including information on GHG inventories of Annex I Parties that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol. Action: The SBI will be invited to take note of the information contained in document FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.8. FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.8 Status of submission and review of the initial reports submitted in accordance with decision 13/CMP.1 and the annual information required under Article 7 of the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol Background: The SBI, at its thirtieth session, considered this agenda item with the SBSTA agenda item "Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol" in a joint contact group. At the same session, the SBI and the SBSTA agreed to continue discussing these matters in a joint contact group at their thirty-first sessions, based on the draft text annexed to their respective reports. Action: The SBI will be invited to consider these matters with a view to agreeing on further action. Report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol Background: The COP, by its decision 16/CP.10, requested the administrator of the international transaction log (ITL) to report annually to the CMP on organizational arrangements, activities and resource requirements and to make any necessary recommendations to enhance the operation of registry systems. The CMP, by its decision 12/CMP.1, requested the SBI to consider, at its future sessions, annual reports of the administrator of the ITL, with a view to requesting the CMP to provide guidance, as necessary, in relation to the operation of registry systems. The CMP, at its fourth session, requested the administrator of the ITL to compile sufficient information on transactions in the ITL and provide it in its annual reports for 2009 and 2010. The CMP also requested the ITL administrator to report on the activities planned for the future and the related resource requirements with a view to ensuring that adequate means are available to perform these activities. Action: The SBI will be invited to take note of the information contained in the report of the administrator of the ITL for 2009 mentioned below. FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/19 Annual report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol Background: The CMP, by its decision 13/CMP.1, requested the secretariat to publish the annual compilation and accounting reports after completion of the initial review under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol and resolution of any question of implementation relating to adjustments under Article 5, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol, and to forward such reports to the CMP, the Compliance Committee and each Party concerned. As at 31 August 2009, the initial review had been completed for 37 Annex I Parties included in Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol (Annex B Parties). At the time when this document was prepared, the initial review by the expert review team for Croatia was completed and forwarded to the Compliance Committee with questions of implementation. Belarus has submitted its initial report but the review of the report has not been initiated, because the amendment to include Belarus in Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol with a quantified emission reduction commitment of 92 per cent has not yet entered into force. The annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol therefore contains information for only 37 Annex B Parties. The documents below contain final values for some of the initial accounting parameters recorded in the compilation and accounting database after completion of the initial review under the Kyoto Protocol. They also contain provisional information on: (1) total GHG emissions from the sources listed in Annex A to the Kyoto Protocol reported voluntarily for 2007; (2) total net anthropogenic emissions and removals of GHGs pursuant to decision 16/CMP.1 reported voluntarily for 2007; and (3) transactions and holdings of Kyoto Protocol units for the first year of the commitment period (2008). Action: The SBI will be invited to take note of the information contained in the documents below. FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/15 Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/15/Add.1 Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol. Addendum. Compilation and accounting information by Party. Note by the secretariat Administrative, financial and institutional matters Budget performance for the biennium 2008 - 2009 Background: A performance report on income and expenditure for the first three quarters of the biennium has been prepared to inform Parties of income received, expenditure incurred and results achieved as at 30 June 2009. This report is contained in document FCCC/SBI/2009/11. Information on the latest status of contributions by Parties, as at 15 November 2009, is contained in document FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.10. Action: The SBI will be invited to take note of the information presented in the documents and any additional relevant oral information provided by the Executive Secretary, and decide on actions that may need to be included in draft decisions on administrative and financial matters to be recommended for adoption by the COP at its fifteenth session and by the CMP at its fifth session. FCCC/SBI/2009/11 Budget performance for the biennium 2008 - 2009 as at 30 June 2009. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.10 Status of contributions as at 15 November 2009. Note by the secretariat Continuing review of the functions and operations of the secretariat Background: The SBI, at its twenty-first session, decided to review the functions and operations of the secretariat under this sub-item annually. Action: The SBI will be invited to take note of some relevant points covered in document FCCC/SBI/2009/11 on the budget performance of the secretariat, including programme delivery and other administrative issues prepared under agenda item 14 (a) and to provide guidance accordingly. Privileges and immunities for individuals serving on constituted bodies established under the Kyoto Protocol Background: The SBI, at its thirtieth session, took note of the submissions from Parties made on privileges and immunities for individuals serving on constituted bodies established under the Kyoto Protocol. The SBI also took note of the draft treaty arrangements developed by the contact group, as contained in annex V to the report of the SBI on its thirtieth session. The SBI decided to continue the consideration of this sub-item at its thirty-first session, in accordance with rule 16 of the draft rules of procedure being applied. Action: The SBI will be invited to continue its consideration of this sub-item. Other matters Any other matters arising during the session will be taken up under this item. Report on the session Background: A draft report on the work of the session will be prepared for adoption by the SBI at the end of the session. Action: The SBI will be invited to adopt the draft report and authorize the Rapporteur to complete the report after the session, under the guidance of the Chair and with the assistance of the secretariat. Documents before the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its thirty-first session Documents prepared for the session FCCC/SBI/2009/9 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2009/10 Synthesis report on the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/11 Budget performance for the biennium 2008 - 2009 as at 30 June 2009. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBI/2009/12 National greenhouse gas inventory data for the period 1990 - 2007. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/13 Report on the sixteenth meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/14 Second interim report of the Global Environment Facility on the progress made in carrying out the Poznan strategic programme on technology transfer. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.8 Status of submission and review of the initial reports submitted in accordance with decision 13/CMP.1 and the annual information required under Article 7 of the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.9 Status of submission and review of fourth national communications and of reports demonstrating progress. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.10 Status of contributions as at 15 November 2009. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/INF.11 Information on financial support provided by the Global Environment Facility for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.8 Activities to implement the framework for capacity-building in developing countries under decision 2/CP.7. Submissions from Parties and relevant organizations FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.9 The assessment of the implementation of paragraph 2 (a - e) of decision 1/CP.12 (guidance for the operation of the Special Climate Change Fund). Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.10 The operation of funds under the Global Environment Facility as an operating entity of the financial mechanism, as well as the Special Climate Change Fund and the Least Developed Countries Fund. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.11 Possible further action on the implementation of Article 4, paragraph 8, of the Convention and decisions 5/CP.7 and 1/CP.10. Submissions from Parties and relevant organizations FCCC/SB/2009/4 Performance indicators to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of the technology transfer framework. Final report by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer FCCC/SB/2009/4/Summary Performance indicators to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation of the technology transfer framework. Final report by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer. Summary FCCC/SB/2009/INF.6 Report of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer for 2009. Note by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer Other documents before the session FCCC/CP/2009/9 Report of the Global Environment Facility to the Conference of the Parties. Note by the secretariat FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/15 Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/15/Add.1 Annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol. Addendum. Compilation and accounting information by Party. Note by the secretariat FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/19 Annual report of the administrator of the international transaction log under the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/4 Analysis of progress made in, and the effectiveness of, the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries in support of the second comprehensive review of the capacity-building framework. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/5 Synthesis of experiences and lessons learned in the use of performance indicators for monitoring and evaluating capacity-building at the national and global levels. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.1 Information on experiences and lessons learned in the use of performance indicators for monitoring and evaluating capacity-building at the national and global levels. Submissions from Parties and intergovernmental organizations FCCC/SBI/2009/MISC.2 Additional or updated information and views relevant to the completion of the second comprehensive review of the capacity-building framework. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBI/2009/8 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its thirtieth session, held in Bonn from 1 to 10 June 2009 FCCC/SBI/2008/19 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on its twenty-ninth session, held in Poznan, from 1 to 10 December 2008 FCCC/SB/2007/INF.2 Relationship of various provisions of the Mauritius Strategy to the work of the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat 