%%%DESERTIFICATION|PROGRAMME PLANNING|

UNITED NATIONS Convention to Combat Desertification Distr. ICCD/COP(9)/CST/2 23 June 2009 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES Committee on Science and Technology Ninth session Buenos Aires, 22 - 25 September 2009 Item 3 (a) of the provisional agenda Documentation on reshaping the operation of the Committee on Science and Technology in line with the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008 - 2018) Reshaping the operation of the Committee on Science and Technology in line with the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008 - 2018) Note by the secretariat Recognizing the need to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of the Committee on Science and Technology (CST), the Conference of the Parties (COP), in decision 13/COP.8, called for reshaping the operation of the CST in line with the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (The Strategy). The COP decided that each future ordinary session of the CST should be organized in a predominantly scientific and technical conference-style format by the CST Bureau, in consultation with a lead institution/consortium, which is qualified in and has expertise in the relevant thematic topic selected by the COP. Against this background, the CST Bureau in collaboration with the Dryland Science for Development (DSD) consortium has organized the UNCCD 1st Scientific Conference. This will be open to registered participants in their individual capacity, and participants accredited by the COP. The priority theme to be addressed will be, as per decision 18/COP.8, "Bio-physical and socio-economic monitoring and assessment of desertification and land degradation, to support decision-making in land and water management". Three facets of the topic have been identified: (a) integrated methods for monitoring and assessment of desertification/land degradation processes and drivers; (b) monitoring and assessing land rehabilitation and sustainable land management; and (c) the impacts of economic and social drivers and knowledge management on monitoring and evaluation of desertification/land degradation. Three working groups have been formed by the DSD Consortium to address these topics and prepare written analyses and an overall synthesis. Additional mechanisms have been put in place to ensure the effective participation of the scientific community, including a review of the white papers through an e-dialogue in the preparatory process and a competitive poster session side event during the conference. Both are aimed at creating the opportunity for interested scientists to participate in the conference. The present document, with its addenda, addresses the requests of the COP as outlined above. The addenda are as follows: Document ICCD/COP(9)/CST/2/Add.1 will contain the report of the UNCCD 1st Scientific Conference. This report will be issued during the conference. Document ICCD/COP(9)/CST/2/Add.2 describes the process undertaken by the CST Bureau to organize the UNCCD 1st Scientific Conference in collaboration with the DSD consortium. 7. During the conference, the white papers and the overall synthesis will be discussed and draft recommendations prepared for consideration at the CST ordinary session and at the COP. 