%%%DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Convention to Combat Desertification Distr. GENERAL ICCD/CST(S-1)/5 22 January 2009 Original: ENGLISH COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY Report of the Committee on Science and Technology on its first special session, held in Istanbul from 3 to 6 November 2008 CONTENTS Paragraphs Page I. Opening OF THE SESSION 1 - 7 3 A. Welcoming ceremony 1 - 5 3 B. Continuation of the session 6 - 7 3 II. ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS 8 - 15 3 A. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work 8 - 10 3 B. Attendance 11 - 14 4 C. Documentation 15 6 III. REPORTS ON AGENDA ITEMS 2 TO 5 16 - 29 6 A. Work of the Bureau of the Committee on Science and Technology during the 2008 intersessional period 17 6 B. Progress on the preparation of the ninth session of the Committee on Science and Technology in a scientific and technical conference-style format 18 - 21 6 C. Consideration of the draft multi-year (four-year) work plan and of the costed draft two-year work programme for the Committee on Science and Technology 22 - 28 7 D. Consideration of advice on how best to measure progress on strategic objectives 1, 2 and 3 of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention 29 7 IV. ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 30 8 Annexes: I. Organization of work 9 II. Documents before the Committee on Science and Technology at its first special session 11 A. Welcoming ceremony 1. On 3 November 2008, the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Environment and Forestry of Turkey, Mr. Hasan Z. Sarikaya, opened the joint meeting of the seventh session of the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC 7) and the first special session of the Committee on Science and Technology (CST S-1) and delivered a statement on behalf of the President of Turkey, Mr. Abdullah Gül, and the Prime Minister of Turkey, Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. 2. The Minister of Environment and Forestry, Mr. Veysel Eroğlu, also addressed the meeting. 3. Statements were also made by the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) and the Managing Director of the Global Mechanism. 4. At the same meeting, a statement was made by Mr. Jose Luis Herranz, Director-General of the Ministry of the Rural, Marine and Natural Environment of Spain, on behalf of Ms. Elena Espinosa, President of the Conference of the Parties to the UNCCD. 5. Statements were also made by the Chairperson of the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC), Mr. Israel Torres (Panama), and the Chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology (CST), Mr. William D. Dar (Philippines). B. Continuation of the session 6. The first special session of the Committee on Science and Technology (CST) was held in Istanbul Turkey, on 5 and 6 November 2008. 7. The Chairperson of the CST, Mr. William D. Dar (Philippines) opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. II. Organizational matters A. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work 8. At its first meeting, on 5 November 2008, the CST considered a note by the UNCCD secretariat containing the provisional agenda and annotations (ICCD/CST(S-1)/1 and ICCD/CST(S-1)/1/Corr.1). 9. At the same meeting, the agenda, as corrected, was adopted as follows: 1. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work. 2. Functioning of the Committee on Science and Technology: Work of the Bureau of the Committee on Science and Technology during the 2008 intersessional period. 3. Reshaping the operation of the Committee on Science and Technology in line with the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Intersessional Working Group 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008 - 2018): Progress on the preparation of the ninth session of the Committee on Science and Technology in a scientific and technical conference-style format. 4. The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology: (a) Consideration of the document on the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology; (b) Consideration of the draft multi-year (four-year) work plan for the Committee on Science and Technology; (c) Consideration of the costed draft two-year work programme for the Committee on Science and Technology; (d) Elements for provision of advice on how best to measure progress on strategic objectives 1, 2 and 3 of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention. 5. Other matters. 6. Adoption of the report of the Committee on Science and Technology. 10. At the same meeting, the Committee approved its organization of work as annexed to the provisional agenda (see annex I to this report). B. Attendance 11. The representatives of the following 145 Parties to the UNCCD attended the first special session of the CST: Afghanistan Algeria Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Czech Republic Democratic People's Republic of Korea Democratic Republic of the Congo Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Ethiopia European Community Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Haiti Honduras Hungary India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kenya Kiribati Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Madagascar Malawi Mali Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Niger Nigeria Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Republic of Tanzania United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe 12. The session was also attended by observers from one other country and one organization. 13 The following United Nations organizations, offices and specialized agencies were represented: Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) United Nations University (UNU) World Bank World Meteorological Organization (WMO). 14. Fourteen intergovernmental and 49 civil society organizations were also represented (see ICCD/CRIC(7)/INF.2-ICCD/CST(S-1)/INF.1). C. Documentation 15. The documents submitted for the consideration of the CRIC are listed in annex II. III. Reports on agenda items 2 to 5 16. The conclusions and recommendations listed in this report are a summary compilation of ideas, suggestions and proposals offered by various delegations during CST S-1. A. Work of the Bureau of the Committee on Science and Technology during the 2008 intersessional period 17. The increase in the work of the CST Bureau was acknowledged, as well as the need to give to the Bureau the facilities necessary for it to undertake its work. B. Progress on preparation of the ninth session of the Committee on Science and Technology in a scientific and technical conference-style format 18. The ninth session of the Committee on Science and Technology (CST 9) scientific conference should be built on a solid scientific basis in terms of content and participation. For this purpose, the conference should be open to the whole scientific community. The issue of the participation of civil society and of the relevant private sectors was also raised. The importance was underlined of using website and other relevant technology to disseminate the information relevant to the Conference and its output. 19. Transparency and geographical balance in the selection of expertise and participants is needed, in particular for the working groups of the Drylands Science for Development (DSD) consortium selected to assist the CST Bureau in organizing CST 9 in a predominantly scientific and technical conference-style format. 20. The Scientific Policy Dialogue (SPD) targeting the international community should be postponed in order to be organized back to back with CST 9. 21. The date and venue of CST 9 are crucial to ensure early preparation and high attendance on the part of the scientific community. C. Consideration of the draft multi-year (four-year) work plan and of the costed draft two-year work programme for the Committee on Science and Technology 22. The recommendations and conclusions of CST S-1 on the four-year work plan and the two-year work programme of the CST were agreed upon in-session through an oral report which was further transmitted by the CST chairperson to CRIC 7 for harmonization and to ensure coherence with the CRIC and secretariat work programmes. 23. The CST work plan and programme are coherent and translate the orientations of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (The Strategy) into concrete outcomes and activities. 24. Regarding the current two-year work plan and related activities planned in 2009, the following priorities were identified: the selection of a minimum set of impact indicators for measuring progress on strategic objectives 1, 2 and 3, the organization of CST 9 scientific conference, the involvement of the science and technology correspondents in the activities of the CST bureau, and the organization of the SPD back to back with CST 9. 25. The role of the science and technology correspondents, and their involvement in the preparatory activities for CST 9, need to be clarified. 26. With reference to the next four-year plan 2010 - 2013, it is recommended that the priorities among the expected accomplishments should be clearly identified by the CST through its Bureau for consideration by CST 9. The related activities could be merged into work packages and a detailed budget should be provided. According to the priorities established by the CST in its four-year work plan, the number of performance indicators should be decreased taking into account the matter of quality. 27. The 2010 - 2011 work programmes of the secretariat and of the CST should be carefully reviewed, taking into account the need to avoid overlap and ensure coherence. 28. The provision of adequate resources for the Bureau is crucial in order to ensure efficient functioning in the implementation of the CST work plan and programme. D. Consideration of advice on how best to measure progress on strategic objectives 1, 2 and 3 of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention 29. The conclusions and recommendations on this subject from CST S-1 are contained in the document ICCD/CST(S-1)/5/Add.1 which was adopted in session. This document was presented to CRIC 7 by the CST chairperson. IV. Adoption of the report of the Committee on Science and Technology 30. At its fourth meeting, on 7 November 2008, the CST considered the draft report of its first special session (ICCD/CST(S-1)/L.1). Also at the same meeting, at the proposal of the Chairperson, the Committee authorized the Rapporteur to complete the report of the session, with the assistance of the secretariat. Annex I Organization of work Monday, 3 November 2008 10 a.m. - 1 p.m. 3 p.m. - 6 p.m. Joint opening of the first special session of the Committee on Science and Technology and of the seventh session of the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention Regional consultations of affected country Parties of the Convention's regional implementation annexes Tuesday, 4 November 2008 (continued) Wednesday, 5 November 2008 Continuation of the first special session of the Committee on Science and Technology Introductory Statement by the Chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology Adoption of the agenda and organization of work (ICCD/CST(S-1)/1) Functioning of the Committee on Science and Technology: Consideration of the report on the work of the Bureau of the Committee on Science and Technology (ICCD/CST(S-1)/2) Reshaping the operation of the Committee on Science and Technology in line with the recommendations of the Intergovernmental Intersessional Working Group 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention Consideration of the report on progress in preparation of the ninth session of the Committee on Science and Technology in a scientific and technical conference-style format (ICCD/CST(S-1)/3) The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology Consideration of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology. (ICCD/CST(S-1)/4) Consideration of the draft multi-year (four-year) work plan for the Committee on Science and Technology (ICCD/CST(S-1)/4/Add.1) The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology (continued) Consideration of the costed draft two-year work programme for the Committee on Science and Technology (ICCD/CST(S-1)/4/Add.2) Thursday, 6 November 2008 Elements for provision of advice on how best to measure progress on Strategic Objectives 1, 2 and 3 of The Strategy (ICCD/CST(S-1)/4/Add.3) Elements for provision of advice on how best to measure progress on strategic objectives 1, 2 and 3 of The Strategy (ICCD/CST(S-1)/4/Add.3) (continued) Adoption of the report of the Committee Closure of the session Documents before the Committee on Science and Technology at its first special session Document symbol Title ICCD/CST(S-1)/1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the secretariat ICCD/CST(S-1)/1/Corr.1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the secretariat. Corrigendum ICCD/CST(S-1)/2 Report on the work of the Bureau of the Committee on Science and Technology. Note by the secretariat ICCD/CST(S-1)/3 Report on progress with the preparation of the ninth session of the Committee on Science and Technology in a scientific and technical conference-style format. Note by the secretariat ICCD/CST(S-1)/4 The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology. Note by the secretariat ICCD/CST(S-1)/4/Add.1 The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology. Note by the secretariat. Addendum. Consideration of the draft multi-year work plan for the Committee on Science and Technology (2008 - 2011) ICCD/CST(S-1)/4/Add.2 The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology. Note by the secretariat. Addendum. Consideration of the costed draft two-year work programme for the Committee on Science and Technology (2008 - 2009) ICCD/CST(S-1)/4/Add.3 The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology. Note by the secretariat. Addendum. Advice on how best to measure progress on strategic objectives 1, 2 and 3 of the strategic plan ICCD/CST(S-1)/4/Add.3/ Corr.1 [English and French only] The 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention - Committee on Science and Technology. Note by the secretariat. Addendum. Advice on how best to measure progress on strategic objectives 1, 2 and 3 of the strategic plan. Corrigendum 