%%%NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|NUCLEAR WEAPONS USE|NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|MIDDLE EAST|

Third session New York, 4-15 May 2009 Eleven benchmarks for global nuclear disarmament Working paper submitted by Japan I. Introduction 1. Japan has consistently been playing a leading role in the efforts to achieve a peaceful and safe world free of nuclear weapons, and thus would like to contribute to further strengthening the current momentum towards that goal. The international community should put forward realistic and concrete steps for nuclear disarmament that will maintain international security and stability both in the process leading to the goal of elimination of nuclear weapons and when the goal has been reached. 2. Besides the existing nuclear arsenals that should be significantly reduced by all five nuclear-weapon States that are signatories to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and States that have yet to accede to the Treaty and that hold nuclear weapons as mentioned in paragraph 5 below, there are pressing issues, and Japan has the following views on such issues. (a) The nuclear programmes of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea pose a serious threat to the international community. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea should take concrete actions to fully implement the obligations stipulated in relevant Security Council resolutions and agreements reached at the six-party talks. (b) The Islamic Republic of Iran needs to clear the concerns of the international community about the nature of its nuclear programme, including activities related to uranium enrichment. (c) International cooperation needs to be strengthened to secure vulnerable nuclear and radiological materials around the world, which otherwise might fall into the hands of terrorists. 3. The international community should also continue to seek accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty by all States that have yet to do so. Establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East should be an integral part of efforts to bring peace and security to this unstable region. II. Key benchmarks for global nuclear disarmament 4. Japan's Foreign Minister, Hirofumi Nakasone, presented the following 11 key benchmarks for global nuclear disarmament towards a world free of nuclear weapons on 27 April 2009. They cover three basic areas: (1) steps by all States that hold nuclear weapons; (2) steps by the entire international community; and (3) steps to support States promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Japan hopes that these benchmarks will facilitate agreement on recommendations at the third session of the Preparatory Committee and will contribute to the success of the 2010 Review Conference. Steps by all States that hold nuclear weapons 5. Under the first basic area, all States holding nuclear weapons should take concrete measures to significantly reduce their nuclear arsenals. (a) The launching of negotiations on a new nuclear reductions treaty by the United States of America and the Russian Federation has added to the momentum and has set the stage for future efforts towards global nuclear disarmament. Deeper cuts in their nuclear arsenals in a transparent manner and nurturing mutual confidence on missile defence in Europe will revitalize nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. (Benchmark 1) (b) All the other States that hold nuclear weapons should contribute to the momentum by also undertaking nuclear reductions in a transparent manner. They should refrain from any build-up of their nuclear arsenals that is contrary to the disarmament efforts by the United States and the Russian Federation. Disarmament steps by China, in particular, are key to making the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world more realistic than ever. Furthermore, it is important that the nuclear disarmament efforts made by the United Kingdom and France over the past several years are further enhanced. (Benchmark 2) (c) Nurturing a "culture of disclosure" among all the States that possess nuclear weapons is imperative in order to enhance greater mutual confidence for deeper cuts. Japan proposed practical transparency measures to be taken by all States holding nuclear weapons in its working paper submitted in 2008 (see NPT/CONF.2010/PC.II/WP.10). In particular, the information to be disclosed includes "aggregate number of nuclear warheads and delivery systems and/or those deployed", "extent of reduction in nuclear stockpiles" and "amount of fissile material declared as excess to and removed from nuclear explosive purposes or national security requirements, and plans for its disposition". Such information should be disclosed sufficiently and on a regular basis. (Benchmark 3) (d) Japan also stresses the importance of the principle of irreversibility for nuclear disarmament, as agreed to as one of the practical steps at the 2000 Review Conference. This principle should be reaffirmed by all States holding nuclear weapons. Exemplary measures on irreversibility include "dismantling nuclear warheads and delivery systems", "dismantling nuclear testing sites" and "shutting down and dismantling facilities for the production of fissile material for explosive purposes" (see NPT/CONF.2010/PC.II/WP.10). (Benchmark 4) (e) More accurate verification will be required as disarmament advances. Studies on the verification of nuclear warhead dismantlement such as the initiative of the United Kingdom and Norway are welcomed. (Benchmark 5) Steps by the entire international community 6. The second basic area consists of measures to be taken by the entire international community, namely multilateral measures. In order to realize a world free of nuclear weapons, it is necessary that, while all States holding nuclear weapons engage in nuclear disarmament, the entire international community adopts and complies with universal norms for disarmament and non-proliferation. (a) The testing of nuclear weapons must be banned. In addition to the moratorium on nuclear testing by those States that have declared one, the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty should be promoted, in particular through the ratifications by States that have not yet done so, in particular the United States, China and the three States not signatories to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. (Benchmark 6) (b) The production of fissile material for weapons purposes must be ceased. This will quantitatively restrict the development of nuclear weapons capabilities. Negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty should be commenced immediately. Pending the creation of such a treaty, declarations of a moratorium on the production of fissile materials by all the States that possess nuclear weapons would improve the atmosphere of negotiations. (Benchmark 7) (c) The development of missile capabilities, combined with nuclear capabilities, is the source of tension and mistrust in various regions. In order to stop the missile development race, Japan supports the proposal to globalize the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty. Higher priority needs to be accorded to the consideration of this issue. (Benchmark 8) Steps to support States promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy 7. In recent years, an increasing number of countries have shown interest in introducing or expanding nuclear power generation from the viewpoint of energy security and the fight against global warming. The third basic area is for the international community to adopt measures to meet such needs of countries promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the following ways. (a) Acknowledging the needs of those States promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy, Japan advocates that it should be the common interest for the international community to assist countries concerned in introducing nuclear power generation in a manner consistent with the principles of nuclear nonproliferation/safeguards, security against terrorism, and safety (3S). Japan has been supporting human resource development and capacity-building, in particular in Asian countries newly introducing nuclear plants. Japan, in cooperation with IAEA, plans to host an international conference in Tokyo late in 2009 on nuclear security related to Asian countries, particularly those introducing nuclear power plants. This will be the second such conference, after the one in 2006, also in Tokyo, whose outcome was highly appreciated. (Benchmark 9) (b) Japan believes that it is important to enhance transparency over the nuclear activities of individual countries by ensuring that all countries promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy implement the highest level of the IAEA safeguards, specifically, the Non-Proliferation Treaty Comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and the Model Additional Protocol, and Japan has been actively working towards their universalization. (Benchmark 10) (c) The threat of nuclear terrorism needs to be countered. To prevent nuclear terrorism, it is imperative to strengthen the security and management of not only nuclear and radiological materials in nuclear power plants and related facilities but also the control of all nuclear and radioactive materials. Japan supports the proposal made by the President of the United States to hold a "global summit on nuclear security" in 2010. (Benchmark 11) 