%%%ASSASSINATION|INTERNAL SECURITY|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|GUINEA-BISSAU|CONSULTATIONS|

Letter dated 3 March 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council On behalf of the presidency of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, I should be grateful if you would circulate the statement of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries on Guinea-Bissau, enclosed herewith (see annex), as a document of the Security Council of the United Nations. The statement was approved by the Permanent Consultation Committee of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, during an extraordinary meeting held in Lisbon on 2 March 2009. (Signed) José Filipe Moraes Cabral Ambassador Statement of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries on Guinea-Bissau 2 March 2009 1. The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) expresses its deep regrets for the decease of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, General João Bernardo Vieira, and presents its condolences to His Excellency the President of the National Assembly and to the people of Guinea-Bissau. 2. CPLP strongly condemns the attacks that resulted in the death, in Bissau, of the President of the Republic, General João Bernardo Vieira, and of the Chief of Staff, General Batista Tagmé Na Waié. 3. CPLP calls on all institutional and political parties to respect the constitutional order and the normal functioning of the democratically elected institutions. 4. CPLP expresses its solidarity with the people of Guinea-Bissau and welcomes the peaceful and calm manner in which the people has been reacting to the events in the country. 5. CPLP reiterates its willingness to pursue, together with the democratically elected Government of Guinea-Bissau, all endeavours leading to peace, to the consolidation of democracy and to the social and economic development of the country. 6. CPLP would like to remind all the responsible entities in Guinea-Bissau of the importance of guaranteeing political, military and social stability, allowing for the continuation of the dialogue with the partners for development, in order to ensure that the reform programmes necessary to the modernization and progress of the country will be carried out. 7. CPLP underlines that the CPLP programme to support stability in Guinea-Bissau, adopted on 25 November 2008, based on three pillars, namely (1) firm and efficient combat against drug trafficking; (2) reform of the security sector; (3) ,,mobilization of the international resources for the development of Guinea-Bissau, requires, as indispensable conditions for its implementation, the political stability and the normal functioning of all institutions. This will be the only way to effectively mobilize the main international partners for the effective development of Guinea-Bissau. 8. In this context, CPLP has decided to send, in the next few days, a political mission to Bissau, for consultations with the Guinea-Bissau institutions in order to promote internal dialogue. 9. CPLP further reiterates its commitment to continue its actions and initiatives, in close coordination with the relevant international and regional organizations, in particular with the United Nations, the European Union and ECOWAS, to ensure that the best use will be made of all available means and resources, in a complementary manner. 