%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|PEACEBUILDING|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA SITUATION|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|

Letter dated 1 July 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council With reference to Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008), I have the honour to convey the attached letter, dated 25 June 2009, which I received from Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, transmitting the eighteenth quarterly report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). The report covers the period from 1 March to 31 May 2009 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) Ban Ki-moon Letter dated 25 June 2009 from the Secretary-General and High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008), I attach the eighteenth quarterly report on the activities of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR). The report covers the period from 1 March to 31 May 2009. I would be grateful if you would transmit this report to the President of the Security Council. (Signed) Javier Solana Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative of the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on the activities of the European Union military mission (EUFOR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina I. Introduction 1. The present report covers the period 1 March to 31 May 2009. 2. The Security Council, in its resolutions 1575 (2004), 1639 (2005), 1722 (2006), 1785 (2007) and 1845 (2008), requested Member States, acting through or in cooperation with the European Union, to report to the Council on the activities of the European Union military mission (EUFOR), through the appropriate channels and at least at three monthly intervals. This document is the eighteenth such report. II. Political background 3. At the end of March, the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the first ever constitutional change to the Constitution of the country, giving the Brcko District access to the national constitutional court. This was one of the five objectives set by the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. 4. Regarding State property, which is another objective for the closure of the Office of the High Representative, the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina established a working group in April to determine an inventory of State property. The working group started work in May and has a deadline for completing its task by 30 September. 5. On 19 May, the United States Vice-President Joseph Biden and I visited Bosnia and Herzegovina. Vice-President Biden gave a speech to the Parliamentary Assembly in which he expressed the support of the United States for the EuroAtlantic integration process. We also met with the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and a number of other political leaders and officials. The visit demonstrated the coherence of the European Union-United States approach towards Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as concern about the current political situation in the country. 6. On 14 May, the Republika Srpska National Assembly (RSNA) adopted conclusions on the alleged transfer of competences from the entities to the State. These conclusions challenged the State's competences in a number of areas and also sought to make any future transfer of competences more complicated. The High Representative has written to the Speaker of RSNA requesting that the Assembly revoke its conclusions by 11 June, thus nullifying the 14 May conclusions before they enter into force. 7. On 26 May, the Party for Democratic Action (SDA) Congress re-elected Sulejman Tihic as party president. III. Security situation and EUFOR activities 8. The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained calm and stable throughout the reporting period. Although nationalistic rhetoric continued, it had no impact on the safe and secure environment. The economic downturn has affected Bosnia and Herzegovina and has led to strikes during the reporting period, none of which have impacted the overall security situation. Any security challenges that arose were professionally and capably handled by the local police, although EUFOR continued to monitor the security situation. 9. The force of some 2,200 troops is concentrated in Sarajevo, with liaison and observation teams deployed throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. EUFOR continues to conduct operations in line with its mandate: providing deterrence; ensuring continued compliance in relation to the responsibilities specified in the General Framework Agreement for Peace, annexes 1a and 2; and contributing to the maintenance of the safe and secure environment. EUFOR also continues to support the national law enforcement agencies in fighting organized crime in close cooperation with the European Union Police Mission; and the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the search for persons indicted for war crimes. 10. During the reporting period, EUFOR, in response to requests from the International Tribunal, and with the support of NATO and local police, carried out search operations against support networks for persons indicted for war crimes. 11. There was limited progress during the reporting period in the area of joint military affairs. EUFOR and the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to conduct joint inspections of the latter's ammunition and weapon storage sites; and EUFOR continued to monitor, mentor and advise the Armed Forces in order to enhance the self-sustainability of the latter's capabilities. The management of the ammunition and weapon storage sites was reinforced by the establishment of a new electronic management system. EUFOR also continued to assist and support the Armed Forces with planning for the disposal of surplus arms and ammunition. The Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina disposal plan awaits approval by the Presidency, pending political agreement on State property. EUFOR has made the necessary technical preparations on civilian movement control (control of the movement of weapons and ammunition by Bosnia and Herzegovina contractors), and is ready to hand over responsibility to the national authorities once they have adopted the necessary legislation. The draft Law on the Civilian Movement Control was formally rejected by the Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 12. During the reporting period, EUFOR and the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to conduct combined training in line with the 2009 EUFOR training calendar. The Armed Forces participated in tactical exercises up to company level as well as in staff exercises. 13. On 18 May, the Council of the European Union approved, for planning purposes, the concept for a possible evolution of Operation ALTHEA towards a nonexecutive capacity-building and training operation. The Council reconfirmed that it would keep this planning work under regular review so that a decision on the future of the operation could be taken once the necessary conditions had been met. The Council reiterated that approval of the concept did not prejudge a political decision on the possible evolution of the operation, which would need to take political developments, including the future role of the European Union Special Representative, into account. IV. Outlook 14. The security situation is expected to remain stable despite the prospects of continuing political tension. 