%%%NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|

Letter dated 19 September 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit to you the attached written statement for the Security Council summit in connection with nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, to be held on Thursday, 24 September 2009, at 9.15 a.m. in the Security Council Chamber (see annex). I would be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Gary Quinlan International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament The International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament was launched in September 2008 as a joint initiative of the Australian and Japanese Governments. The Commission aims to reinvigorate the global effort to curb the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to secure further advances in nuclear disarmament. Australia welcomes the Security Council's initiative to hold a special summit on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament and believes the Commission is uniquely placed to help build a global consensus ahead of the May 2010 Review Conference of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The Commission's report will be issued in early 2010 and its recommendations will outline disarmament steps all the way to the abolition of nuclear weapons, and the extension of global non-proliferation norms to non-NPT states. The report will emphasize the three pillars of the NPT as mutually dependent; its phased methodology is a pragmatic approach to eliminating nuclear threats. The Commission will be seeking to define a "nuclear-threat minimization point" (vantage point) from which progress towards zero might be achievable, including radically reduced arsenals and lengthened decision times for deployed weapons. The Commission's report will also cover the challenges of maintaining international stability while reducing dependence on nuclear deterrence; and the proliferation concerns potentially associated with growing interest worldwide in civil nuclear energy. Although sponsored by the Australian and Japanese Governments and cochaired by former Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans and former Japanese Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi, the Commission is independent. Its Commissioners are from every nuclear-weapon state and every geopolitical region and its approach makes it a unique contribution to the global debate. In bringing together senior political figures, military commanders and technical experts using language that is scientifically and strategically sound, the Commission speaks directly to decision makers around the world in a realistic and hard-headed way. It is inclusive in its proactive efforts to reach out to states not parties to the NPT. Moreover, the Commission is well-placed in its timeliness to capitalize on the consensus that has begun to emerge in the past year that the present situation of thousands of nuclear warheads held by a gradually expanding set of countries is a grave threat to global security and must be addressed. Japan, as the only country to have experienced nuclear attack, and Australia as the custodian of the world's largest reserves of uranium, are two countries uniquely placed to make this important contribution to the global debate on nuclear weapons. Gareth Evans (Australia) (Co-Chair) Yoriko Kawaguchi (Japan) (Co-Chair) William Perry (United States) Turki Al Faisal (Saudi Arabia) Gro Harlem Brundtland (Norway) Frene Noshir Ginwala (South Africa) Francois Heisbourg (France) Jahangir Karamat (Pakistan) Brajesh Mishra (India) Klaus Naumann (Germany) Alexei Arbatov (Russia) Wang Yinfan (China) Shirley Williams (United Kingdom) Wiryono Sastrohandoyo (Indonesia) Ernesto Zedillo (Mexico) 