%%%NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR SAFETY|

Note verbale dated 24 September 2009 from the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council The Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations presents its compliments to the President of the Security Council, and has the honour to forward the enclosed Canadian written statement to the Security Council summit on nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, held at the United Nations on 24 September 2009 (see annex). We request that the present note and its annex be circulated as a document of the Security Council. Annex to the note verbale dated 24 September 2009 from the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council [Original: English and French] Canadian Statement United Nations Security Council Summit on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Nuclear Disarmament 24 September 2009 Canada welcomes the opportunity to provide a written statement for this special session of the United Nations Security Council. This is only the fifth occasion of a Council meeting at the level of heads of government/heads of state. Canada extends its appreciation to the Security Council and the President of the United States for taking the initiative to convene this Summit. The stature of the participants and their active commitment to address the challenges facing the nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament regime underline the international consensus on the gravity of these issues. Draft resolution S/2009/473 is an important step in setting the course for the critical meetings that will follow, notably the Nuclear Security Summit in April 2010 and the Review Conference on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in May 2010. In particular, Canada commends the central place that the resolution accords the NPT. We affirm the necessity of a constructive and balanced review of each of the three pillars. Canada is committed to enhancing the effectiveness of the NPT, including by addressing state withdrawals without delay, the urgency of which is noted in the draft resolution. To this end, Canada has tabled a working paper entitled "Strengthening the Review Process of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" (NPT/CONF.2010/PC.III/WP.8) and hopes this will serve as the basis for future progress. Canada also welcomes the resolution's reflection of the renewed impetus for disarmament. Canada is a long-standing proponent of a world free of nuclear weapons, but we recognize that the path to achieve this goal will not be easy. Nonetheless, there are important signs of progress, including agreement on a Program of Work in the Conference on Disarmament, which Canada hopes will ultimately lead to the negotiation of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty. Canada also advocates additional ratifications of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, especially by the nine remaining states listed in the Treaty's Annex 2 whose ratifications are required to achieve entry into force. With regard to non-proliferation, Canada recognizes the resolution's references to the implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 1540 (2004). A key aspect of this resolution is the opportunity to provide assistance to states which may lack capacity so that they can meet the broad and complex obligations of the resolution. In the context of the comprehensive review of Security Council resolution 1540, which will open later this month, Canada highlights the importance of discussing a full range of options for funding mechanisms to ensure full implementation. Canada strongly supports the resolution's language on the Nuclear Security Summit and the need to prevent nuclear terrorism. In this regard, Canada is committed to working on the critical issue of nuclear security including promoting concrete outcomes at the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, D.C., in April 2010. Canada believes that the Summit will provide an opportunity to strengthen international consensus concerning the need for effective, timely, and comprehensive international responses to prevent nuclear terrorism through improved physical security of nuclear materials and enhanced efforts to detect and deter illicit nuclear trafficking. The Summit will also provide an ideal opportunity to build upon existing collaborative efforts to prevent nuclear terrorism, such as the G8 Global Partnership and Security Council resolution 1540. Canada will continue to contribute actively to the progress of each of the NPT pillars, through the Nuclear Security Summit, the Review Conference and other forums. As the G8 President in 2010, we look forward to strengthening collaboration between that group and the United Nations on shared international peace and security goals. 