%%%PIRACY|ROBBERY|COASTAL AREAS|SOMALIA|MARITIME SAFETY|MARITIME SECURITY|UNITED STATES|

Note verbale dated 14 October 2009 from the United States Mission to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General The United States Mission to the United Nations has the honour to refer to the attached letter (see annex) referencing paragraph 16 of Security Council resolution 1846 (2008) and would be grateful if the present note verbale and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. 11 September 2009 As called for by the Security Council in paragraph 16 of its resolution 1846 (2008), the United States is providing the following information on the progress of actions undertaken by it under the authority provided in paragraph 10 of that resolution in cooperation with the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia in the fight against piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia. We note that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 1816 (2008), the Transitional Federal Government had already provided advance notification to the Secretary-General on 1 September 2008, that the United States is cooperating with the Transitional Federal Government in the fight against piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia. The authorities provided in paragraph 10 of resolution 1846 (2008) and paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 1851 (2008) have proved essential to United States counter-piracy operations in the region and can effectively preclude pirates from using the Somali territorial sea as a safe haven to elude forces operating in the area. In addition, the United States has undertaken actions within the territorial sea of Somalia to ensure that dangerous cargo is not offloaded from pirated ships to individuals or entities for use in a manner that would be destabilizing to the region. In certain circumstances, the United States has also undertaken actions in the territorial sea of Somalia to isolate pirates from resupply. The United States continues to undertake actions within the territorial sea of Somalia to maintain awareness and gather information on pirate activity and movements, as well as to monitor and attend to the safety, well-being and plight of the hostages held on board pirated vessels. In addition to these actions, the United States operates with the Combined Maritime Forces Coalition to patrol the Maritime Security Patrol Area in the Gulf of Aden that was established on 22 August 2008. The patrol area is utilized by Coalition and other forces to effectively deploy available forces in areas of high risk and thereby reduce the response time for attacks on vessels that are using the International Recommended Transit Corridor for the Gulf of Aden. The Coalition will continue these patrols while the international community develops long-term solutions to prevent attacks. The United States continues to work closely with the Transitional Federal Government and interested States to address piracy and armed robbery off the Somalia coast. We are encouraged by the level of interest in combating this problem. Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 1851 (2008), the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia was established on 14 January 2009 to act as a common point of contact between and among States, regional and international organizations on all aspects of combating piracy and armed robbery at sea off Somalia's coast. To date, the Contact Group has increased military-to-military cooperation, in addition to military and civilian cooperation in the area, started to harmonize regional capacity-building efforts and facilitated the enhancement of the shipping industry's self-awareness and other capabilities for vessels passing through the region. In concert with the International Maritime Organization and other Contact Group participants, flag States and those with significant numbers of mariners, as well as those involved in the maritime industry, are being continually encouraged to redouble efforts in training related to the implementation of internationally recognized best management practices to avoid, deter or delay pirate attacks. The Contact Group is also exploring the establishment of an international trust fund to support counter-piracy initiatives. The Contact Group, which met on 10 September 2009, will continue to periodically report on its overall progress to the Security Council. In the light of the ongoing international efforts and coordination to combat piracy, we anticipate the need for a continuation of the authorities that currently enable action against piracy, as reflected in paragraph 10 of resolution 1846 (2008) and paragraph 6 of resolution 1851 (2008). These authorities were specified for a 12-month period, which will end on 2 December 2009. We look forward to continuing our cooperation with all interested parties to secure the safe passage of all marine traffic off the coast of Somalia. (Signed) Susan E. Rice 