%%%SOVEREIGNTY|INTERNAL SECURITY|LEBANON|MILITARY ACTIVITY|ISRAEL|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|REGIONAL SECURITY|BOUNDARIES|ILLICIT ARMS TRAFFICKING|PALESTINE QUESTION|

Identical letters dated 10 November 2009 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter which represents the position of the Syrian Arab Republic on the eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2009/566) (see annex). I would highly appreciate it if the present letter and its annex were circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Bashar Ja'afari Ambassador Permanent Representative [Original: Arabic] On instructions of my Government, I transmit herewith identical letters addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the President of the Security Council conveying the position of the Syrian Arab Republic on the eleventh report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). The Syrian Arab Republic has consistently demonstrated its full respect for Lebanese sovereignty and has unfailingly provided all kinds of support and assistance to the Lebanese Government in securing its authority and sovereignty over all parts of its territory. Syria has also provided substantial support in building the capacities of and training the Lebanese Army to enable it to carry out its national role of defending its territory against Israeli acts of aggression, because Syria believes that the security and stability of Lebanon have significant positive implications for Syria and the entire region. United Nations Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) was adopted on 11 August 2006 with a view to halting Israeli attacks on Lebanon during the July war of that year which were aimed at undermining the stability of Lebanon and destroying its infrastructure, as well as Israeli atrocities that targeted civilians. The Syrian Arab Republic therefore takes exception to the repeated references to the Syrian Arab Republic by the Secretary-General and his Special Representative in the report on implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its position that the issue of the delineation of borders referred to in the report is a bilateral matter that concerns Syria and Lebanon alone. The real obstacle to border delineation is continued Israeli occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan and the Shab`a Farms. If certain parties who claim to be friends of Lebanon are serious about settling this issue, they should bring pressure to bear on Israel to end its occupation of the Shab`a Farms. The report's perfunctory reference to continued Israeli air violations of Lebanese sovereignty and the demand for their immediate cessation is not enough. The Security Council must take practical steps to prohibit and put a stop to those violations in accordance with and in implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). The Syrian Arab Republic finds it odd that the report insists on including Israeli claims about arms smuggling across the Syrian-Lebanese border. Those claims are fabrications that have been disproved by statements from senior Lebanese officials, and reports of the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team have confirmed that no such activities occur. Those fabrications are designed to provide cover for Israel's air, land and sea violations of Lebanese sovereignty. It would have been more appropriate for the report to address and hold Israel accountable for its violations of Lebanese sovereignty, including the employment of large numbers of spies whose aim is to undermine the security and stability of Lebanon. The Palestinian presence in Lebanon is a matter that is governed by the Cairo Agreement signed in 1969 by the Lebanese Republic and the Palestine Liberation Organization. We reiterate that the Palestinian bases on the Syrian-Lebanese border referred to in the report are fully within Lebanese territory. We also reiterate that the primary reason for the Palestinian presence in Lebanon and neighbouring States, including Syria, is Israel's continued occupation of Palestinian territory and its refusal to implement internationally recognized resolutions, including General Assembly resolution 194 (III), which guarantees the right of the refugees to return to the lands from which they were expelled. Damascus, 10 November 2009 (Signed) [Illegible] Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations 