%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|HAITI|HAITI QUESTION|CONFERENCES|RULE OF LAW|HUMAN RIGHTS|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|ELECTIONS|POLICE|JUDICIAL SYSTEM|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|

Statement by the President of the Security Council At the 6101st meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 April 2009, in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The question concerning Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council: "The Security Council welcomes the progress achieved so far in critical areas for the consolidation of Haiti's stability, namely political dialogue, extension of State authority, including border management, strengthening of security, and rule of law and human rights. "The Council notes with concern the challenges in the area of social and economic development, as there has been a marked deterioration in the living standards of the vast majority of Haitians. The Council reiterates the need for security to be accompanied by social and economic development as a way for Haiti to achieve lasting stability. In this regard, the Council calls upon MINUSTAH and the United Nations Country Team to enhance further their coordination with the Government of Haiti and International and regional partners, while bearing in mind the ownership and primary responsibility of the Government and people of Haiti. "The Council recognizes the vital importance of the high-level donor conference on Haiti to be hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington D.C. on 14 April. The Council welcomes the valuable continuing support of donors and urges them to make available the additional technical and financial assistance required by the Government of Haiti to meet the country's immediate humanitarian, early recovery and reconstruction needs, while laying the foundations for sustainable economic and social development. "The Council urges the institutions of Haiti to intensify their efforts to meet the Haitian population's basic needs, and to work together to promote dialogue, the rule of law and good governance. "The Security Council reaffirms the need for the upcoming elections for the renewal of one-third of the Senate to be inclusive, free and fair. The Council calls on all political actors in Haiti to ensure the elections are held in a peaceful atmosphere. "The Security Council reiterates its strong support for MINUSTAH and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for their efforts to improve stability and governance in Haiti, while emphasizing the need for MINUSTAH to continue to adjust to changing circumstances on the ground, and expresses its appreciation to all Member States who support the stabilization process, in particular the troop and police contributing countries." 