%%%INTERNATIONAL TRADE|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|PROGRAMME PLANNING|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|ECONOMIC RESEARCH|PUBLICATIONS|CONFERENCES|

Trade and Development Board Working Party on the Medium-term Plan and the Programme Budget Fifty-first session Geneva, 1 - 5 September 2008 Item 5 of the provisional agenda Progress report on the implementation of sub-theme 4 of the Accra Accord Note by the secretariat Action required Action taken to date Future action Sub-theme 4: Strengthening UNCTAD: enhancing its development role, impact and institutional effectiveness 171. UNCTAD is the focal point within the United Nations for the integrated treatment of trade and development and the interrelated issues of finance, investment, technology and sustainable development. For over 40 years UNCTAD has consistently addressed the concerns of all developing countries in the areas within its mandate and expertise, with the objective of assisting them in successfully integrating into the global economy. In the context of deepening interdependence between all countries, UNCTAD should continue its unique orientation and commitment to development through its three pillars, while remaining responsive and accountable to all member States. Implementation of the Accra Accord has begun in all three pillars of UNCTAD's work (for example, publication of flagship publications, convening of regular and executive sessions of the Board, activities of the inter-agency cluster on trade and productive capacity). The strategic framework for the period 2010 - 2011 has been revised by the Working Party (June 2008). The four-year work programme referred to in paragraph 221 of the Accra Accord has been presented to the Working Party, which requested its implementation. The secretariat reported on activities to the monthly consultations of the President on 15 December. Implementation of the Accra Accord will continue within the framework of the four-year work programme, the strategic framework and the programme budget. Accountability to member States will be assured through their deliberations in the Trade and Development Board, the Working Party, the Commissions, the Bureau of the Board and the Consultations of the President. 173. In all its work UNCTAD will make efforts to mainstream cross-cutting issues of gender equality and the empowerment of women, the promotion of sustainable development and full and productive employment. Gender equality and empowerment of women Publication of "Mainstreaming gender into trade and development strategies in Africa" (June 2008) Publication of "Mainstreaming gender into trade and development strategies: the case of East Africa" (November 2008) Preparation of background documentation for the Expert meeting on mainstreaming gender in trade policy Full and productive employment Least Developed Countries Report 2008 Economic Development in Africa 2008 EMPRETEC programme (ongoing) TrainForTrade programme (ongoing) E-Business programme (ongoing) Sustainable tourism initiatives (ongoing) Research and analysis on temporary movement of natural persons through Mode 4 of GATS and on trade in labour-intensive services Chairmanship of the Global Migration Group (May - December 2008) Sustainable development Energy Creation of the interdivisional Task Force on Energy Preparatory work on a paper on new energy realities: Trade and development strategies Transport Newsletter Environment and climate change Business Linkages Programme: programmes being launched in Argentina, the United Republic of Tanzania, Mozambique and Zambia (2008) Advisory missions to assess the trade and investment opportunities for developing countries from multilateral agreements related inter alia to climate change (ongoing) United Nations Environment Programme - UNCTAD Capacity-Building Task Force on Trade, Environment and Development (ongoing) Consultative Task Force on Environmental Requirements and Market Access for Developing Countries (CTF) (ongoing) Work on organic agriculture (ongoing) Mining Fourth annual meeting of the Intergovernmental Forum on Mining, Minerals, Metals and Sustainable Development Sustainable tourism Interdivisional Task Force on Tourism for Sustainable Development (ongoing) Membership in the United Nations Tourism Exchange Network Work on foreign direct investment (FDI) in tourism and e-tourism (ongoing) Publication of "FDI and Tourism: The Development Dimension - East and Southern Africa" Enabling environment World Investment Report Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) Trade and Development Board - fifty-fifth session Trade and Development Report Inputs to the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus Expert meeting on mainstreaming gender in trade policy Re-establishment of the interdivisional Task Force on Trade and Gender Assessment of the gender impact of trade policy reform in WTO accession processes (2009) Multi-year expert meeting on enterprise development policies and capacity-building in science, technology and innovation (2010)(focus on gender aspects) Trade and Development Report 2010 Multi-year expert meeting on enterprise development policies and capacity-building in science, technology and innovation (STI) (January 2009) Participatory stakeholder consultative process drafting a trade policy framework to help Rwanda better utilize international trade as an engine for economic development, employment creation and poverty reduction (2009) Competition policy reviews to create a culture of fair competition to facilitate private sector development and promote an enabling environment for business and trade development (ongoing) Assessment of the impact of trade policy reform on poverty reduction strategies in countries acceding to the World Trade Organization (WTO) (2009) Economic Development in Africa 2009 (chapter on intraregional migration) Publication of paper on new energy realities Expert meeting on trade and climate change: trade and investment opportunities and challenges under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) (April 2009) Multi-year expert meeting on transport and trade facilitation (February 2009) Participation in the United Nations-wide Green New Deal initiative Least Developed Countries Report 2009 Economic Development in Africa 2009 Policy briefs Investment policy reviews Investment guides Programme on Good Governance in Investment Promotion Trade policy reviews National services policy reviews Competition law policy reviews Science, technology and innovation policy reviews (Mauritania, Ghana, Lesotho) Information and communications technology (ICT) policy review (Egypt) World Summit on the Information Society follow-up MDGs Multi-year expert meeting on services, development and trade: the regulatory and institutional dimension (March 2009) Interregional Debt Management Conference Technical support for the Group of 24 174. In a manner that preserves UNCTAD's mandated role, UNCTAD should strategically position itself by translating into practice the following principal criteria: comparative advantage; differentiation and complementarity; and strategic and catalytic intervention, so as to put the organization's strengths to the best use in achieving development results. The strategic positioning of UNCTAD is being effected through the implementation of the Accra Accord within the framework of the four-year work programme referred to in paragraph 221 of the Accra Accord, the strategic framework and the programme budget. The Working Party revised the UNCTAD section of the strategic framework for the period 2010 - 2011 in June 2008. The Working Party noted the four-year work programme and requested its implementation (September 2008). Member States will work on strategic positioning through the Trade and Development Board, the Working Party, the Commissions, the Bureau of the Board and the Consultations of the President. The Working Party will consider the draft programme budget at its fifty-second session. 175 Since UNCTAD XI, discussions on strengthening the organization have involved a number of processes, namely the mid-term review conducted by the Trade and Development Board in 2006, the work of the Panel of Eminent Persons established by the Secretary-General of UNCTAD in 2005, and the preparations for UNCTAD XII. Descriptive paragraph. 184. Research and analysis is the backbone of UNCTAD's work and it should be development-oriented, independent and grounded in solid evidence. It should also: (a) Provide ahead-of-the-curve and innovative work on trade and development and related issues; (b) Focus on the main challenges that all developing countries and countries with economies in transition face in the areas of trade and development and in the interrelated issues of finance, investment, technology and sustainable development in pursuing the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. In this regard, special attention should be paid to LDCs; (c) Provide practical solutions and policy options and an analytical response to emerging and long-standing development challenges and continue to examine systemic issues related to trade and development and interrelated issues; (d) Identify opportunities within UNCTAD's mandate to help developing countries use globalization as an engine for economic growth and poverty reduction and put forward practical policy recommendations taking into account, inter alia, international, regional and national best practices; (e) Take into account the needs, priorities and experiences of developing countries and their different levels of development; (f) Prepare, on demand and with donor support, country-specific policy reviews and case studies in the areas of investment, trade, services, commodities, science and technology and innovation, and ICTs; and (g) Analyse existing national policies that support development, with a view to identifying various effective policies, including innovative policies, that developing countries in general and LDCs in particular could consider in their national development strategies or incorporate in a concrete plan for the implementation of such policies in cooperation with potential beneficiaries. Research and analysis is embodied in UNCTAD publications and documents. The main publications completed since UNCTAD XII are the Trade and Development Report (on "Commodity prices, capital flows and the financing of investment"), the World Investment Report (on "Transnational Corporations and the Infrastructure Challenge"), the Least Developed Countries Report (on "Growth, Poverty and the Terms of Development Partnership"), and the Economic Development in Africa report (on "Export performance following trade liberalization: some patterns and policy perspectives"). The secretariat also published a study on the food crisis and one on financing for development (TD/B/EX(45)/2). The UNCTAD secretariat Publications Committee prepared a revised list of publications for 2009 and 2010-2011, and the publications were reflected in the four-year work programme. The Working Party examined the draft list of publications for 2010-2011 at an informal meeting on 10 November. The Working Party will examine the list of publications for 2010 - 2011 in the context of its discussion of the programme budget (January 2009). It will also informally discuss the specific list of publications planned for 2009. The Trade and Development Board will discuss publications policy at its fifty-sixth session. Meetings documents will be prepared on the basis of the agendas agreed by member States. 189. The consensus-building pillar of UNCTAD's work is of fundamental importance. The intergovernmental machinery should strive to build consensus on policies that allow developing countries to maximize the opportunities and address the challenges of globalization and economic integration, and that promote an enabling environment for sustained economic growth and sustainable development. It should also provide guidance for the work of the secretariat in all three pillars of UNCTAD. The intergovernmental character of UNCTAD must be preserved, and the coherence between the different levels of the intergovernmental process must be enhanced. The fifty-fifth regular session of the Board focused in particular on the MDGs. It adopted agreed conclusions on the least developed countries and Africa. The forty-fifth executive session of the Board focused on financing for development in the context of the financial crisis. The consultations of the President in October and December focused in particular on financing for development. At its fifty-fifth regular session, the Board adopted agreed conclusions on technical cooperation. The Working Party noted the four-year work programme referred to in paragraph 221 of the Accra Accord and requested its implementation (September 2008). Sessions of the Board, the Commissions and expert meetings will be convened on the basis of agendas, terms of reference and the calendar approved by member States. Intergovernmental meetings will be organized in the manner - and produce the outputs - stipulated in the Accra Accord. 190. The outcomes of intergovernmental meetings should be more action-oriented and should identify practical solutions to trade and development problems. Trade and Development Board, fifty-fifth regular session: agreed conclusions on Africa, LDCs and technical cooperation Trade and Development Board, forty-fifth executive session: President's summary highlighting recommendations put forward by participants Expert meetings in 2009 are expected to result in practical options and actionable outcomes. Commission sessions are expected to result in agreed conclusions from the policy dialogue and recommendations to the secretariat. 