%%%APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS|

Sixty-fourth session Agenda item 112 (a) Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Note by the Secretary-General 1. The Secretary-General has received notification of the resignation of Nagesh Singh (India) from the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, effective 26 February 2010. Accordingly, the General Assembly will be required to appoint, at its current session, a person to fill the vacancy for the remaining period of the term of office of Mr. Singh, which expires on 31 December 2010. 2. The Government of India has nominated Mr. Anupam Ray to fill the vacancy arising from the resignation of Mr. Singh. 3. In a communication dated 4 March 2010, the Secretariat was informed by the Chairman of the Asian Group that the candidature of Mr. Ray had been endorsed by the Group. 4. The candidate's curriculum vitae is annexed to the present note. Anupam Ray (India) Date of birth: 5 June 1967 Sex: Male Relevant work experience March 2008 to date Counsellor, Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations, New York Coordinate all policy and operational matters relating to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Function as the Military Adviser of the Mission and liaise with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support about all aspects of the deployment of more than 8,000 Indian peacekeepers. Earlier served, for a year, as India's delegate to the Executive Boards of the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Children's Fund. Also the delegate for humanitarian affairs and to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. August-December 2007 Counsellor/Special Assistant to the High Commissioner of India, London Assigned to the High Commission of India, London, to manage the campaign of Kamalesh Sharma, then High Commissioner of India in London, for the position of Secretary General of the Commonwealth. The campaign was successful. June-August 2007 and December 2007-February 2008 Visiting Fellow, Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), Washington, D.C. Attached to the South Asia Program of CSIS as a part of the Regional Security Studies Programme of the Asia Foundation. Wrote a paper on radical Islam ideologies in South Asia with particular reference to Bangladesh. January 2006-May 2007 Director, Office of the Minister of State for External Affairs, New Delhi Chief of staff to the Minister of State. Minister's senior diplomatic adviser in which role advised him on policy matters and monitored the execution of directives issued by him. Also served as the principal point of contact between the political environment in which the Minister operates with the professional civil service and the Government bureaucracy. September 2004-January 2006 Deputy Secretary (Sri Lanka), Ministry of External Affairs, New Delhi Principal coordinator for matters related to Sri Lanka in the Foreign Office. The India-Sri Lanka bilateral relationship is crucial for India. Responsible for monitoring developments relating to the ethnic problem in Sri Lanka, assisting in formulating India's response to the situation there and in managing other key aspects of the relationship, including an extensive defence and security cooperation programme. August 2001-August 2004 First Secretary (Political), High Commission of India, Dhaka Responsible for monitoring internal developments in Bangladesh, one of our immediate neighbours, and for liaising with political parties and Government functionaries. Also involved in managing key, sensitive bilateral issues such as border management and security, the sharing of common resources (e.g., river waters) and counter-terrorism. June 1996-February 2001 Second Secretary, Embassy of India, Bonn, Germany Worked as executive assistant to the Ambassador of India in Germany and therefore worked as an economic and commercial officer of the Embassy. Educational qualifications Initial university education was in medical science and qualified as a medical practitioner in 1991. In training as a neurosurgeon before joining the Indian Foreign Service in 1994. After joining the Service, participated in professional training as a civil servant at the National Academy of Administration (four months) and then as a diplomat in the Foreign Service Institute (one year). Masters degree in Public Administration through distance education (2002). Field experience in working as a doctor with non-governmental organizations specializing in community health. Language skills Speak and write English fluently. Also speak and write German (reasonably fluent). Basic understanding of French. Speak and write two Indian languages fluently (Hindi and Bangla). Speak and understand two more (Assamese and Punjabi). Other relevant information Won the Army Chief of Staff award for the best essay on defence and security issues by civil service trainees on the subject of Civil Military Relations (1994). 