%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|MAPS|LEBANON|RESULTS-BASED BUDGETING|STAFFING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|COSTS|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE|

Sixty-fourth session Agenda item 158 (b) Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East: United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon Budget for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Page Mandate and planned results Overall Planning assumptions and mission support initiatives Regional mission cooperation Results-based-budgeting frameworks Financial resources Non-budgeted contributions Efficiency gains Vacancy factors Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment Training Mine detection and mine-clearing services Quick-impact projects Qana incident Analysis of variances Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Summary of follow-up action taken to implement the decisions and requests of the General Assembly in its resolutions 61/276 and 63/298 and requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the General Assembly, and of the United Nations Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services Annexes Definitions Results-based-budgeting frameworks: support component Organization charts Map Summary The present report contains the budget for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011, which amounts to $564,536,900. The budget provides for the deployment of 15,000 military contingent personnel, 404 international staff and 741 national staff, including temporary positions. The total resource requirements for UNIFIL for the financial period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 have been linked to the objective of the Force through a number of results-based budgeting frameworks, organized according to components (operations and support). The human resources of UNIFIL, in terms of the number of personnel, have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of the executive direction and management of the Force, which can be attributed to the Force as a whole. The explanations of variances in resource levels, both human resources and financial resources, have been linked, where applicable, to specific outputs planned by the Force. (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is from 1 July to 30 June.) Category Expenditures Apportionment Cost estimates Variance Amount Percentage Military and police personnel Civilian personnel Operational costs Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total requirements Human resourcesa Military contingents International staff National staffb Temporary positionsc Total Executive direction and management Approved 2009/10 Proposed 2010/11 Components Operations Support Net change a Represents highest level of authorized/proposed strength. b Includes National Officers and national General Service staff. c Funded under general temporary assistance. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are set out in section V of the present report. A. Overall 1. The mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) was established by the Security Council in its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), expanded in its resolution 1701 (2006) and extended in subsequent resolutions of the Council. The most recent extension of the mandate was authorized by the Council in its resolution 1884 (2009), by which the Council extended the mandate until 31 August 2010. 2. The Force is mandated to help the Security Council achieve an overall objective, namely, to restore international peace and security in southern Lebanon. 3. Within this overall objective, UNIFIL will, during the budget period, contribute to a number of expected accomplishments by delivering related key outputs, shown in the frameworks below, which are organized according to components (operations and support) and derived from the mandate of the Force. 4. The expected accomplishments would lead to the fulfilment of the Security Council's objective within the lifetime of the Force and the indicators of achievement show a measurement of progress towards such accomplishments during the budget period. The human resources of UNIFIL, in terms of the number of personnel, have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of the executive direction and management of the Force, which can be attributed to the Force as a whole. Variances in the number of personnel, compared to the 2009/10 budget, have been explained under the respective components. 5. The Security Council, in its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), established a United Nations interim force for southern Lebanon for the purpose of confirming the withdrawal of Israel forces, restoring international peace and security, and assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area. By its resolution 1701 (2006), the Council decided, in order to supplement and enhance the Force in numbers, equipment, mandate and scope of operations, to authorize an increase in the Force strength to a maximum of 15,000 troops. By the same resolution, the Council decided that the mandate of the Force, in addition to carrying out its mandate under resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), would include, inter alia, monitoring the cessation of hostilities, accompanying and supporting the deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces throughout southern Lebanon in parallel with the withdrawal of the Israeli Defense Forces, ensuring respect for the Blue Line and assisting the Lebanese Armed Forces in ensuring that the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River is free of any unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons, taking all necessary action within its capabilities to ensure that its area of operations is not utilized for hostile activities, and assisting the Government of Lebanon, at its request, in securing its borders and other entry points in order to prevent the entry into Lebanon without its consent of arms or related materiel. 6. UNIFIL headquarters, which houses the Offices of the Force Commander, the Director of Mission Support, and the Director of Political and Civil Affairs, is located in Naqoura, some kilometres from the Blue Line and 90 kilometres from Beirut. As the capital, and principal point of entry to Lebanon by sea and air, Beirut hosts a small UNIFIL Office with liaison and political personnel, as well as support personnel who interface with immigration and customs authorities, vendors and United Nations offices in Beirut, primarily to facilitate the flow of personnel and equipment destined for, or repatriating from, UNIFIL. The establishment of a UNIFIL office in Tel Aviv, which is to provide enhanced liaison and coordination functions with the Israel military and other relevant Government authorities, still remains pending the agreement of the Israeli authorities. B. Planning assumptions and mission support initiatives 7. During the 2010/11 period, UNIFIL will continue its regular operational activities of monitoring the cessation of hostilities through regular patrolling activities and, in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, efforts to prevent violations of the Blue Line. UNIFIL will continue assisting the Lebanese Armed Forces to establish an area, between the Blue Line and the Litani river, free of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons other than those of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces. At the same time, the Maritime Task Force will continue to patrol and conduct maritime interdiction operations in the UNIFIL area of maritime operations, in cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy. The Lebanese Armed Forces Navy is expected to increasingly contribute to maritime interdiction operations in preparation for the gradual transfer of Maritime Task Force responsibilities in the future. In undertaking its mandated operational activities, the Force will further enhance its cooperation and coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces as called for in resolution 1884 (2009). In this respect, UNIFIL will also continue initiatives related to building the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces, including, inter alia, in the areas of civilian and military coordination and military community outreach. UNIFIL will also provide engineering support to the Lebanese Armed Forces in building a road parallel to the Blue Line that will increase access by the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL, mobility and the ability to control the Blue Line. UNIFIL will also maintain a high level of liaison and coordination with both the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces, with a view to maintaining the cessation of hostilities and preventing violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). In this connection, UNIFIL would continue to facilitate and lead a tripartite mechanism with representatives from the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces to discuss operational and security matters, including visibly marking the Blue Line. 8. The planning assumptions for the 2010/11 period are based on the operation of the Force at the maintenance level, while augmenting the number of green initiatives. While UNIFIL will continue to expand and enhance its cooperation and coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces on the ground, it is anticipated that the number of troops would remain relatively stable during 2010/11. 9. UNIFIL civilian personnel will continue to provide political advice and guidance to the military component and to conduct an increased number of civil affairs activities, as well as public information and outreach activities. The Force will also continue activities that will assist the Government of Lebanon in extending its authority in southern Lebanon and in increasing the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces to provide security within the UNIFIL area of operations, including (a) enhancing the civilian-military coordination capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces through continuous engagement with the Lebanese Armed Forces, (b) training in the management, mediation and resolution of localized conflict within its area of operations in order to increase the capacity of the Force to design local community projects, with the objective of increasing the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces to deliver conflict sensitivity and preventive/mediation training, (c) the development and application of a series of externally funded surveys to assess the local communities' perception of UNIFIL and to assess their understanding of the mandate of the Force under Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), (d) assistance to local municipalities in the preparation of feasibility studies for donor-funded projects to enhance external funding opportunities and to promote cooperation with external donors, through which the relevant capacities of municipal administrative staff on project formulation and implementation would be increased, and (e) the implementation of environmental initiatives, in cooperation with international and local governmental and non-governmental organizations, as a means of assistance to local municipalities. 10. Facilitating the withdrawal of the Israeli Defense Forces from Ghajar is an important provision of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL may be required to play a role in Ghajar and, on this basis, the 2010/11 budget includes a provision for consultancy services for two police officers for six months each. Any repair or maintenance projects will be of a relatively minor nature and as such, no additional provision is made in the proposed budget. 11. UNIFIL would continue to facilitate and lead the tripartite mechanism with representatives from the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces. Following the withdrawal of the Israeli Defense Forces from Lebanese territory, with the exception of northern Ghajar, the forum would continue to serve as a mechanism for the parties to discuss operational and security matters on a regular basis. UNIFIL will continue to use this forum to increase the level of confidence and trust between the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces to reach security agreements and to prevent any outbreak of hostilities. 12. UNIFIL will continue to seek the establishment of an office in Tel Aviv, as agreed by the Government of Israel. The main focus of the office would be on liaison functions at the strategic (headquarters) level with the Israeli Defense Forces and other Israeli Government authorities. UNIFIL places importance on the role of the office, which would significantly enhance the current level of liaison and would include a strategic-level dialogue with the Israeli Defense Forces and other Israeli authorities. 13. The relations between the local population in southern Lebanon and UNIFIL troops will continue to be of critical importance in the implementation of the mandate. In this connection, UNIFIL public information, civil affairs and outreach components will play an important role in engaging the press and local communities in seeking to ensure their understanding of the mandate of the Force and its daily operational activities. UNIFIL specialized civilian and military personnel would continue to build confidence with the local population through the provision of humanitarian and development-related assistance, as well as support to contingents in reaching out to the local population so as to foster a better understanding by the public of the mandate and activities of the Force through the use of a variety of media tools. 14. In response to a highly volatile environment in which an assessed ongoing terrorist threat against UNIFIL personnel and property exists, the Force will continue to mitigate risks to personnel and property and to focus its capabilities on the Blue Line and on the Litani River in order to further strengthen security control of the area. Regarding security planning, emergency procedures for the use of a new assembly area have been developed and are ready for implementation pending the identification of a suitable site, while a review of the national staff relocation plan, in cooperation with UNIFIL military elements, forms a key element of the most recent security plan update. With the concurrence of the UNIFIL military, each and every United Nations position is considered as a rally point for national staff (and eligible dependants) in the event of a sudden and extreme emergency and an additional nine United Nations positions to be utilized as coordination centres have been identified for the relocation of national staff, which would require some logistical support from the Mission Support Division. In addition, UNIFIL will increase its briefings to international and national staff and their dependants in order to raise the level of awareness with regard to personal security measures and the current emergency procedures. A new security database for national staff has been finalized, which will include the global positioning system plotting each residence. 15. The proposed resources for 2010/11 are based on a similar level of operational demand to that of the 2009/10 period, with some modifications. The Security Council, in paragraph 7 of its resolution 1884 (2009), welcomed the receipt as soon as possible of the conclusions of the review of the operational capacity of UNIFIL, including the force structure, assets and requirements that was to be conducted during the succeeding months in an effort to ensure that the Force's assets and resources are configured most appropriately to fulfil its mandated tasks. In this regard, the Joint Department of Peacekeeping Operations-UNIFIL Technical Review was undertaken and completed in January 2010. 16. Since the expansion of UNIFIL in the 2006/07 period, the functional requirements and reporting lines required to meet the full scope of responsibilities under the support component have been under constant review. On the basis of the current level of troop deployment and operational priorities that are yet to be completed before mission support reaches a plateau in its operational structure, the staffing proposals for the 2010/11 period have been based primarily on the analysis of workload requirements and the corresponding human resource requirements. In most cases, the staffing proposals are associated with the delivery of the same level of services by a lower number of personnel, while in other cases, resource-neutral adjustments are proposed through the redeployment or reassignment of posts from/to sections/units based on the workload requirements of the organizational units to correspond with the increased level of monitoring and compliance while at the same time deriving institutional best practices related to peacekeeping operations. 17. The most significant change in the staffing structure of the Mission Support Division is the proposed dissolution of the Sector Administrative Offices, for which a total of 300 posts (2 international, 1 National Officer and 297 national General Service) were approved for the 2009/10 period. The staffing of the Sector Administrative Offices is primarily composed of national posts for Language Assistants/Interpreters that support the military personnel throughout the area of operations. 18. As a result of the rationalization efforts mentioned above, it is now proposed that 168 posts (Language Assistants) of the 297 national General Service posts be redeployed to the Joint Logistics Operations Centre. The proposal is based on the determination that the geographical scope of the UNIFIL area of operations does not warrant the earmarking of dedicated resources in various areas of the area of operations and that a reasonable response time to all parts of the area of operations can be provided to all parts of the area of operations from a centrally managed pool of resources. The proposed staffing aims to provide improved service to the sectors of the area of operations without the maintenance of a permanent presence in locations outside of Force headquarters. In addition, efforts have been made to streamline support to remote field locations through the creation of mobile support teams in different functional areas to assure a more timely and specialized response without the need to maintain a permanent and generalist presence at any field location. 19. In addition, the staffing proposal for the 2010/11 period includes the redeployment or reassignment of posts to technical support areas as a means of regularizing temporary arrangements that had been made in response to evolving operational requirements. 20. The proposed 2010/11 budget of $564.5 million reflects a decrease of $25.3 million (equivalent to 4.3 per cent) compared with the approved budget of $589.8 million for the 2009/10 period. The decrease is attributable to: (a) reduced requirements under military personnel costs, resulting from the application of a delayed deployment factor of 16 per cent as compared to 15 per cent in the 2009/10 budget; (b) reduced requirements under national staff, which is attributable primarily to the proposed reduction of 92 national posts; (c) reduced requirements under facilities and infrastructure, resulting primarily from the projected completion of major construction projects in the 2009/10 period and from completion of requirements for the acquisition of generators in the 2009/10 period; (d) reduced requirements under ground transportation, which is attributable to the acquisition of fewer vehicles compared to the 2009/10 period; (e) reduced requirements under naval transportation, owing to the reconfiguration of the types of vessels deployed in the Maritime Task Force; and (f) reduced requirements under medical, which is attributable primarily to reduced reimbursements to troop-contributing Governments for self-sustainment. The decrease in resource requirements is offset in part by additional requirements for international staff resulting primarily from the application of a vacancy factor of 15 per cent for the 2010/11 period as compared to 18 per cent in the 2009/10 period and the revision of international salary scales as at 1 January 2010. The proposed budget excludes resource requirements for the Strategic Military Cell, comprising two temporary positions (1 D-2 and 1 General Service) and related non-post resources, as the Cell is to be terminated by 30 June 2010. 21. UNIFIL has agreed to participate in a pilot project aimed at improving the presentation of the results-based budgeting frameworks for the support component. Observations and recommendations are requested from the legislative bodies, in the light of which this presentation format may be reflected in future budget reports. C. Regional mission cooperation 22. UNIFIL remains the designated regional hub for the Conduct and Discipline Team, which covers the Force, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process (UNSCO), the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) and the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy. 23. UNIFIL will continue to maintain close cooperation with other United Nations peacekeeping operations in the region, including UNFICYP, on medical evacuations and other logistics issues, and UNTSO, on the provision of support for infrastructure, office accommodation, communications and information technology equipment and its services and maintenance, medical support, fuel and spare parts for vehicles, emergency rations and water and security to the Observer Group Lebanon. During the 2009/10 period, UNIFIL has been included in the coverage of the Regional Aviation Safety Office in the United Nations Logistics Base. 24. In addition, UNIFIL will continue to maintain close cooperation with the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) on the sharing of regional information on economic and social development, such as cost-of-living surveys, and use of its training facilities. The Force would also maintain close cooperation with the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, which coordinates the work of all United Nations agencies in Lebanon, and provide an interface with the Government of Lebanon on political aspects relevant to Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and other issues and UNIFIL, while collaborating with all concerned parties to mitigate political tensions within Lebanon and along the Blue Line. The Force will provide various administrative services and logistical and technical support to the Office, when UNIFIL resources are available. 25. The Security Information Operations Centre of the United Nations Development Programme in Beirut will continue to provide security information for all United Nations staff operating and/or living in Lebanon, north of the Litani River, and would be responsible for security clearances of UNIFIL staff travelling to Beirut. In case of an emergency, the designated official (United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon) would ensure the evacuation of UNIFIL staff in Beirut and the head of ESCWA would provide administrative support for the evacuation. UNIFIL will have a Field Security Adviser in Beirut who will be in constant contact with the North Litani River Chief Security Adviser and who will represent the UNIFIL Chief Security Officer at the Security Management Team and Security Cell meetings. UNIFIL will provide security support and clearance and evacuation arrangements to staff of United Nations agencies operating within its area of operations. Staff of United Nations agencies based in and operating in the UNIFIL area of operations will be fully integrated into the South Litani River Security Plan and will have full access to the UNIFIL emergency communications system and security services. A UNIFIL Military Liaison Officer and UNIFIL Security Officer will conduct weekly meetings with United Nations agencies operating in southern Lebanon in order to ensure full coordination and cooperation on security issues. 26. UNIFIL will continue to cooperate with and lead regional training efforts through the provision of training support to other peacekeeping missions and United Nations entities within the region. The support to be provided would include the identification of training needs, the development of training proposals, the implementation of training including development, delivery and facilitation of training sessions and the evaluation of training activities. 27. Cooperation among the four established missions in the region has resulted in a robust communications backbone and business continuity plan which would enhance disaster recovery and crisis management, and reduce operational risk. Areas such as minimum operating security standards compliance, support to other regional United Nations agencies and implementing partners, and radio frequency management would benefit from a formalized Middle East regional communications and information technology services structure, which is being proposed for implementation during the 2010/11 period. 28. Significant inroads continue to be made in the area of regional cooperation, particularly in the area of communications and information technology services and training. Cooperation between UNIFIL and information technology offices at United Nations Headquarters has resulted in the proposal to consolidate regional communications and information technology efforts under one umbrella in the 2010/11 period that will enable the coordinated delivery of information and communications technology (ICT) services through regional strategic management, elimination of duplication of effort, creation of economies of scale, and removal of disparity of service across missions. The concept entails the establishment of a post of a Chief of the proposed Regional Information and Communications Technology Services in UNIFIL and the establishment of a Deputy Chief of the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services in UNDOF, who will lead the coordinated delivery of information and communication technology services with improved accountability for their effective regional management. The regionalization initiative is expected to produce tangible financial cost reductions, enable delivery of new types of service by regional gateways and develop regional capacities. D. Results-based-budgeting frameworks 29. In order to facilitate the presentation of proposed changes in human resources, six categories of possible action with respect to staffing have been identified. A definition of the terminology with respect to the six categories is contained in annex I to the present report. 30. Overall mission direction and management are to be provided by the immediate Office of the Head of Mission/Force Commander. International staff staffa United Nations Volunteers USG- ASG D-2- D-1 P-5- P-4 P-3- P-2 Field Service General Subtotal Office of the Head of Mission/Force Commander Approved posts 2009/10 Proposed posts 2010/11 Legal Affairs Section Joint Mission Analysis Centre Tel Aviv Office Strategic Military Cell Approved temporary positionsb 2009/10 Proposed temporary positionsb 2010/11 a Includes National Officers and national General Service staff. b Funded under general temporary assistance. International staff: increase of 2 posts 31. Following the review of the organizational structure of UNIFIL, it is proposed that the existing post of Best Practices Officer (P-4) in the Political Affairs Division be redeployed to the Office of the Force Commander, based on the determination that best practices functions would be more appropriately positioned in the Office of the Force Commander for the provision of guidance on the creation, collection and archival of knowledge across all components of the Force. 32. As Head of Mission, the Force Commander (Assistant Secretary-General) is currently supported by the Deputy Head of Mission/Deputy Force Commander (D2), two international staff (1 P-4 and 1 Field Service) and two national General Service staff, who coordinate support directly related to the activities requiring the personal involvement of the Head of Mission/Force Commander. The Deputy Head of Mission/Force Commander presides over a number of committees, among which include committees for space allocation, vehicle establishment and welfare for which executive decisions on pertinent issues are made and recorded. Taking into account the current workload of the Office, it is proposed that an existing post of Administrative Assistant (Field Service) be redeployed from the Joint Mission Analysis Centre to provide day-to-day administrative support to the Deputy Head of Mission/Deputy Force Commander. As support to the Deputy Head of Mission/ Deputy Force Commander is currently provided through military staff officers who rotate periodically, the proposed redeployment is intended to provide continuity and ensure institutional/organizational knowledge of the functions of the Office and of the Force. International staff: decrease of 1 post National staff: increase of 2 posts 33. The review of the staffing structure of the Joint Mission Analysis Centre has led to the determination that one of the two existing posts of Administrative Assistants (Field Service) would be able to provide sufficient support to the Centre with additional support from military personnel should the need arise. Accordingly, it is proposed that one post of Administrative Assistant (Field Service) be redeployed to the Office of the Force Commander to provide administrative support to the Deputy Force Commander (refer to para. 32 above). 34. Among its mandated activities, the Joint Mission Analysis Centre is tasked to collect, collate and analyse information from a variety of local and international sources relating to the surrounding political, military and security issues on a national basis and across the region. At present, interpretation and translation services are provided on an ad hoc basis. Taking into account the volume of information that requires interpretation/translation on a regular basis, it is proposed that two existing posts of Language Assistants (national General Service) be redeployed from the Sector Administrative Offices to ensure continuity of knowledge of key issues, to facilitate greater rapport with local counterparts and to provide the requisite language support to the Centre. 35. With the termination of the Strategic Military Cell by 30 June 2010, it is proposed that the two temporary positions comprising the position of Director (D-2) and the position of Administrative Assistant (General Service (Other level)) be abolished. Component 1: operations 36. Under the operations component, UNIFIL will continue its regular patrolling and operational activities of monitoring the cessation of hostilities, in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces, to prevent violations of the Blue Line with the aim of further stabilizing the area of operations south of the Litani River. UNIFIL would also continue to assist the Lebanese Armed Forces in ensuring that the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River is free of unauthorized armed personnel, assets or weapons. The Maritime Task Force would continue to patrol and conduct maritime interdiction operations in the area of maritime operations, in cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy. The Force would further intensify and strengthen its cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces, as called for in Security Council resolution 1884 (2009). In addition, UNIFIL would maintain a high level of liaison and coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces, with a view to maintaining the cessation of hostilities and preventing violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). In this connection, UNIFIL would continue to lead and facilitate a tripartite mechanism with representatives of the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces as the central mechanism for liaison and coordination and as a means of addressing operational and security matters, including violations of resolution 1701 (2006). Expected accomplishments Indicators of achievement 1.1 Stable and secure environment in southern Lebanon 1.1.1 Absence of air, sea or ground incursions or firing incidents across the Blue Line 1.1.2 Lebanese Armed Forces deployed throughout the entire area south of the Litani River, including the part of the town of Ghajar north of the Blue Line 1.1.3 Area between the Blue Line and the Litani River is free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons, except for those of the Lebanese Armed Forces and of UNIFIL 1.1.4 Participation by both parties in tripartite meetings and maintenance of liaison and coordination arrangements Outputs :: 1,270,200 mobile patrol person days, to include reserve capacity and a quick reaction capacity for the reconnaissance of areas of tension, reconnoitring and intervention, if required, in crisis situations to support other units (10 troops x 348 patrols x 365 days) :: 545,310 manned observation post person days (7 troops per post x 3 shifts per post x 63 permanent posts x 365 days and 3 troops per post x 57 random/temporary posts x 365 days) :: 500 air patrol hours along the Blue Line :: 2,080 flight hours for investigation of incidents and operational movements for transport of combat assets, reconnaissance, command and control function, liaison and training :: 2,190 naval vessel patrol days to monitor the maritime border of Lebanon, including joint operational exercises with the Lebanese Armed Forces (average of 3 frigates x 365 days; average of 3 patrol vessels x 365 days) :: 2,200 flight hours for maritime interdiction patrols and operational activities inside the area of maritime operations :: Coordinated patrolling activities with the Lebanese Armed Forces, including at least 8 counter rocket-launching operations, 4 foot patrols and 8 co-located checkpoints per day :: Conduct of 150 joint/coordinated exercises, seminars, workshops, lectures and training courses with the land and maritime components of the Lebanese Armed Forces to improve their tactical and operational capabilities and to improve the coordination between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces at operational and tactical levels for enhanced effectiveness of combined operations :: 3 reports of the Secretary-General to the Security Council :: Daily and weekly liaison, communication and exchange of information with both parties on issues requiring immediate attention relating to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) :: Chairing of and provision of secretariat support services for tripartite meetings on a monthly basis and as required :: Provision of secretariat support services for the tripartite subcommittee meetings, including the Blue Line subcommittee, as required, and support on a weekly basis for field work to visibly mark the Blue Line on the ground :: Conduct, on an as-required basis, of strategic dialogue conferences and other high-level meetings with Lebanese Armed Forces officials on the strengthening of UNIFIL-Lebanese Armed Forces liaison, coordinated operational activities, adjustments and training to enhance effectiveness :: Conduct, on an as-required basis, of investigations into alleged violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), and other incidents that risk escalating tensions in the area of operations :: Weekly liaison and coordination meetings with local authorities/community representatives and civic associations/partner organizations on assistance in conflict resolution and confidence-building initiatives, and on progress towards stability at the local level :: Meetings, on a weekly basis and as required, with Lebanese and Israeli authorities, diplomatic representatives and United Nations offices, agencies, funds and programmes on improving the understanding of the mandate, role and activities of UNIFIL :: Briefings to Member States, troop-contributing countries and donor countries, as required, on UNIFIL operational issues :: Daily monitoring and analyses of the media coverage on UNIFIL, daily morning and afternoon news round-ups, daily and weekly summaries of Arabic media, and weekly analyses of media trends pertaining to UNIFIL :: Daily provision of information on UNIFIL to the international and local media, facilitation of access and organization of media visits to UNIFIL activities and operations, regular press releases updating the media on UNIFIL activities, regular photo coverage of UNIFIL activities/events and weekly updates of the UNIFIL website in English and Arabic :: Production and distribution of audio and video materials for television and radio, regular broadcast radio features, as well as a bimonthly magazine in English and Arabic on the activities of UNIFIL and United Nations agencies throughout the area of operations (6 times per year, 120,000 copies) :: Coordination of demining and explosive remnants of war clearance operations with Lebanese authorities, including the Lebanon Mine Action Centre, on mine and cluster-munitions clearance activities within the UNIFIL area of operations :: Assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces and Lebanon Mine Action Centre on the ongoing review of the cluster munitions technical strike data received from the Israeli Defense Forces :: Clearance of mines/unexploded ordnance and the release of 192,000 m2 of land back to the local civilian population 1.2 Normalization of the authority of the Government of Lebanon in southern Lebanon 1.2.1 Enhanced functioning of new local government structures at the municipal levels, as well as civic and religious institutions in southern Lebanon 1.2.2 Increased role of the Government of Lebanon in the provision of public services, including water, sanitation, electricity, health services and education in all communities in southern Lebanon 1.2.3 Prevention, by the Lebanese Armed Forces, of the presence of any authority outside the authority of the Lebanese State 1.2.4 Strengthening of the civilian-military coordination capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces :: Monthly meetings with Lebanese authorities at the central level, including service-related ministries, on the extension of the authority of the Lebanese Government in southern Lebanon :: Daily contacts with local authorities and community leaders on municipal-related issues, confidence-building measures and on the resolution of potential issues of conflict between UNIFIL and the local population :: Advice to local authorities on the development of project proposals for funding by external donors and project management and other initiatives to contribute to the enhancement of their standing among communities in southern Lebanon and advice on the extension of the Government's authority and discharge of local governance responsibilities :: Coordination with and provision of assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces to enhance civilian-military coordination through joint training sessions and workshops on project management, negotiation and mediation skills, conflict resolution and confidence-building :: Advice to and coordination with the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, other United Nations offices, agencies, funds and programmes, diplomatic representatives and non-governmental organizations on the overall situation in southern Lebanon, in particular the security situation in the UNIFIL area of operations :: Weekly meetings with United Nations agencies and international and local non-governmental organizations operating in southern Lebanon on programme coordination, including those related to the environment, elections, strengthening local government capacity, recovery, development and humanitarian assistance in the area of operations :: Implementation of 25 quick-impact projects in support of community social needs, access to basic services, capacity-building and conflict management in southern Lebanon :: Monthly consultations with local authorities, civil society, local women's groups and United Nations agencies and other international partners on gender issues and issues related to the protection of child rights :: Public information campaigns (through leaflets published every quarter in quantities of up to 25,000, the maintenance of an updated website, the issuance of regular press releases, and a bimonthly magazine, regular broadcast radio features, weekly and monthly regular video productions for national and international television broadcast and web streaming) on the mandate and activities of UNIFIL :: Organization of community outreach activities among the local population to promote confidence-building and conflict resolution External factors All parties will remain committed to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL will be accorded full freedom of movement by all parties Table 2 Human resources: component 1, operations I. Military contingents II. Civilian staff staff a United Nations Volunteers USG- ASG Field Service Political Affairs Division Civil Affairs Office Beirut Office Public Information Section Tripartite Coordination Unit Subtotal, civilian staff Total (I-II) International staff: net increase of 1 post 37. Immediately following the adoption of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), a requirement for a Head of Office in Beirut at the D-1 level had been projected on the basis that a large extent of the planning and coordination of procedures and activities between the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL would be undertaken in Beirut where the Lebanese Armed Forces headquarters is located. However, owing to operational exigencies, the command for the UNIFIL area of operations was handed over to the Senior Liaison Officer of Lebanese Armed Forces in the south. As a result, key coordination and planning activities have instead been conducted between Force headquarters in Naqoura and the Lebanese Armed Forces in Tyre, with the UNIFIL Office in Beirut providing the necessary support, particularly for tripartite issues with the Lebanese Armed Forces and other authorities in Beirut. 38. In view of the above, it is now proposed that the existing post of Head of the Beirut Office (D-1) be reassigned to the Political Affairs Division at Force headquarters to act as Deputy Director of the Division, taking into account the increased scope and volume of workload of the Division, the need to oversee the Division for the Director, who is required to attend meetings in Beirut on a frequent basis and the need for a constant presence in Naqoura. It is envisaged that the proposed reassignment would enhance liaison between the civilian and military substantive components of the mission and provide critical input to the increasing number of UNIFIL investigations into incidents in the area of operation. 39. As explained in paragraph 31 above, the existing post of Best Practices Officer (P-4) is proposed for redeployment to the Office of the Force Commander in the light of the overarching scope of the functions of the post which spans across all mission components. 40. A review of the heavy workload related to human resources management, budget and finance and general administrative tasks of the entire Division has resulted in the requirement to strengthen the capacity of the Division to support its administrative tasks. Accordingly, it is proposed that an existing post of Administrative Assistant (Field Service) be redeployed from the Public Information Section to augment the capacity of the Division to provide administrative support in an efficient and timely manner. 41. As reflected in paragraph 38 above, it is proposed that the existing post of the Head of the Beirut Office (D-1) be reassigned to the Political Affairs Division at Force headquarters to act as the Deputy Director of the Division. Consequently, it is also proposed that the existing post of Senior Political Affairs Officer (P-5) in the Beirut Office act as the Head of the Beirut Office. National staff: increase of 1 post 42. Among its mandated activities, the Public Information Section is tasked with collecting, compiling and analysing information from various local and international media sources regarding political developments at the national level and across the region that impact the mandate of the Force. Three military staff officers are currently tasked with coordinating the activities of different UNIFIL components at community-interface points with respect to the impact of their activities on the public's perception of UNIFIL. In this regard, it is proposed that an existing post of Language Assistant (national General Service) in the Sector Administrative Offices be reassigned to the Public Information Section to function as a Public Information Assistant. The proposed national post would ensure that local sensibilities are adequately factored in the regular guidelines issued to UNIFIL components. 43. Based on a review of the staffing structure of the Section, it is also proposed that an existing post of Administrative Assistant (Field Service) be redeployed to the Political Affairs Division, as reflected in paragraph 40 above. Component 2: support 44. During the reporting period, the support component will continue to provide effective and efficient logistical, administrative and security services in support of the implementation of the mandate of the Force through the delivery of related outputs, the implementation of service improvements, as well as the realization of efficiency gains. Support will be provided to the authorized strength of up to 15,000 military contingent personnel as well as to the proposed civilian staffing establishment of 404 international staff (including temporary positions) and 741 national staff. The range of support will comprise all support services, including the implementation of conduct and discipline and HIV/AIDS programmes, personnel administration, health care, information technology and communications, ground transport operations, monitoring and control over the supply of rations, fuel, and general supply items, as well as provide security services mission-wide. 45. UNIFIL has agreed to participate in a pilot project aimed at improving the presentation of the results-based-budgeting frameworks for the support component. Accordingly, the framework below only reflects the indicators of achievement and relevant outputs related to service improvements. The standard support outputs and mission-specific non-standard or specialized outputs are reflected in annex II of the present report. 2.1 Effective and efficient logistical, administrative and security support to the Force 2.1.1 Reduction of major operational shortfalls in provision of language support services from 10 cases per year to 2 cases 2.1.2 Reduction in the number of major vehicle accidents (2008/09: 314; 2009/10: 247; 2010/11: 228) 2.1.3 Full implementation of the Misconduct Database Tracking System, with accurate and up-to-date information on all cases in peacekeeping missions in the Middle East region 2.1.4 Enhanced Zone Warden exercises (minimum of 2 exercises per month in the 2010/11 period) 2.1.5 Increase in the number of Zone Wardens (2009/10: 35 Zone Wardens; 2010/11: 60 Zone Wardens) 2.1.6 Increase in the number of peer educators and Voluntary Counselling Assistants (2009/10: 200; 2010/11: 250) 2.1.7 Increase in the number of multidisciplinary health-care workers (doctors, nurses and laboratory personnel) trained in voluntary counselling and confidential testing protocols and universal safety precautions and guidelines for post-exposure prophylaxis (2009/10: 25; 2010/11: 50) :: Enhancement of language support services, including the introduction of a Force headquarters standby roster to ensure round-the-clock coverage and the centralization of similar language support services to meet operational requirements :: Implementation of a maintenance programme at every 5,000 kilometres of service of the UNIFIL vehicle fleet and of road safety campaigns :: Implementation of a conduct and discipline programme for all military and civilian personnel including training, prevention, monitoring and recommendations on remedial actions where misconduct has occurred :: Provision of security services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week in the area of operations :: 24 hours of close protection to senior UNIFIL staff and visiting high-level officials :: Update of Force-wide security risk assessments according to the Department of Security Services mandatory security documents :: Conduct of a total of 12 information sessions on security awareness and contingency plans for all UNIFIL personnel :: Induction security training and primary fire training/drills for all new staff and residential site surveys for 50 residences :: Conduct of a total of 12 exercises to test the effectiveness of the Security Plan and Zone Warden System :: Maintenance of HIV prevention and education for all UNIFIL personnel, induction training and promotion of safer sex practices :: Development and distribution of 9 types of HIV/AIDS information, education and communication materials to all UNIFIL personnel :: Training of 200 peer educators to increase the coverage and ensure continuity of the peer education programme, including the monitoring and supervision of peer educator sessions to UNIFIL personnel :: Training of additional 50 voluntary counselling and confidential testing counsellors to strengthen and enhance the provision and promotion of ethical and professional voluntary counselling and confidential testing services for all UNIFIL personnel :: Training of 25 multidisciplinary health-care workers (doctors, nurses and laboratory personnel) on voluntary, confidential counselling and testing protocols and universal safety precautions and guidelines for post-exposure prophylaxis Freedom of movement is provided by the Government of Lebanon. Vendors/contractors/suppliers will be able to deliver goods and services, as contracted Table 3 Human resources: component 2, support National staff a Conduct and Discipline Team Approved temporary positions b 2009/10 Proposed temporary positions b 2010/11 Security Section Mission Support Division Office of the Director Administrative Services Integrated Support Services Regional Information and Communications Information Technology Services (formerly Communications and Information Technology Section) Total, Mission Support Division Subtotal, component 2 Total, component 2 International staff: increase of 4 posts 46. The approved staffing structure of the Security Section includes Close Protection Team of nine staff, comprising the Close Protection Team Leader (Field Service) and eight Close Protection Officers (Field Service), that provides close protection services to the Force Commander as well as visiting delegations and senior United Nations officials. The Security Risk Assessment conducted in July 2009 for the Office of the Force Commander took into consideration the current security situation and identified the requirement for a total of 13 Close Protection Officers. The Department of Safety and Security has reviewed and concurred with the recommendations in the Security Risk Assessment, including the need to augment the structure of the Close Protection Team. Based on a review of the staffing structure of the Section, it has been determined that the redeployment of existing security staff to the Close Protection Team is not feasible, taking into account that all staff are fully engaged in their current functions. 47. Based on the above, it is proposed that four additional posts for Close Protection Officers be established through the establishment of one post of Close Protection Officer (P-2), which would also function as the Team Leader of the Close Protection Unit, and through the reassignment of three existing Field Service posts (Fuel Assistant, Quality Assurance Assistant and Asset Management Assistant) from the Supply Section. The Team Leader of the Close Protection Unit would supervise a total of 12 Close Protection Officers, report directly to the Chief Security Officer and liaise on a daily basis with the Office of the Force Commander and military officers who support the Force Commander on matters relating to the close protection of the Force Commander. The incumbents of the four proposed posts would not only ensure that close protection services for the Force Commander are sufficient and conducted in accordance with the latest Security Risk Assessment but would also ensure that visiting VIPs and senior United Nations officials to UNIFIL would also be provided with the appropriate level of protection as stipulated in standard security operational procedures. International staff: net decrease of 10 posts National staff: net decrease of 95 posts 48. Based on the results of a detailed review of the staffing structure and workload requirements of the Mission Support Division, a net decrease of 10 international posts and a net decrease of 95 national posts are proposed, as explained in detail below. 49. Within the Mission Support Division, and in connection with the regionalization initiative in the Middle East, it is proposed that the existing Communications and Information Technology Section be excluded from Integrated Support Services and that the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services be established as a separate organization entity that would report directly to the Director of Mission Support, as presented in detail in paragraphs 88 to 95 below. International staff: net increase of 3 posts National staff: net decrease of 288 posts 50. As explained in detail below, it is proposed that the staffing of the Office of the Director, comprising the immediate Office of the Director, Sector Administrative Offices and the Budget Section, be strengthened by a net increase of three international posts. With the proposed abolishment of the Sector Administrative Offices, it is proposed that the staffing of the Office of the Director be restructured through a net decrease of 288 national General Service posts. 51. The immediate Office of the Director currently has two Aviation Safety Officers (1 P-3 post and 1 military officer). With the inclusion of UNIFIL as part of the coverage of the Regional Aviation Safety Office in the United Nations Logistics Base, it is now proposed that the functional title and functions of the existing post of Aviation Safety Officer (P-3) be changed to an Administrative Officer and that the post be reassigned to the Compliance and Monitoring Unit. The military Aviation Safety Officer, who reports directly to the Director of Mission Support, would work closely with the Regional Aviation Safety Office in the United Nations Logistics Base on the development and maintenance of the UNIFIL aviation safety programme and would participate in the investigation of air incidents for joint reporting to the Regional Aviation Safety Office in the United Nations Logistics Base and to the Aviation Safety Section in the Logistics Support Division at Headquarters. 52. Based on recent experience, the level of oversight of all peacekeeping missions, including UNIFIL, has increased significantly resulting in an increased number of internal and external audit observations, inquiries and investigations. At present, an Administrative Officer in the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services has acted as the Force's focal point for all audit-related functions, an arrangement that can no longer be sustained. Responses to audit observations and recommendations require extensive coordination, detailed review and analyses of responses from various programme managers and consolidation of responses prior to final review by the senior management of the Force. 53. In view of the foregoing, it is proposed that the Compliance and Monitoring Unit be established in the immediate Office of the Director, which would incorporate the existing functions of the Boards of Inquiry as well as the new compliance and monitoring functions which, in addition to the coordination of responses to audit observations, include the development and implementation of risk management procedures. The Unit would have a staffing structure of six posts comprising the proposed establishment of a new post of Senior Administrative Officer (P-4), the reassignment of a total of five posts from other offices to function as Administrative Officers (2 P-3), Administrative Assistants (2 Field Service) and a Team Assistant (national General Service). The post of Senior Administrative Officer (P-4) would be responsible for the oversight and supervision of two distinct functional areas of Boards of Inquiry and Compliance and Monitoring and would be the first point of contact for internal and external auditors and investigators. In addition, the incumbent of the post would also be responsible for supporting the Local Committee on Contracts, the review of responses of programme managers on audit recommendations and the monitoring of the implementation of audit recommendations. Two posts of Administrative Officers (P-3) are proposed for the Unit through the reassignment of the existing post of Aviation Safety Officer (P-3) in the immediate Office of the Director and the reassignment of an existing post of Assets Disposal Officer (P-3) from the General Services Section. The incumbents of the posts would support the Senior Administrative Officer on matters related to internal and external audits and on matters related to the Boards of Inquiry and the Local Committee on Contracts. Two posts of Administrative Assistants (Field Service) are proposed through the reassignment of one post of Assets Management Assistant from the Supply Section and one post of Movement Control Assistant from the Movement Control Section. The incumbents of the post would support the two Administrative Officers in ensuring that existing standards of procedure and related policy documents are up to date and for pre-screening all travel requests for military and civilian personnel as well as related travel claims prior to their certification. The Administrative Assistants would also assist in the preparation of progress reports on all open tasking and for the follow-up of cross-cutting issues that may need to be centrally coordinated. To support the Unit, it is proposed that one post of Team Assistant (national General Service) be established through the reassignment of an existing post from the Sector Administrative Offices. 54. The establishment of an additional new unit called the Mission Support Policy/Planning Unit and Beirut Office with a total of nine staff, comprising one post of Head of the Unit (P-4), one post of Administrative Officer (National Officer) and seven national General Service posts (1 Administrative Assistant, 4 Team Assistants and 2 Messengers/Drivers), is proposed through the redeployment of all of the existing posts from the Sector Administrative Offices to the immediate Office of the Director. The staffing of the Unit will now include the administrative staff in the Beirut Office, which were previously included under the Sector Administrative Offices. The Head of the Unit (P-4) would be responsible for the overall support provided by the Beirut Office to sections based in Naqoura, which are dependent on the Beirut Office for processing matters covered by the Status-of-Forces Agreement. The Unit would also be responsible for the drafting of mission support policy documentation; the management of memorandums of understanding with UNSCO, UNTSO-Observer Group Lebanon, United Nations Mine Action Coordination Centre/United Nations Office of Project Services, Security Information Operations Centre of the United Nations Development Programme and Lebanese Armed Forces; and oversight of regional cooperation, including the exploration of economies of scale for common services required by the missions in the region (UNTSO, UNDOF, UNFICYP and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq). 55. Finally, taking into account the increased workload in the immediate Office of the Director, it is also proposed to reassign one existing post of Warehouse Assistant (Field Service) from the Supply Section to augment the administrative capacity of the immediate Office of the Director of Mission Support. 56. In the Budget Section, the conversion of one post of Budget Assistant from the Field Service category to national General Service level. The Section is based at Force headquarters in Naqoura but provides support to sections at headquarters, in the sectors and in Beirut. Owing to the availability of suitable and qualified national staff, it has been determined that the existing functions of the post could be performed by a national staff. The incumbent of the post would assist in the use of field budget management systems which include extracting information from the Field Personnel Management System, the Sun System, the Integrated Management Information System, the funds monitoring tool, Mercury and Galileo for the preparation of monthly management reports. 57. As indicated in paragraph 17 above, it is proposed that the Sector Administrative Offices be abolished as an organizational unit. Of the total approved staffing of 300 posts for the 2009/10 period, it is now proposed that two international posts (1 P-4 and 1 Field Service) and one National Officer post be redeployed, 221 national General Service posts be reassigned/redeployed to other sections/offices and 76 national General Service posts be abolished. International staff: net increase of 7 posts National staff: net increase of 16 posts 58. Based on the review of the staffing structure of the Mission Support Division, it is proposed that the staffing structure of the Administrative Services be strengthened through a net increase of seven international posts (1 P-4, 2 P-3 and 4 Field Service) and 16 national General Service posts, as explained in detail below. 59. In the Personnel Section, it is proposed that a Workforce Planning and Selection Unit be established in order to centralize the recruitment for international and national posts. These functions are currently distributed based on the category of staff being recruited. UNIFIL has requested additional delegation of authority to recruit up to the D-1 level based on the premise that the capacity of the Section is strengthened. It is proposed that the Unit be staffed by a total of four posts, comprising two Human Resources Officers (1 P-4 and 1 P-3), a Human Resources Assistant (Field Service) and an existing post of Human Resources Assistant (national General Service) from the International or National Staff Unit of the Personnel Section. Three of the four posts would be established through the reassignment of an existing post of Property Control and Inventory Officer (P-4) from the Property Management Section and the reassignment of an existing post of Regional Coordinator (P-3) and an existing post of Billing Assistant (Field Service) from the existing Communications and Information Technology Section. 60. Centralizing recruitment activities would require that the Workforce Planning and Selection Unit be headed by a Human Resources Officer (P-4) who would coordinate with programme managers at various levels and supervise all recruitment activities and have direct communication with senior-level management on issues related to the recruitment of national and international staff. Closer coordination and the co-location of recruitment functions are expected to expedite the recruitment process. In this regard, the Unit would be responsible for the preparation of all vacancy announcements, the review of applications and preparation of shortlists; the organization and conduct of interviews; the review of recommendations on the selection of candidates and staff of the Unit would serve as ex-officio in local appointment and promotion bodies, as per the Force's delegation of authority, and recommendations on changes related to recruitment procedures to client offices. 61. It is also proposed that a Staff Administration Unit be established to augment the capacity of the Personnel Section in the administration of international and national staff entitlements. The Unit would comprise three posts, comprising one new post of Head of the International Staff Unit (P-3) and two Human Resources Assistant (Field Service) through the reassignment of an existing post of a Billing Assistant from the Communications and Information Technology Section and through the internal redeployment of a Human Resources Assistant in charge of national staff entitlements. The Unit would oversee the functions of the staff assigned within the National and International Staff Units and would ensure strict compliance in the administration of entitlements and adherence to established United Nations regulations, rules and procedures. 62. It is also proposed to create a Personnel Records Unit comprising one post of Head of the Unit (P-3), who would be supported by a Human Resources Clerk/Messenger (national General Service). The P-3 post would be established through the reassignment of an existing post of Transport Officer from the Transport Section, while the national General Service post would be established through the reassignment of an existing post of Language Assistant from the Sector Administrative Offices. As UNIFIL headquarters is spread over an area of approximately 4 square kilometres, the Unit would be responsible for ensuring the timely and accurate distribution of personnel records to various offices and for providing messenger services within the Mission Support Division. The Unit would also be responsible for escorting candidates from the main entrance of UNIFIL to the Personnel Section and for accompanying selected candidates for medical examinations on appointment and retirees who visit UNIFIL for issues related to their pension entitlements and after-service medical issues. 63. In line with recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the comprehensive review of the welfare and recreation needs of all categories of peacekeeping personnel (A/62/663), UNIFIL has established a Welfare and Recreation Committee to enhance welfare activities for military and civilian personnel. The current focal point for welfare and recreation is the UNIFIL Staff Counsellor, who has presently no administrative support. In order to improve the welfare of the different categories of mission personnel, it is essential that additional dedicated support is provided to the Staff Counsellor. It is therefore proposed to establish two posts of Welfare Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 National General Service), through the reassignment of an existing post of Information Technology (IT) Assistant (Field Service) from the existing Communications and Information Technology Section and of one existing post of Language Assistant (national General Service) from the Sector Administrative Offices. 64. In the General Services Section, with the establishment of a new catering contract in the 2008/09 period along with the planned UNIFIL PX for the Force in the 2010/11 period, additional capacity would be required to manage and monitor these contracts, particularly the need for closer monitoring and verification for quality assurance. In order to carry out these functions and to comply with related audit recommendations, it is proposed to reassign one post of Telecommunications Assistant (Field Service) from the existing Communications and Information Technology Section and to change its functional title to Quality Assurance Assistant. The Quality Assurance Assistant would conduct on-site inspections, respond to queries of the Contracts Management Section, investigate allegations of contractor's non-performance, prepare detailed performance reports on a regular basis and prepare new scope of works or modification(s) to existing scopes of works. The incumbent of the post would monitor that services provided under various contracts are delivered based on the required specifications as well as provide documentation on the Force's experience on outsourced contracts and related lessons learned to the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. 65. In addition, on the basis of the review of the functional responsibilities of the Mission Support Division, it is proposed that the functions in the Assets Disposal Unit be transferred to the Property Management Section under Integrated Support Services, by which certain synergies in the transfer of functions were identified. As a result, it is proposed that two existing posts of Asset Disposal Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 national General Service) be redeployed to the Property Management Section. Moreover, based on the determination that there is sufficient managerial support in the Property Management Section to oversee the additional responsibilities related to the redeployment of the two aforementioned posts, it is proposed that the existing post of Assets Disposal Officer (P-3) be reassigned to the immediate Office of the Director of Mission Support and that its functional title be changed to Administrative Officer in the Contracts Management Section. 66. In the General Services Section, the Mail and Pouch Unit is currently comprised of only one international staff and two national staff (national General Service). Based on the review of its workload, it has been determined that the existing resources in the Unit do not have the capacity to perform the additional requirements related to the planned centralization of all individual archive systems into one physical area and in one database system. The additional tasks would entail the detailed identification of all archives throughout the Force, the identification of focal points and the conduct and organization of training workshops on archiving techniques. To strengthen the capacity of the Unit, it is proposed to reassign one post of Information Management Assistant (Field Service) from the existing Communications and Information Technology Section and that its functional title be changed to Registry Assistant. 67. Moreover, with the transfer of functional responsibilities from the Department of Field Support to UNIFIL for the travel arrangements of over 200 staff officers of the Force, it has been determined that the Travel Unit of the General Services Section would need to be augmented, as the existing resources of the Unit are fully required in the processing of the travel of civilian personnel as well as arrangements for an average of 70 additional trips related to medical repatriation and compassionate travel. The revised arrangement would require additional coordination between the Military Personnel Travel Cell of the Unit and United Nations Headquarters through the Police Military Staff Travel and Rotation System database. In order to perform the additional functions for the travel of military staff officers, it is proposed that an existing post of Language Assistant (national General Service) be reassigned from Sector Administrative Offices and that its functional title be changed to Travel Assistant. 68. Furthermore, it is proposed that 13 existing posts of Language Assistants (national General Service) be reassigned from the Sector Administrative Offices and that their functional titles be changed to Facilities Management Assistants. Following the award of the contract for garbage collection in the area of operations, and taking into account the magnitude of the expanded headquarters, the additional 13 posts at Force headquarters in Naqoura are needed to provide continuous coverage in the expanded headquarters as office and residential premises are gradually moved from their current locations to the expanded headquarters, which also includes new helipads. The Facilities Management Assistants would perform functions related to janitorial, grounds maintenance and handyman services and participate in the relocation of the office and residential premises from their current locations to the expanded headquarters. 69. Finally, in connection with receiving and inspection functions, it is proposed that an existing post of Language Assistant (national General Service) be reassigned from the Sector Administrative Offices to the General Services Section and that its functional title be changed to Receipt and Inspection Assistant. The requirement for an additional Receipt and Inspection Assistant in the Section stems from the change in the arrangements for the delivery of rations and fuel. While the delivery of rations and fuel was previously centralized to the central warehouse of the Force, the arrangements have been recently revised wherein the rations contractor is now responsible for the delivery of rations to various contingent bases in the area of operations and the fuel vendor is now responsible for the distribution and dispensing of fuel in several fuel stations in the area of operations. Consequently, with the decentralization of the delivery of these commodities, the Receiving and Inspection Unit of the Section would require additional capacity as the existing resources of the Unit cannot absorb the additional functions, which require additional time and travel requirements for the completion of inspections in various locations in the area of operations. International staff: net decrease of 82 posts National staff: net increase of 125 posts 70. In connection with the regionalization initiative in the Middle East, it is proposed that the existing Communications and Information Technology Section be excluded from Integrated Support Services and that the regional Information and Communications Technology Services be established as a separate organizational entity, as explained in paragraphs 88 to 95 below. The proposed exclusion of the existing Section would result in the reduction of a total of 131 posts, comprising 69 international posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 4 P-3 and 62 Field Service) and 62 national General Service posts. 71. In the immediate Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services, it is proposed that an existing post of Supply Assistant (national General Service) be reassigned from the Supply Section to provide general administrative to the Deputy Chief of Integrated Support Services, who currently does not have dedicated administrative support. The incumbent of the post would perform administrative and clerical functions, including receiving and filing correspondence, drafting and proofreading of routine correspondence and reports and note-taking at meetings, as required. In addition the incumbent would be responsible for scheduling appointments, arranging meetings and maintaining an up-to-date filing system. 72. In addition, it is proposed that an existing post of Language Assistant (national General Service) be reassigned from the Sector Administrative Offices to the Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services. The incumbent of the post would perform functions related to the monitoring of all Integrated Support Services accounts in the field and in Headquarters, generating financial reports and undertaking related analyses, liaising with all of the self-accounting units within the Integrated Support Services and collating, coordinating and consolidating data pertaining to Integrated Support Services activities in connection with acquisitions, expenditures, inventory stock analyses, budget submissions in order to assist with strategic planning and early detection of issues that may arise. The incumbent of the post would also liaise with military and other components to provide assistance on requests related to Integrated Support Services. 73. In the Property Management Section, it is proposed that the existing post of Chief of the Property Control and Inventory Unit (P-4) be reassigned to the Workforce Planning and Selection Unit in the Personnel Section. The post of Chief of the Unit had originally been established with the intention of leading all Units related to the management of all United Nations-owned property, namely receiving and inspection, property control and inventory, property disposal and claims. However, based on the review of the functional responsibilities within the Mission Support Division, it has been determined that functions related to receiving and inspection and claims will remain within the General Services Section and as a result, the post of Chief of the Property Control and Inventory Unit was considered redundant. 74. As indicated in paragraph 65 above, it is proposed that two posts of Asset Disposal Assistants (one Field Service and one national General Service) in the Asset Disposal Unit in the General Services Section be transferred to the Property Management Section. The primary rationale for this proposal is that all stages of the write-off process should be handled by a single organizational entity in order to produce synergy and expedite the disposal process, which represents the last stage of the write-off process. The proposal also aims to mitigate risks, in response to previous audit observations regarding delays in the completion of the asset disposal process. In addition, it is proposed that an existing post of Transport Assistant (Field Service) in the Transport Section be reassigned to the Property Management Section and that the functional title be changed to an Assets Disposal Assistant (Field Service) to strengthen the capacity of the Unit to perform asset disposal functions in a timely and efficient manner. 75. Based on a review of its workload, it is proposed that the staffing of the Supply Section be reduced by a total of eight posts (5 Field Service and 3 national General Service) through the reassignment of five posts (Field Service) and the redeployment of one post (national General Service) to other sections/offices as well as the abolishment of two posts (national General Service). The proposed decrease in the number of posts in the Section results from: (a) the establishment of a fuel turnkey contract, in which most of the responsibilities for the delivery of fuel, the operation/maintenance of fuel equipment, the establishment of strategic and operational fuel stocks and the provision of liquefied petroleum gas and petrol and related products are part of fuel contract, which obviates the need for additional staff in the Section. Accordingly, one post of Supply Assistant (Field Service) and one post of Warehouse Assistant (Field Service) would be reassigned to the immediate Office of the Director of Mission Support (refer to paras. 53 and 55 above), while one post of Fuel Assistant (Field Service), one post of Quality Assurance Assistant (Field Service) and one post of Assets Management Assistant (Field Service) would be reassigned to the Security Section (refer to para. 47 above). In addition, it is proposed that one post of Supply Assistant (national General Service) and one post of Assets Management Assistant (national General Service) in the General Supply Unit be abolished, based on a review of the requirements to support the average number of military personnel. Finally, it is also proposed that one post of Supply Assistant (national General Service) be reassigned to the Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services to function as an Administrative Assistant. 76. In the Medical Section, it is proposed that the existing post of Pharmacist be converted from the P-3 level to the National Officer level. Taking into account the availability of well-qualified Lebanese staff, the proposal aims to support national capacity-building and to take advantage of the knowledge of a national incumbent to perform liaison with local hospitals, doctors, and pharmacies in the mission area and to facilitate communications in the local language on instructions pertaining to medications prescribed to patients treated in UNIFIL level-II hospitals from the surrounding communities. In addition, it is proposed that one post of Driver (national General Service) be redeployed from the Transport Section to ensure the provision of a full-time dedicated Ambulance Driver who would be responsible for the transportation of patients to hospitals and for the transportation of blood specimen and the delivery of pharmaceutical and specimen packages and documents. The incumbent would be certified to administer first aid, and would be on standby for medical emergency duties. 77. Based on the assumption that the military component of the Force would remain at its current level, it has been determined that the Movement Control Section would be able to deliver its expected outputs within its current staffing level. Accordingly, it is proposed to reassign one post of Movement Control Assistant (Field Service), which is currently vacant, to the Office of the Director of Mission Support to function as an Administrative Assistant in the new Compliance and Monitoring Unit (refer to para. 53 above). In addition, it is proposed that an existing post of Movement Control Officer (P-4) be converted to the Field Service (Principal) category and its functional title be changed to Movement Control Assistant. The proposal is based on the review which indicates that the functions of the post require personnel with in-depth and hands-on knowledge and field experience. 78. In the Engineering Services Section, the Operations Unit is headed by an Engineer who oversees construction projects and facilities management, including various technical services (power generation, electrical, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), plumbing, carpentry, metal works, masonry and painting). In addition to carrying out in-house technical services and providing support to 64 UNIFIL positions, the Operations Unit also verifies technical aspects of work completed by external contractors as well as monitors that tasks carried out by the self-sustained contingents are aligned with the mission standards and maintenance schedules. Taking into account that environmental issues in the Force had been previously supported on an ad hoc basis, it is proposed that an Environment and Water Sanitation Unit be established, to be headed by a post of Environmental and Water Sanitation Engineer, which would be established through the reassignment of the existing post of Deputy Chief Transport Officer (P-4) from the Transport Section. The incumbent of the post would oversee the control and monitoring of the safe disposal of all solid, liquid and hazardous materials and coordinate with both internal and external partners to align the Force's waste disposal activities. In addition, UNIFIL now maintains 26 waste water treatment plants to support 64 military positions in lieu of its previous reliance on externally controlled water sources. The incumbent of the post would be supported by 19 staff (1 P-3, 3 Field Service, 1 National Officer and 14 national General Service) who would be redeployed from within the other Units of the Engineering Services Section. 79. In addition, it is proposed that a new post of Surveyor (P-2) be established to increase the capacity of the Engineering Services Section to expedite the completion of the marking of the Blue Line and to provide support to the Lebanese Armed Forces on the construction of the road along the Blue Line. 80. Finally, it is proposed that 16 posts performing engineering-related functions (Painters, Masons, Electricians, Welders, Carpenters, Generator Mechanics and Sanitation Technicians) (national General Service) be redeployed from the Sector Administrative Offices, whose structure is proposed for abolishment. Taking into account that the technical supervision and tasking of these posts had been undertaken by the Engineering Services Section since the expansion of the Force, the proposed redeployment of the posts is intended to regularize the oversight and supervision of the posts. 81. In the Joint Logistics Operations Centre, it is proposed that a Language Support Unit be established in the Centre, comprising an existing post of Administrative Officer (Field Service), 166 existing posts of Language Assistants (national General Service) and two existing posts of Administrative Assistants (national General Service) through the redeployment of these posts from the Sector Administrative Offices, which is proposed for abolishment. Based on the review of language support requirements since the expansion of UNIFIL in the 2006/07 period, it has been determined that the language support functions complement the support activities provided by the Centre, which already has representation in the sectors. Consequently, to streamline and consolidate the oversight and management of language support services to ensure the efficient delivery of services to the Force. The proposal also takes into account and responds to previous internal audit observations on the weakness in the management of the Language Assistants assigned in the sectors and at Force headquarters. 82. The Administrative Officer (Field Service) would assist in improving the management structure for Language Assistants assigned to the military units. Considering the number of Language Assistants dispersed over the entire area of operations, the redeployment of two posts of Administrative Assistants (national General Service), whose incumbents would be responsible for the oversight of the Language Assistants assigned to various military units in the sectors. 83. In the Transport Section, a review of its staffing structure and current workload requirements has identified the need for adjustments. As referred to in paragraph 78 above, it is proposed that the existing post of Deputy Chief Transport Officer (P-4) be reassigned to the Engineering Services Section, as a result of the merging of some key functions and the streamlining of the Transport Section as a whole and the determination that the functions performed by this post can be absorbed by the Chief Transport Officer and two Senior Transport Officers (Field Service), which has enabled improved control and accountability within the Section. 84. In addition, it is proposed that an existing post of Transport Officer (P-3) be reassigned to the proposed Personnel Records Unit in the Personnel Section. Taking into account that the total value of vehicle spare parts has decreased and the planned relocation of spare parts to one central location in the expanded headquarters, it has been determined that the functions of the post, which covered the management and coordination of vehicle spare parts, can be absorbed by the other Transport Officers in the Section. It is also proposed that an existing post of Transport Assistant (Field Service) be reassigned to the Property Management Section. 85. Furthermore, it is proposed that six posts of Transport Assistants (Field Service) be abolished, based on the review of the structure and workload of the entire Section that has resulted in the improved streamlining of functions and the absorption of functions of these posts by other posts in the Section. 86. It is also proposed that seven existing posts, comprising four Vehicle Mechanics, two Stores Assistants and one Office Assistant (national General Service), be redeployed from the Sector Administrative Offices, taking into account the proposed abolishment of the Sector Administrative Offices and the fact that the management of these posts had been under the Transport Section. In addition, it is proposed to redeploy one post of Driver (national General Service) to the Medical Section. Lastly, as a result of the streamlining of the organizational structure of the Section, it is proposed that seven existing posts, one Office Assistant, one Transport Assistant, one Duty Technician, one Heavy Vehicle Driver, one Maintenance Worker, one Driver and one Inventory and Supply Clerk (national General Service) be abolished. 87. In the Air Operations Section, it is proposed that an existing post of Aviation Officer (Field Service), which heads the Technical Compliance Unit, be converted to the national General Service level and that its functional title be changed to Aviation Assistant. With the aim of capitalizing on the knowledge of national staff of aeronautical institutions, culture and language as well as enhancing national capacity-building, the functions of the post would include the collection, recording and dissemination of daily weather information and forecasts to the Air Operations Centre. Regional Information and Communications Technology Services (formerly the Communications and Information Technology Section) International staff: Increase of 62 posts National staff: Increase of 52 posts 88. As reflected in paragraphs 27, 28 and 70 above, it is proposed that the existing Communications and Information Technology Section be excluded from Integrated Support Services and to establish the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services as a separate organizational entity in connection with the regionalization initiative in the Middle East. From the 2009/10 approved staffing of 131 posts, comprising 69 international posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 4 P-3 and 62 Field Service) and 62 national General Service posts for the 2009/10 period for the existing Communications and Information Technology Section, it is proposed that the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services would comprise a total of 114 posts, comprising 62 international posts (1 D-1, 3 P-3 and 58 Field Service) and 52 national General Service posts, which reflects a decrease of 17 posts (7 international and 10 national) from the approved 2009/10 staffing. 89. Reporting directly to the Director of Mission Support, the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services would develop and institute a common framework to interconnect strategic applications for the Force. The establishment of the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services aims to achieve improvements in service delivery in areas including IPbased videoconferences, encrypted and secure communications, disaster recovery and business continuity, emergency communications and compliance with minimum operating security standards, regional training, frequency coordination and the introduction of new types of services resulting from effective strategic regional management. It is projected that the regionalization initiative would benefit the client base of the four Middle East operations (UNDOF, UNIFIL, UNFICYP and UNTSO) which covers the average deployment of 14,655 military contingent personnel, 153 military observers, 69 United Nations police and almost 1,800 civilian staff. 90. Cooperation among UNIFIL, UNDOF, UNFICYP and UNTSO has already been ongoing, particularly in the field of information and communications technology, which favours common platforms and integration. Much has been achieved in recent years as the Communications and Information Technology Section components of the four missions have met biannually, including on the design and implementation of regional information systems and sharing of regional software inventories and the conduct of training courses. As reflected in paragraph 94 of the report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of peacekeeping operations (A/63/696), the coordinated delivery of ICT services through regional strategic management would eliminate duplication of effort, create economies of scale and eliminate disparity of services across missions. The regionalization initiative seeks to formalize the unity of effort of the four missions by revising the organizational structure of ICT support through the proposed establishment of the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services. 91. Based on the above, it is proposed that the post of Chief of the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services be established at the D1 level through the reclassification of the existing post of the Chief of the Services (P-5). This proposed post and the proposed post of the Deputy Chief of Regional Information and Communications Technology Services (P-5) in the context of the 2010/11 budget proposal for UNDOF are considered crucial in ensuring accountability for effective regional strategic management of ICT, in eliminating duplication of effort, creating economies of scale and eliminating disparities in services provided across the missions. The Chief of the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services would participate in conferences of regional heads of mission and of the Director of Mission Support/Chief of Mission Support to provide input into the formulation of strategic direction; interact with senior officials at the ministerial level in the formulation of agreements with host Governments in the areas of service delivery through national infrastructure and in the management of complex radio frequency issues; take the lead in the harmonization of support to United Nations system agencies, funds, programmes and other implementing partners in the region. 92. Based on the review of the proposed structure of the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services, it is also proposed that an existing post of Chief Information Technology Officer be reclassified from the P-4 level to Field Service (Principal level). The proposal is based on the determination that the management of the Information Technology Unit within the Regional Information and Communications Technology Services requires a hands-on approach in the provision of practical IT solutions under challenging conditions and as such, it is projected that the reclassification of the post to the Field Service (Principal level) would attract suitable candidates with the requisite technical expertise to manage standard and emergency IT services. 93. In addition, as a result of the regionalization approach to ICT support of the missions in the region, it is proposed that an existing post of Chief Communications Officer (P-4) be abolished, as it has been determined that the functions of the post can be absorbed within the new regional staffing structure by leveraging the expertise of other senior Communications Officers in the planning and execution of regional initiatives. 94. Similarly, it is proposed that an existing post of Regional Coordinator (P-3) be reassigned to the proposed Workforce Planning and Selection Unit in the Personnel Section, as explained in paragraph 59 above. As a result of the regionalization approach, the functions of the post would be absorbed into a centralized Middle East mission support and coordination centre that would manage and coordinate the support elements required in the remote sites of the four missions. 95. In addition, it is proposed that three existing posts of Radio Technician, Billing Assistant and the IT Technician Assistant (Field Service) be reassigned to the Personnel Section and that two existing posts of IT Assistant and Telecommunications Technician (Field Service) be reassigned to the General Services Section. Lastly, it is proposed that 10 existing posts (1 Administrative Assistant, 1 Radio Technician, 1 Satellite Technician, 1 Telephone Technician, 1 Inventory Assistant, 1 Switchboard Operator, 3 Billing Assistants and 1 IT Assistant) (national General Service) be abolished, as the regional and integrated approach to the provision of ICT services to the four missions in the region aims to eliminate the duplication of effort, to leverage regional expertise and to yield efficiency gains owing to improved uniformity in service delivery. The functions of these posts will be absorbed within the proposed regional staffing structure. (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is 1 July to 30 June.) Expenditures (2008/09) Apportionment (2009/10) Cost estimates (2010/11) Military observers Military contingents United Nations police Formed police units National staff General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Ground transportation Air transportation Naval transportation Communications Information technology Medical Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment 96. The estimated value of non-budgeted contributions for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 is as follows: (Thousands of United States dollars) Estimated value Status-of-forces agreementa a Relates to land and premises provided by the host Government, including UNIFIL House in Beirut, a rear headquarters evacuation centre, UNIFIL headquarters in Naqoura and military positions. C. Efficiency gains 97. The cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 take into account the following efficiency initiatives: Initiative Communications and information technology services Reduction in communications and information technology spare parts owing to the Middle East regionalization concept Commercial communications Access to competitive commercial communications markets for Internet and Public Switched Telephone Network traffic through the Middle East Regional Hub D. Vacancy factors 98. The cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 take into account the following vacancy factors: (Percentage) Actual Budgeted Projected Temporary positionsa a Funded under general temporary assistance. E. Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and selfsustainment 99. Requirements for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 are based on standard reimbursement rates for major equipment (wet lease) and self-sustainment in the total amount of $123,735,500 as follows: Estimated amount Major equipment Self-sustainment Mission factors Effective date Last review A. Applicable to Mission area Extreme environmental condition factor 1 July 2008 14 March 2008 Intensified operational condition factor Hostile action/forced abandonment factor B. Applicable to home country Incremental transportation factor F. Training 100. The estimated resource requirements for training for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 are as follows: Training consultants Official travel, training Training fees, supplies and services 101. The number of participants planned for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011, compared to previous periods, is as follows: (Number of participants) Planned Proposed Internal Externala a Includes United Nations Logistics Base and outside the mission area. 102. The planned internal training activities during the period would continue to focus on the upgrading of substantive and technical skills and on leadership, management and organizational development for international staff and military personnel. A total of 51 courses for 590 international staff, comprising 48 courses for 540 international staff on the upgrading of technical skills and 3 courses for 50 international staff on leadership, management and organizational development, are planned. In addition, 46 courses for 594 national staff are planned, comprising 44 courses for 564 staff on the upgrading of substantive and technical skills and 2 courses for 30 staff on leadership, management and organizational development. Furthermore, 657 military personnel will be trained in 18 internal courses related to the upgrading of substantive and technical skills. 103. The planned external training activities, primarily at the United Nations Logistics Base, would also continue to focus on the upgrading of substantive and technical skills and organizational development. A total of 74 courses, comprising 64 courses on the upgrading of substantive and technical skills for 77 international staff and 10 courses on leadership management and organizational development are planned for 20 international staff. In addition, 45 national staff will be trained in 43 courses on the upgrading of substantive and technical skills to be held outside the mission area. Furthermore, five military personnel will undertake five courses on the upgrading of substantive and technical skills. G. Mine detection and mine-clearing services 104. The estimated resource requirements for mine detection and mine-clearing services for the period 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 are as follows: Mine detection and mine-clearing equipment Mine detection and mine-clearing supplies 105. The mine action programme in UNIFIL was implemented in three phases beginning in 2000. The first phase included the establishment of the United Nations Mine Action Coordination Centre to coordinate with the national authorities in southern Lebanon to establish a mine action plan. The second phase, which started in May 2002, related to the continuation of the development and refinement of the mine action response for the safe return of internally displaced persons. During the final phase (hand-over phase), which started in January 2009, the Coordination Centre transferred the coordination role to the Lebanese Armed Forces and from April 2009, the Centre relocated its remaining staff to UNIFIL headquarters in Naqoura, where its role has been to support UNIFIL mine clearance and explosive ordnance disposal. The Coordination Centre continues its liaison function with the Lebanese Mine Action Centre and UNIFIL. In the 2010/11 period, UNMACC will continue to provide operational management and quality assurance in accordance with the memorandum of agreement between the United Nations and the United Nations Office of Project Services, which administers the Centre. H. Quick-impact projects 106. The estimated resource requirements for quick-impact projects for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011, compared to previous periods, are as follows: Period Number of projects 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 (actual) 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 (approved) 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 (proposed) 107. UNIFIL implemented 30 quick-impact projects in 2008/09. For the 2009/10 period, 25 projects are being implemented in the areas of (a) support to the extension of State authority/civic education/capacity-building, (b) conflict management/ confidence-building initiatives and (c) access to basic services. 108. Based on the UNIFIL assessment of quick-impact projects that have been implemented to date, it has been determined that quick-impact projects remain critical in fostering good relations with the local population and authorities in the UNIFIL area of operations. The potential areas of intervention include, capacity- and confidence-building with local authorities; strengthening and engaging with civil society; continued need for basic services and employment in southern Lebanon. The types of quick-impact projects identified would improve the environment for mandate implementation by generating support for the mission, including through addressing the immediate needs of the population. III. Qana incident 109. In paragraph 19 of its resolution 63/298, the General Assembly reiterated its request to the Secretary-General to take the necessary measures to ensure the full implementation of paragraph 8 of its resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of its resolution 52/237, paragraph 11 of its resolution 53/227, paragraph 14 of its resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of its resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of its resolution 55/180 B, paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 A, paragraph 13 of its resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of its resolution 57/235, paragraph 13 of its resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of its resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of its resolution 60/278, paragraph 21 of its resolution 61/250 A, paragraph 20 of its resolution 61/250 B, paragraph 20 of its resolution 61/250 C and paragraph 21 of its resolution 62/265, stressed once again that Israel shall pay the amount of $1,117,005 resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996 and requested the Secretary-General to report on this matter to the General Assembly at its current session. Pursuant to the requests in those resolutions, the amount has been recorded under accounts receivable in the Special Account for UNIFIL, and the Secretariat has transmitted 15 letters to the Permanent Mission of Israel on the subject, the most recent of which was dated 19 October 2009, for which no response has been received. IV. Analysis of variances 110. The standard terminology applied with respect to the analysis of resources variances in this section are defined in annex I to the present report. The terminology used remains the same as in previous reports. :: Management: reduced inputs and same outputs 111. The variance is mainly attributable to reduced requirements to troop-contributing Governments for standard reimbursements for troop costs and for major equipment, owing to the projected deployment and repatriation of military contingent units and the application of a delayed deployment factor of 16 per cent on the estimates, compared with 15 per cent applied in the 2009/10 budget. The reduced requirements are partly offset by: (a) increased requirements for recreational leave allowances owing to the increase in the duration of the entitlement from 7 to 15 days for every six-month period of service, as authorized by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/285; and (b) additional requirements for emplacement, rotation and repatriation travel based on recent mission experience and for the freight of contingent-owned equipment based on projections for the deployment or repatriation of military contingent units. A delayed deployment factor of 16 per cent has been applied to the cost estimates. :: Cost parameters: revision of international salary scales 112. The variance is attributable primarily to the application of step 5 of the international salary scale effective January 2010, taking into account the proportion of dependent/single staff for the mission in the 2010/11 budget whereas the 2009/10 budget was based on actual average staff costs at each grade level for the 2007/08 period. In addition, a 15 per cent vacancy rate factor has been applied to the cost estimates compared to the vacancy factor of 18 per cent for the 2009/10 period. The variance is offset in part by the proposed net decrease of six international posts. 113. The variance is attributable mainly to the proposed net reduction of 92 national posts. The cost estimates are based on the national salary scales effective 1 September 2008 and on the 2011 World Bank exchange rate of 1,507.50 Lebanese pounds per United States dollar. :: Management: reduced inputs and outputs 114. The variance is attributable mainly to the abolishment of two temporary positions (1 D-2 and 1 General Service (Other level)) in the Strategic Military Cell, which will be terminated by 30 June 2010. :: Management: increased inputs and outputs 115. The variance is attributable mainly to additional requirements for specialized training in the areas of air operations, movement control, security, budget and finance and personnel. 116. The variance results primarily from: (a) reduced requirements for the alteration/renovation services and construction services, as major planned projects related to the expansion of the Force headquarters are expected to be completed by the end of the 2009/10 period; and (b) the non-requirement for the acquisition of generators, as all of the requirements for generators would have been met during the 2009/10 period. The variance is partly offset by additional requirements for maintenance supplies and maintenance services, resulting from the expansion of Force headquarters. 117. The variance is attributable mainly to: (a) the acquisition of fewer vehicles (33 in the 2010/11 period compared to 98 in the 2009/10 period) and fewer items of workshop equipment; (b) reduced requirements for the rental of heavy vehicles, owing to completion of the expansion of Force headquarters in the new land; and (c) reduced requirements for repairs and maintenance since a large number of vehicles in the UNIFIL fleet are relatively new. :: Management: increased inputs and same outputs 118. The variance is attributable mainly to additional requirements for the rental costs of nine rotary-wing aircraft. 119. The variance is attributable mainly to reduced requirements resulting from the proposed reconfiguration and deployment of seven vessels in the Maritime Task Force comprising three frigates, three patrol boats and one support ship, as compared with the current configuration of eight vessels, comprising one frigate, one observation vessel, five patrol boats and one support ship. The provision for rental and operation costs is based on the type of vessel and takes into account transit costs related to the deployment of the vessels from their countries of origin. 120. As a result of the regionalization initiative in the Middle East, the variance is attributable primarily to: (a) reduced requirements for spare parts for communications equipment (estimated at 5 per cent of total inventory value for the 2010/11 period compared to 7.5 per cent in the 2009/10 period); and (b) reduced requirements for commercial communications. The variance is offset in part by additional requirements for the rental of three Cobra radar equipment and two NC1 radar equipment already deployed in the area of operations, which were previously provided as contingent-owned equipment. 121. As a result of the regionalization initiative in the Middle East, the variance is attributable primarily to reduced requirements for spare parts (at 5 per cent of total inventory value for the 2010/11 period as compared to 7.5 per cent in the 2009/10 period) and to reduced requirements for software packages, owing to economies of scale. In addition, the variance results from reduced requirements for the replacement of various types of equipment as well as the replacement of 96 laptop computers by notebooks at lower unit costs. 122. The variance is attributable mainly to reduced requirements for standard reimbursements to troop-contributing Governments for self-sustainment, as a result of the application of a delayed deployment factor of 16 per cent and the projected deployment or repatriation of military contingent units during the 2010/11 period. In addition, the variance reflects reduced requirements for medical supplies and services based on recent mission experience. The variance is offset in part by increased requirements for the acquisition of medical equipment for the upgrade of the UNIFIL hospital in Naqoura from a level-I facility to a level-II facility. 123. The variance is attributable mainly to reduced requirements for standard reimbursements to troop-contributing Governments for self-sustainment, taking into account the application of the delayed deployment factor of 16 per cent and based on the projected deployment or repatriation of military contingent units in the 2010/11 period. 124. The variance is attributable mainly to reduced requirements for mine detection and mine clearing services and supplies, as a result of the transfer of mine action coordination from the United Nations Mine Action Coordination Centre to the Lebanese Armed Forces and reduced requirements for uniforms, flags and decals, owing to the application of a delayed deployment factor of 16 per cent for military contingent personnel. The variance is offset in part by additional requirements for training fees and supplies for training materials for security-related training. V. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 125. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNIFIL are: (a) Appropriation of the amount of $564,536,900 for the maintenance of the Force for the 12-month period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011; (b) Assessment of the amount of $94,089,485 for the period from 1 July to 31 August 2010; (c) Assessment of the amount of $470,447,415 for the period from 1 September 2010 to 30 June 2011, should the Security Council decide to continue the mandate of the Force. VI. Summary of follow-up action taken to implement the decisions and requests of the General Assembly in its resolutions 61/276 and 63/298 and requests recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the General Assembly, and of the United Nations Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services A. General Assembly (Resolution 61/276) Decision/request Action taken to implement decision/request Section II: budgeting and budget presentation When submitting future budget proposals and performance reports, include information on the most significant management decisions relating to the mission's budget and its implementation, including those related to operational costs (para. 2). Significant management decisions are reflected in paragraphs 18 and 28. Budget submissions should reflect management improvements and efficiency gains to be achieved and present future strategies in that regard (para. 4). Efficiency gains are reflected in paragraph 97. Take further steps towards improving budget assumptions and forecasts and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-second session (para. 5). The improvement of budget assumptions is an ongoing process. Improve control over obligations due to the significant increase in the cancellation of prior-period obligations (para. 6). Fuel price fluctuations resulted in the unforeseen cancellation of obligations in the 2008/09 period. Section III: results-based budgeting Integrate operational, logistical and financial aspects fully in the planning phase of peacekeeping operations by linking results-based budgeting to the mandate implementation plans of peacekeeping operations (para. 2). UNIFIL formulates the annual results-based budgeting based on the operational and support plans and priorities. Additionally, the implementation of operational and support plans are monitored through the mission-specific key performance indicators in the support area and through a comprehensive portfolio of evidence maintained for operations. Section VII: staffing, recruitment and vacancy rates Make greater use of national staff, as appropriate, commensurate with the requirements of the mission and its mandate (para. 3). In the 2010/11 cost estimates, UNIFIL has carried out a full review of all posts in the Force in line with the requirements of the mission and its mandate. Ensure that vacant posts are filled expeditiously (para. 4). The Force recently reviewed its staffing establishment and the proposed 2010/11 budget reflects a net decrease of 100 posts. Review the staffing structure of missions on an ongoing basis, bearing in mind, in particular, the mission's mandate and concept of operations, and to reflect this in budget proposals, including full justification of any additional posts proposed (para. 5). UNIFIL carried out a full review of all civilian posts, which is reflected in the 2010/11 budget proposal. Section IX: training Provide professional development opportunities for national staff and fully include them in all relevant training programmes (para. 2). In the 2010/11 period, UNIFIL proposes to conduct 639 training courses, including 45 external courses for national staff, compared to 381 courses, including 30 external courses in 2009/10. Section XIII: air operations Improve the formulation of resource requirements for air operations in budget submissions to make them more reflective of actual operations, bearing in mind the overbudgeting of air transportation requirements in some peacekeeping operations (para. 3). With the implementation of the Aviation Reporting System Database, every flight and passenger list is recorded to provide an accurate report on the utilization and proper planning of air operations resources. When reviewing their transportation requirements, missions must take into account means that are efficient, cost-effective and responsive to their operational needs and that ensure the safety of their personnel and take fully into account the unique mandate, complexities, specificities and operational conditions of each mission (para. 4). The Air Operations Section and the Movement Control Section closely collaborate to identify the most efficient, safe and cost-effective means of transportation. Conduct aviation quality inspections and aviation assessments to confirm that established standards are being fully complied with (para. 6). In UNIFIL, aviation safety assessments, evaluations and quality assurance inspections/checks are regularly done by Safety and Quality Assurance Officers. Section XIX: quick-impact projects Quick-impact projects should be implemented with minimal or no overhead charges in order to ensure that the maximum amount is spent for the direct benefit of the local population (para. 5). The majority (76 per cent) of implementing partners for quick-impact projects implemented in 2008/09 were local authorities (municipalities) and a smaller number of projects were implemented by non-governmental organizations and associations. Neither municipalities nor associations charge overhead costs and non-governmental organizations only charge costs directly related to the project implementation. Funding for quick-impact projects for the third year of a mission and beyond may be requested if there is a requirement for confidence-building activities, in which case a needs assessment should be conducted (para. 6). A needs assessment has been undertaken for the 2010/11 period (refer to para. 108 above). Coordination with humanitarian and development partners should be made in order to avoid duplication and overlap of activities between missions and humanitarian and development partners in the field (para. 7). UNIFIL coordinates with United Nations agencies through weekly and biweekly meetings to enhance coordination and avoid duplication between the mission and humanitarian and development partners. In addition, UNIFIL attends donor coordination meetings on specific sectors such as water, environment, local development, livelihoods, and so on, as well as embassy small grants meetings. Mission budgets allocated for quick-impact projects should not be used to finance humanitarian and development activities already being carried out by United Nations agencies or other international organizations (para. 8). In order to avoid duplication of work being carried out by other agencies, quick-impact projects are submitted to the UNIFIL NGO/Inter-Agency Liaison focal point, who checks the projects against the United Nations Resident Coordinator's project matrix for southern Lebanon. Section XXI: regional coordination Develop and implement regional coordination plans aligned to the objectives of missions, keeping in mind the specific mandate of each mission (para. 2). UNIFIL has signed memorandums of understanding with regional peacekeeping missions and other United Nations organizations to streamline the activities of common services, namely, training, procurement, maintenance, and so on. Additionally, the budget proposal for 2010/11 reflects various initiatives, including the establishment of regional communications and information technology services for optimal use of resources in the region with due consideration for all political sensitivities. (Resolution 63/298) Ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant legislative mandate (para. 11). The proposed UNIFIL 2010/11 budget is based on the mandate of the Security Council. B. Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/63/746/Add.11) Request/recommendation Action taken to implement request/recommendation The Advisory Committee stressed the importance of full and expeditious implementation of the relevant recommendations of the oversight bodies (para. 3). UNIFIL has implemented all recommendations of the oversight bodies. The Advisory Committee reiterated the need for better planning and budget forecasting, to the extent possible, in order to avoid significant variances in the resources budgeted and approved during a specific period (para. 9). The improvement in planning and budget forecasting was evident in the end of the 2008/09 performance period where the unutilized balance was reduced from 17.1 per cent in 2007/08 to 11.6 per cent in 2008/09. The Advisory Committee noted that the Board of Auditors had expressed concern about the unavailability of standard operating procedures to verify contingent-owned equipment of the Maritime Task Force. The Advisory Committee noted that the Administration had agreed with the Board's recommendation in this regard and that the Department of Field Services, in coordination with UNIFIL, had issued in October 2008 standard operating procedures that provide the framework and necessary guidance for the verification of maritime assets. The Advisory Committee concurred with the Board of Auditors that the Department of Field Support should review and incorporate the procedures developed into the next revision of the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual (para. 35). The Department of Field Support will review and propose to the Contingent-Owned Equipment Working Group, which is scheduled to meet in January 2011, the incorporation of the procedures developed to verify the contingent-owned equipment of the Maritime Task Force. Based on the decision of the General Assembly, the Department will include the procedures in the next revision of the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual. C. Board of Auditors (A/63/5 (Vol. II)) Unsuccessful procurement case The Board noted that up to September 2008, the provision of catering service at the new dining hall, since completion of its construction in April 2008, was unsuccessful due to an inadequate acquisition strategy. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure an adequate acquisition strategy before the implementation of a complex procurement activity and expedite the procurement procedures for the new dining hall in order to ensure that the building is put into use as soon as possible (paras. 118-120). Implemented. The new dining hall has been in operation since March 2009. Processing time delays at Headquarters The Board noted that in the Procurement Division, the procurement exercise for the provision of aviation and ground fuel to UNIFIL and MINUSTAH lasted more than 600 days and had not been finalized yet up to October 2008. As a result, UNIFIL had to extend its local fuel contract five times from 1 September 2007 through 31 December 2008 with the not-to-exceed amount increased by $31.38 million. The Board recommended that the Administration finalize the procurement process for the provision of fuel to the missions. The Board also recommended that the Administration expedite the technical evaluation process in future procurement activities (paras. 123-125). The fuel contract was finalized and executed on 22 December 2008 and is fully mobilized throughout the Force. Requisition and procurement time frames analysis at missions The Board reviewed the requisition time frame (from requisition initiation to requisition approval) and procurement time frame (from requisition approval to purchase order approval) in several missions and made the following observations: at UNIFIL, the requisition time frames for almost one fourth of the purchase orders exceeded the maximum days listed in the Procurement Manual. Similarly, the procurement lead time for more than one third of the purchase orders went beyond the maximum days, with the longest lead time being 372 days. The Board reiterated its previous recommendation that the Administration ensure that UNIFIL identifies the causes for the lengthy lead times in the requisitioning and procurement process and adopts measures to ensure that the requisitions and purchase orders are issued within the reasonable time frames (paras. 128 (a) and 129). The Mission has strengthened the management of procurement time frames. Weekly reports highlight outstanding cases to expedite the procurement function. A review of the present status of UNIFIL expenditures indicates that progress on requisitions is in conformity with the Procurement Plan. Ex post facto cases The Board noted that no written justifications were available for five ex post facto cases. In particular, in the ex post facto case of the shipment of 12 trailers to MONUC initiated at the Movement Control Office in Beirut with the amount of $187,980, the delegation authorization, formal requisition and formal bidding were absent. Furthermore, due to the narrow scope of works, offers received could not be considered as competitive. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that UNIFIL: (a) maintain a written record for the justification of ex post facto cases; and (b) comply strictly with the requirements relating to the delegation of authority and other related procedures for the procurement of goods and services (paras. 137 and 138). The Mission has implemented a similar structure as United Nations Headquarters for handling of ex post facto cases, whereby Service Chiefs are required to provide the reason for ex post facto cases prior to the review and potential notification by the Local Committee on Contracts. This procedure ensures that potential deviations from the procurement regulations are brought to the attention of senior management for action as appropriate. UNIFIL endeavours to limit ex post facto cases to a minimum. Technical evaluation The Board noted that a vendor who had not provided a quality plan, which was a mandatory requirement of technical evaluation, was awarded the contract for the Naquora Harbour rehabilitation project. Due to the inability of the vendor to provide the plan, UNIFIL organized a re-bid and awarded the contract to another vendor. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that UNIFIL observe the mandatory requirements of technical evaluation in the future (paras. 147 and 148). United Nations Headquarters has circulated documents which UNIFIL uses in all requests for proposal bids to ensure transparency in the procurement process. Bid submission time frame The Board noted several instances at UNMIS, UNIFIL and UNAMID where the submission time frames allowed for potential vendors was much shorter than the minimum time as required in the Procurement Manual. For the request for quotation, the minimum time allowed is 10 days, while for invitation to bid and request for proposal, the minimum time is 30 days. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that UNMIS, UNIFIL and UNAMID comply strictly to the requirements of the Procurement Manual relating to the minimum time frames for the submission of proposals and responses to request for quotations, invitation to bids and request for proposals (paras. 159 and 160). UNIFIL will endeavour to adhere to the time frame of bidding. It should be noted that during the 2007/08 period, the Force experienced a significant growth of activities in a post-conflict environment, thus necessitating some shortening of time frames to meet operational requirements. Preparation time frame for mandatory site visits The Board noted that the Procurement section selected the eligible vendors from those who attended the mandatory site visit or pre-proposal conference between the bid issuing date and bid closing date. The Board sampled cases from those reviewed by the Local Committee on Contracts in the financial year 2007/08. Among observed cases, it was noted that the time frame between bid issuance date and mandatory site visit or pre-proposal conference date ranged from 3 to 10 days. The Board was concerned that the scheduling of a mandatory site visit or pre-proposal conference within a short time (for example three days) after the issuing of bids did not appear to be reasonable as the international vendors did not have sufficient time to prepare for the site visit or conference. The Board recommended that the Administration reconsider the reasonableness of the time frame for mandatory site visits to ensure the effectiveness of competition, both locally and internationally (paras. 162-164). UNIFIL gives vendors at least 10 calendar days to prepare for mandatory site visits, except for immediate operational requirements or exigency situations. Performance bonds and liquidated damages A review of purchase orders reflected delivery delays ranging from 4 to 197 days. However, in none of these contracts the requirement for liquidated damages was enforced. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that UNIFIL comply strictly with the requirements of the Procurement Manual relating to liquidated damages (paras. 171 and 174). UNIFIL has developed standard operating procedures to address delivery discrepancies. Vendor performance monitoring Based on sample tests carried out, the Board noted that 92 per cent of the vendors did not have any performance evaluation rating records. The Board recommended that the Administration should ensure that UNIFIL monitor and report vendors in a timely manner, in accordance with the standards set out in the Procurement Manual and ensure that satisfactory vendor performance reports are available in the files before contracts are extended (paras. 179 and 180). UNIFIL ensures that a vendor performance report is on file prior to issuance of contract amendments. The Force further ensures that appropriate vendor performance reports are filed after delivery of goods or services. Self-accounting units were reminded of the requirement for the timely provision of vendor performance reports. Vacancy rate The Board noted that of the five approved posts for the Contract Management Unit, only two were filled as of September 2008. Due to shortage of staff, the roles and responsibilities of the Contract Management Unit had not been carried out completely and the Board recommended that the Administration ensure that UNIFIL take appropriate measures to expedite the recruitment of the vacant procurement positions (paras. 186 (a) and 187). The Contract Management Unit has five approved posts in the staffing table. Four posts have been filled and recruitment for the remaining vacancy has been finalized and is currently with the Field Central Review Board. The Unit is fully functional and carries out its roles and responsibilities as required. Local vendor database The local Vendor Review Committee did not meet periodically to evaluate and recommend the suspension and removal of the registered vendors. It was noted that the Committee meeting was held only once in the financial year 2007/08. Also, 158 temporary vendors had not been invited for bidding and more than half of them remained in the database beyond the three-month period set forth in the Procurement Manual. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that missions comply strictly with the requirements of the Procurement Manual relating to vendor management (paras. 190, 191 and 193). The reviewing and updating of the vendor database is an ongoing process. The most recent review was conducted on 3 March 2009. The Force takes an active approach to ensure wide geographical competition and will temporarily register vendors even if the commodities they provide are not immediately required. UNIFIL believes that it would be counterproductive to automatically delete potential vendors after 90 days when they may still be of future benefit to the Organization. Discrepancies and follow-up The Board pointed out that self-accounting units were custodians of non-expendable property and it is their responsibility to follow up when discrepancies were noted. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that discrepancies are promptly investigated and corrective action taken to avoid a recurrence (paras. 221 and 222). The Property Management Section/Property Control and Inventory Unit of UNIFIL performs a monthly discrepancy analysis and shares the findings with the self-accounting units for action through the monthly consolidated discrepancy report. The Self-Accounting Unit has improved oversight, the provision of training to asset managers and reinforced compliance with the Property Management Manual. Stock level ratios and surplus The Board noted that stock ratios of 50 categories of non-expendable property were higher than the standard stock ratios and the Board reiterated its recommendation that the Administration expedite the review of non-expendable property at all the missions to ascertain realistic quantities that should be held (paras. 223 (a) and 225). UNIFIL developed a consolidated action plan based on the Department of Field Support Directive on Property Control and Management: Corporate and Mission Targets. The analysis of current unit stock assets is carried out on a monthly basis and has led to identifying surplus assets. Contingent-owned equipment The Maritime Task Force started to function on 15 October 2006 while verification reports on operational readiness of the Force had not been conducted until October 2007 due to the fact that there were no established procedures on how to prepare verification reports for the Maritime Task Force and the inspection of vessels would require to fly a helicopter to one of the designated maritime ports and this was deemed not practical owing to the high cost and the unavailability of aircraft. The Board was concerned that since no standard operational procedures to verify contingent-owned equipment of the Maritime Task Force existed, the capability of the Force could not be properly determined. The Board recommended that UNIFIL in cooperation with Headquarters, develop specific guidelines for contingent-owned equipment inspections for the Maritime Task Force (paras. 262-265 and 267). The Department of Field Support, in coordination with UNIFIL, issued in October 2008 standard operating procedures that provide the framework and necessary guidance for the verification of maritime assets. The Department will review these procedures and propose to the Contingent-Owned Equipment Working Group, which is scheduled to meet in January 2011, the incorporation of the procedures into the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual. Upon approval by the General Assembly, the Department will include the procedures in the next revision of the Contingent-Owned Equipment Manual. Recording of rations Daily issuance records were not available at all times especially in cases where food was supplied from more than one source. There were some discrepancies in quantity between the Galileo system records and the physical verification. The total discrepancies were 21,385 packages, accounting for 71 per cent of the samples selected. The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation that UNIFIL investigate the reason for the discrepancies relating to the recording of rations and update the records in the Galileo system (paras. 331 and 332). The observed discrepancies between the actual physical stock and the records captured in Galileo are being reconciled on the basis of manual issue vouchers obtained from the Food Platoon. To prevent its recurrence, one international staff has been permanently assigned the task of maintaining accurate records in Galileo. Galileo input application controls Some of the records in the Galileo system did not have the information related to the make or model of equipment, both of which are required by the Property Manual. In addition, the input control was not in place between the field of entry on duty mission and entry on duty United Nations to ensure that entry on duty mission is not earlier than entry on duty United Nations. The Board recommends that the Administration ensure that UNIFIL improve the input controls over the Galileo system to ensure the accuracy and integrity of inventory information (paras. 377-379). UNIFIL has referred the audit finding relating to the input controls to the Galileo Change Management Board for consideration in future upgrades. UNIFIL has enforced the standard entry procedures to ensure that such discrepancies would not occur again. Lotus Notes accounts All civilian staff members were assigned an e-mail account; however, all the military accounts were generic instead of private because the users of the functions in a military contingent rotate regularly. The Administration agreed with the Board's recommendation to ensure that UNIFIL assess the risk of not assigning unique accounts of military contingents and to ensure safe use of the Lotus Notes accounts (paras. 381-383). In accordance with the guidance provided by United Nations Headquarters, Lotus Notes accounts are now available to the individual contingents based on their level of self-sustainment. Family relationship The Board observed that as at 21 September 2008, 37 staff members in UNIFIL bore family relationship of brother or sister to other staff members in the mission. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that UNIFIL avoid assigning staff members with the family relationships in the same section and adhere strictly to the time limit for the engagement of individual contracts (paras. 405-407). UNIFIL fully applies the current recruitment policy. Human resources action plans and recruitment workplan The Board pointed out that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support had decided to implement the human resources action plans in United Nations Peace Operations effective 1 July 2008. Missions had not yet developed the action plan for the 2008/09 period although the year had already progressed. The Board recommended that the Administration ensure that missions establish the human resources action plans as required by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support (paras. 409-411). The human resources action plan has been implemented in the Force. The first reports from the system have indicated that there are still some technical aspects of the reporting system that need to be reviewed. Close consultation with Field Personnel Division/United Nations Headquarters is ongoing in order to solve these technical discrepancies. The Board noted that of the 25 approved quick-impact projects valued at $0.5 million, 10 projects were delayed in the 2007/08 period. Among those delayed, four were ongoing as at 30 June 2008. Two projects were still ongoing for 257 days up to the date of the audit. The Board was concerned that delays in implementation of quick-impact projects would compromise attainment of projects objectives (paras. 446 (d) and 447). All quick-impact projects approved during the 2007/08 period have been completed and closed, including release of final payment. UNIFIL has implemented measures to ensure projects are completed within the 90 day time frame, including additional monitoring of projects and ensuring that executing agencies are fully aware of their obligations to complete projects within the stipulated period. D. Office of Internal Oversight Services (A/63/302 (Part II)) In an audit of the local committees on contracts in 11 peacekeeping missions, including UNIFIL, the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) found that not all committee members and alternates, who by the nature of their function had direct access to confidential procurement information, had filed a financial disclosure form with the United Nations Ethics Office, as required by the Secretary-General's bulletin on financial disclosure and declaration of interest statements (ST/SGB/2006/6). The audit revealed that in some missions, staff members were not aware of the filing requirement. The failure to submit financial disclosure as required could potentially hamper the timely detection and resolution of any actual or potential financial conflict of interest. OIOS issued recommendations to mission management calling for compliance with ST/SGB/2006/6. The Department of Field Support accepted the recommendation, indicating that the standard operating procedures relating to on-boarding of staff for United Nations peace operations, issued in April 2008 and circulated to missions, provides guidance regarding the financial disclosure requirement (para. 40). Information for all staff members (including committee members) of UNIFIL who are required to file a financial disclosure and declaration are submitted to the United Nations Ethics Office. In the horizontal audit of the procurement of core requirements in 10 peacekeeping missions, including UNIFIL, OIOS identified areas for improving internal controls in the procurement and reporting of core requirements. For instance, UNIFIL had not fully complied with a delegation of authority statute which required that missions submit a report, within a specific time frame, to the Department of Field Support and the Department of Management with the procurement of core requirements exceeding $200,000. Non-compliance with reporting requirements could impede effective monitoring of the delegation of authority and risk abuse of authority (para. 42). Core requirements are essential goods and services that can be procured locally (for example, fresh food, waste disposal services, potable water, etc.). Non-core requirements are all other goods and services. An instruction has been issued by the UNIFIL management to ensure that the required reports are filed in a timely manner. Additionally, the Department of Field Support reminded all missions to submit a report detailing the procurement of core requirements within 30 days of such activity to the Under-Secretary-General, Department of Field Support; the Assistant Secretary-General, Office of Central Support Services; and the Chief, Field Procurement Service (para. 42). The required reports have been filled in a timely manner. An audit of sewage collection and disposal services contracts in UNIFIL found that the mission's management of its sewage contracts was not adequate. For instance, owing to lack of proper planning, the mission had amended the contracts three times, thereby raising the not-to-exceed amount from $0.5 to over $2.1. The failure of the mission to properly manage the sewage contracts precluded the Organization from benefiting from competitive pricing. The mission has accepted the OIOS recommendation that it improve its planning, particularly where temporary service contracts are involved (para. 54). UNIFIL Management has issued a memorandum to all self-accounting units to allow sufficient time for preparation of service requirements, the completion of the procurement process and any stop-gap period in all future service contracts. A. Terminology related to proposed changes in human resources The following terminology has been applied with respect to proposed changes in human resources (see sect. I): :: Post establishment: a new post is proposed to be established when additional resources are necessary and when it is not possible to redeploy resources from other offices or otherwise accommodate specific activities from within existing resources :: Post reassignment: an approved post that was intended to cover a certain function is proposed to implement other priority mandated activities unrelated to the original function. While a post reassignment may involve a change of location or office, it does not change the category or level of the post :: Post redeployment: an approved post is proposed to be redeployed to cover comparable or related functions in another office :: Post reclassification: an approved post is proposed to be reclassified (upgraded or downgraded) when the duties and responsibilities of the post have changed substantially :: Post abolishment: an approved post is proposed to be abolished if it is no longer needed to implement the activities for which it was approved or to implement other priority mandated activities within the mission :: Post conversion: three possible options for post conversion are as follows: - Conversion of general temporary assistance positions to posts: approved positions financed under general temporary assistance are proposed for conversion to posts if the functions being performed are of a continuing nature - Conversion of individual contractors or individuals on procurement contracts to national staff posts: taking into account the continuing nature of certain functions, in line with section VIII, paragraph 11, of General Assembly resolution 59/296, individual contractors or individuals on procurement contracts are proposed for conversion to national staff posts - Conversion of international staff posts to national staff posts: approved international staff posts are proposed for conversion to national staff posts. B. Terminology related to variance analysis Section III of the present report indicates the single largest contributing factor of each resource variance according to specific standard options encompassed in the four standard categories listed below: :: Mandate: variances caused by changes in the scale or scope of the mandate, or changes in the expected accomplishments as driven by the mandate :: External: variances caused by parties or situations external to the United Nations :: Cost parameters: variances caused by United Nations regulations, rules and policies :: Management: variances caused by management actions to achieve planned results more effectively (e.g., by reprioritizing or adding certain outputs) or efficiently (e.g., by taking measures to reduce personnel or operational inputs while maintaining the same level of outputs) and/or from performance-related issues (e.g., by having underestimated the costs or quantities of inputs required to produce a certain level of outputs, or by delayed recruitment). Annex II A. Standard support outputs Output Emplacement, rotation and repatriation of military and police personnel and administration of civilian personnel Average strength of 15,000 military contingents and 1,245 civilian personnel (including 5 temporary positions) Average strength of 15,000 military and 1,145 civilian personnel (including 3 temporary positions) Monitoring of contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment services provided 40 formed land units inspected and verified through mandatory contingent-owned equipment inspections 43 formed land units inspected and verified through mandatory contingent-owned equipment inspections 328 contingent-owned equipment verification reports 352 contingent-owned equipment verification reports 48 verification reports for the Maritime Task Force forwarded to Headquarters for reimbursement purposes 2 Contingent-Owned Equipment/ Memorandum of Understanding Management Review Boards conducted 3 Contingent-Owned Equipment/ 100 per cent accountability for United Nations-owned equipment 100 per cent accountability for 21,500 United Nations-owned equipment verified and accounted for Rations 4,046,280 person-days of rations distributed to 23 locations 4,050,934 person-days of rations distributed to 23 locations Fuel supply 17.9 million litres of diesel, 10.5 million litres of petrol and 1.3 million litres of aviation fuel 18.9 million litres of diesel, 9.8 million litres of petrol and 1.3 million litres of aviation fuel Maintenance of premises 163 hard-wall premises in 63 locations 169 hard-wall premises in 63 locations Maintenance of generators 243 generators operated and maintained 203 generators operated and maintained Maintenance of prefabricated buildings 1,871 properties and facilities 1,813 properties and facilities Maintenance and rehabilitation of roads 100 kilometres of roads Fleet of vehicles 1,040 vehicles 1,062 vehicles Fleet of aircraft 9 aircraft Flight hours 2,580 flight hours Airfield locations 22 helicopter landing sites at 21 locations 31 helicopter landing sites at 21 locations Medical facilities 21 level-I clinics, 2 level-II and 1 level-I+ medical facilities 22 level-I clinics, 1 level-II and 1 level-I+ medical facilities and their level 2 satellite networks, 7 very small aperture terminal (VSAT) systems, 35 telephone exchanges, 164 microwave links, 86 high frequency (HF) and 45 very high frequency (VHF) repeaters and 1 transmitter 2 satellite networks, 10 VSAT systems, 39 telephone exchanges, 165 microwave links, 78 HF and 51 VHF repeaters and 1 transmitter Geographic information and maps 40 operational maps, 90 thematic maps, 50 satellite-image maps, 10 web-based e-maps produced 42 operational maps, 95 thematic maps, 55 satellite-image maps, 12 web-based e-maps produced 7 service provided for terrain analysis, geospatial intelligence and study 9 service provided for terrain analysis, geospatial intelligence and study 12 Geographic Positioning System (GPS), Geographic Information System (GIS) and map-related training to mission staff 12 Geographic Positioning System, Geographic Information System and map-related training to mission staff 2,300 square kilometres of coverage of geospatial data collected for mission operations 60 servers, 1,739 desktop computers, 355 laptop computers, 455 printers, 121 digital senders, 30 local area networks and wide area networks 65 servers, 1,719 desktop computers, 323 laptop computers, 463 printers, 115 digital senders, 33 local area networks and wide area networks B. Mission specific, non-standard (or specialized) outputs Operation and maintenance of wastewater treatment plants 20 plants in 13 locations 26 plants in 13 locations Operation and maintenance of water purification plants 10 water purification plants in 8 locations and 13 water wells in 12 locations 11 water purification plants in 9 locations and 14 water wells in 13 locations Provision of training and assessment programmes for drivers/operators of all types of vehicles 800 military and civilian drivers 500 military and civilian drivers Operation of daily shuttle service 5 days a week for UNIFIL personnel For an average of 36 personnel For an average of 24 personnel Operation and maintenance of maritime vessels 7 vessels (3 frigates, 3 patrol boats and 1 support ship) Maintenance of mission-wide land and air evacuation arrangements For all UNIFIL locations, including 2 level-III hospitals For all UNIFIL locations, including 1 level-III and 5 level-IV hospitals A. Operations Abbreviations: ASG: Assistant Secretary-General; FS: Field Service; NO: National Officer; NGS: National General Service. a To be funded under the peacekeeping support account. b New. c Redeployed. d Reassigned. e Temporary positions. B. Mission Support Division a Converted. e Formerly Communication and Information Technology Section. 