%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SUPPORT ACCOUNTS|STAFFING|

Sixty-fourth session Agenda item 146 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Rejustification of posts financed under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Page Introduction Rejustification Department of Peacekeeping Operations Department of Field Support Department of Management Office of Internal Oversight Services Executive Office of the Secretary-General Office of the Ombudsman Office of Legal Affairs Department of Public Information Department of Safety and Security Office of Information and Communications Technology Annexes Authorized staffing of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Authorized staffing of the Department of Field Support for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Approved staffing of the Department of Management for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Approved staffing of the Office of Internal Oversight Services for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Approved staffing of the Office of the Ombudsman and Mediation Services for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Approved staffing of the Office of Legal Affairs for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Approved staffing of the Department of Public Information for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Approved staffing of the Department of Safety and Security for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Approved staffing of the Office of Information and Communications Technology for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Authorized staffing establishment under the support account, 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Professional category and above General Service and related categories USG ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2/1 Sub-total Field Service Principal level Other level National General Service Security Service Total 1. In paragraph 28 of its resolution 63/287, the General Assembly took note of paragraph 45 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/63/841) and requested the Secretary-General to include in the rejustification of the totality of support account staffing requirements information on and an analysis of the following, taking into account the relevant legislative mandates: (a) The lead agency, entity, department and/or office for major strands of activity and the scope of their respective responsibilities; (b) Comprehensive assessment of the evolution of the support account; (c) Related human resources funded from the regular budget and other sources of funding, including in other departments of the Secretariat, resources in field missions and, where relevant, the specialized agencies and funds and programmes; (d) The impact of the requested resources with respect to the improvement of the administrative and financial management of peacekeeping operations; (e) All functions covered by the proposed resources other than that of backstopping peacekeeping operations; (f) The impact of information and communications technology initiatives, including related business process improvements, on enhancing productivity and on the level of resources requested; (g) The outcome of business process improvements; (h) Lessons learned from recent experience in operating the support account, including on the conversion of general temporary assistance positions to posts. 2. The rejustification requested by the General Assembly is contained in two addenda to the budget of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 (A/64/697). The rejustification information is organized as follows: the present document includes a staffing table for each department/office and a brief summary of its functions and organization; A/64/697/Add.2 includes a table comprising the following elements for each division/office: (a) Description of the mandate/mission consistent with the relevant Secretary-General's bulletin; (b) Authorized staffing establishment under the support account by grade level for 2009/10; (c) Description of how the workload is distributed to achieve the mandate; (d) Workload statistics or ratio of staff to clients served to demonstrate the overall staffing requirements; (e) Other Secretariat entities performing similar functions and summary of fundamental differences between the mandated activities of the division/office and those of other entities performing similar activities. 3. The rejustification is based on the approved posts for the support account for the 2009/10 period. Organization charts for the authorized 2009/10 staffing establishment at the department office level (and the division office level) are included at the end of the present report. The number and level of general temporary assistance positions funded from the support account and posts funded from the regular budget are reflected in the charts. 4. The Secretariat has made every effort to address the requests of the General Assembly in the present report. In accordance with the decision of the Assembly, support account funds are used for the sole purpose of backstopping and supporting peacekeeping operations at Headquarters. Furthermore, all proposed and continuing support account posts are reviewed in terms of changing operational requirements, the distribution of workload and the actual responsibilities and functions. Requests for additional posts are justified with reference to actual and expected workload drivers and statistics, and requests for additional Headquarters capacity include information on the existing capacity devoted to the function for which the additional capacity is requested so as to enable the Assembly to make fully informed decisions on the support account staffing requirements. 5. With respect to the request of the General Assembly to take into account the comprehensive assessment of the evolution of the support account, it will be recalled that the study on the evolution of the support account, the results of which were presented in the support account budget for 2009/10 (A/63/767), concluded that the evolution of the support account was correlated with the increased complexity of peacekeeping operations mandates and the significant increase in the deployment of peacekeeping personnel to the field. While the Secretariat acknowledges that conclusion, it also recognizes that the study did not present a defined formula for the determination of support account staffing requirements. Accordingly, the support account budget for 2010/11 includes resources in the amount of $207,000 to conduct a follow-up study to develop a conceptual staffing model for the support account. 6. Regarding the request to address the impact of information and communications technology (ICT) initiatives, including related business process improvements, on enhancing productivity and on the level of resources requested, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 63/287, the Office of Information and Communications Technology is currently undertaking a comprehensive review of ICT capacity across the Secretariat. The report of the Secretary-General on the issue will be submitted to the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session. 7. With regard to the request of the General Assembly to address in the rejustification the outcome of business process improvements, the Secretariat introduced a capacity-building programme incorporating Lean Six Sigma methodologies to develop a culture of continuous business process improvement throughout the Secretariat along with the development of staff members to take leadership roles in executing improvement projects. 8. The first phase of the business process improvement capacity-building programme was completed in mid-2009, with 11 projects focusing on support of business processes in the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations, Field Support and Management. Continuing its support of those three Departments, the second phase of the programme commenced in June of 2009 and was nearing completion at the time of preparation of the present report. All projects included the training of staff members in Lean Six Sigma methodologies and were aimed at delivering savings in terms of increased process efficiency, reduced process cycle times and reductions in waste and unnecessary rework. For the second phase of the programme, the Secretariat has initiated another 11 new projects in the following areas: the medical sick leave certification process (Office of Human Resources Management), troop strength reporting (Force Generation Service), the voluntary trust fund assistance process (Mine Action Service), requests for services (Chief Information Technology Officer), guidance approval and publication process (Information Management Unit), field financial systems upgrade (Field Budget and Finance Division), the national competitive exam process (Office of Human Resources Management), the contingent-owned equipment reimbursement process (Field Budget and Finance Division), the air operator vendor registration process and the assets disposal process (Logistics Support Division) and the designation process (Office of Human Resources Management and Field Personnel Division). Two projects have been delayed in the short term as a result of the diversion of resources to the Haiti relief effort. 9. Regarding the request to address the lessons learned from recent experience in operating the support account, including on the conversion of general temporary assistance positions, in this respect the Secretariat is guided by the request of legislative bodies to ensure that core functions that are of a continuing nature are performed by incumbents of authorized posts. The conversion of general temporary assistance positions to posts is requested only when it is considered that the functions are of a core and continuous nature. II. Rejustification A. Department of Peacekeeping Operations 10. In accordance with Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/2010/1, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations: (a) Directs, manages and provides political and policy guidance and strategic direction to all operations under its responsibility, which comprise all traditional and multidimensional peacekeeping operations with military and/or police components and which may include elements of peacemaking and peacebuilding, as well as certain special political missions as determined by the Secretary-General; (b) Formulates policies, guidelines and procedures, including the continued development of best practices, guidance materials and training programmes that guide the design and delivery of United Nations peacekeeping and related activities for which it is given lead responsibility within the United Nations system; (c) Leads the integrated planning process for new Department-led operations and coordinates transitions and consolidation and exit strategies in existing operations, assisting with the development of a comprehensive United Nations approach to the resolution of conflict; (d) Fulfils its role as the designated lead entity within the United Nations system or in peacekeeping contexts in the areas of military, police, corrections, mine action, strengthening of legal and judicial institutions and security sector reform, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions or the Secretary-General's Policy Committee decisions and in coordination or consultation with partners; (e) Leads the delivery of integrated, efficient and coherent Headquarters support to multidimensional Department-led operations, drawing together all policy, military, political, field support, police and other civilian elements and links with other United Nations entities, including through its leadership of integrated mission task forces for those operations; (f) Provides expertise to the Department of Political Affairs and, through it, to missions led by that Department, as required and feasible, through its participation in integrated task forces and other consultation mechanisms led by the Department of Political Affairs in support of the conduct and planning of such missions; (g) Guides and promotes gender-sensitive approaches to the planning, design and implementation of policies and operational activities of operations led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and takes action to achieve gender parity at all levels and to ensure a gender-friendly work environment at Headquarters and in Department-led operations; (h) Manages the interaction of the Secretariat with troop- and police-contributing countries; (i) Maintains contact with the parties to conflicts and with members of the Security Council and the General Assembly to ensure the implementation of the mandates of Department-led operations; (j) Promotes and coordinates strategic and operational partnerships within the Secretariat and with other organizations in the United Nations system, regional organizations and other multilateral and bilateral institutions to support the planning and conduct of Department-led operations as well as the transition to sustainable peace in fulfilment of mandates provided by the Security Council and the General Assembly for those operations; (k) Manages reporting on behalf of the Secretary-General to the Security Council and the General Assembly on individual operations and on peacekeeping issues in general; (l) Provides substantive secretariat services to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations; (m) Implements the United Nations security management system within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations at Headquarters and in Department-led operations. 11. To ensure coherence and, where appropriate, integrated Department-led operations, as well as coordination with non-United Nations peacekeeping partners, the Department maintains the following mechanisms and arrangements: (a) Regular strategic dialogue and exchange with United Nations partners through meetings of the Secretary-General's Policy Committee, the Executive Committee on Peace and Security and other relevant senior management forums; (b) A structural arrangement by which the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support reports to and receives direction from the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on all issues pertaining to United Nations operations under the direction of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations; (c) An integrated mission planning process incorporating all relevant United Nations partners and, where appropriate, non-United Nations partners, to support integrated planning and the conduct of integrated operations led by the Department; (d) Integrated operational teams responsible for integrated planning and the provision of operational guidance and support to Department-led operations on mission-specific issues that cut across specialized functional areas, while those areas remain responsible for providing technical guidance across missions in their specific areas of responsibility; (e) Modalities for cooperation in the implementation of mandated responsibilities for cross-cutting activities, including guiding principles to ensure effective coordination, consultation and information-sharing; (f) Strategic cooperation frameworks and regular communication with regional and subregional organizations and international financial institutions on issues related to peacekeeping; (g) Modalities for the implementation of multidimensional presences and peacekeeping operations conducted or coordinated with regional organizations, where mandated by the Security Council and the General Assembly; (h) Modalities for coordination and, where appropriate, provision of support to Department-led operations by United Nations and non-United Nations partners; (i) Modalities for the provision of capacity-building and operational support by the United Nations to non-United Nations peacekeeping partners. 12. The Department is organized into five organizational units: the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, headed by the Under-Secretary-General, the Office of Operations, the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions and the Office of Military Affairs, each headed by an Assistant Secretary-General, and the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division, headed by a Director. Approved posts, Department of Peacekeeping Operations Office of the Under-Secretary-General Office of Operations Office of Military Affairs Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions Policy, Evaluation and Training Division 1. Office of the Under-Secretary-General 13. The Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations comprises the front office, the Public Affairs Section and the Office of the Chief of Staff, which includes the Situation Centre and the Executive Office. 14. The Office assists the Under-Secretary-General in carrying out his/her responsibilities to oversee and provide strategic policy direction to peacekeeping operations and special political missions under the direction of the Department; manage high-level involvement with Member States; manage media relations, publicity and external relations on peacekeeping-related issues; oversee the internal management of the Department, including the integration of the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support on all peacekeeping-related issues, leadership on departmental activities in the areas of programme management and information management and reform and change management; lead delivery on situational awareness and crisis response; oversee safety and security matters related to Department-led operations; direct the Department's engagement with appropriate legislative bodies; and provide substantive Secretariat support to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. 15. The Executive Office assists the head of the Department, programme managers and staff members, and is the central service for matters related to the budgetary, financial and human resources and general administrative responsibilities delegated by the Under-Secretary-General for Management. 16. The functions of the Office of Operations are to develop overarching political and operational strategies and provide political and strategic direction and day-to-day operational support for new and ongoing Department-led operations, including substantive guidance to those operations on policy and operational issues; devise and promote agreement on and implement solutions to the political and operational challenges of Department-led operations and support them vis-à-vis the parties to the conflict and other interested stakeholders; convey relevant concerns to members of the Security Council, Member States and other relevant partners; lead the integrated mission planning process for new operations and coordinate transitions in existing operations, including consolidation and exit strategies, by providing the overall political, strategic and operational framework and through the integrated operational teams, to ensure unity of command and integration of effort of the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support. 17. The Office of Operations is headed by an Assistant Secretary-General, who is accountable to and the deputy of the Under-Secretary-General. The front office of the Assistant Secretary-General includes staff directly assisting and advising him/her, as well as an integrated mission planning process capacity and a guidance and training capacity. The Office comprises four regional divisions: the Africa I Division, the Africa II Division, the Asia and Middle East Division and the Europe and Latin America Division. The regional divisions are each headed by a Director at the D-2 level. They contain a total of seven integrated operational teams. Each team serves as a principal entry point for operational and planning issues for the peacekeeping missions under its purview as well as for troop- and police-contributing countries, Member States and other relevant partners. They are led by a Team Leader at the D-1 level and consist of political affairs officers and specialist officers (military, police and support personnel). 18. The Addis Ababa-based component of the African Union Peace Support Team reports to the Africa I Division and consists of one P-5, three P-4, two P-3 and two General Service (Other level) posts. It works in close consultation with the team in New York and is responsible for providing advice on developing peacekeeping capacity directly to the African Union Commission, primarily its Peace Support Operations Division. The composition of the team reflects the priority areas in which the Commission requested support for the development of the African standby force. In addition to providing support to the Commission, the team coordinates with other United Nations peace and security components and with capacity-building partners based in Addis Ababa. 3. Office of Military Affairs 19. The Office of Military Affairs is mandated to provide military advice to senior management and the Security Council to ensure the utilization and deployment of the most appropriate military capability in peacekeeping operations. 20. The Office of Military Affairs is led by a Lieutenant General at the Assistant Secretary-General level and comprises the Office of the Military Adviser and three Services: the Current Military Operations Service, the Force Generation Service and the Military Planning Service. 4. Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions 21. The Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions is responsible for ensuring that peacekeeping operations and special political missions employ a coordinated approach to supporting rule of law and security institutions. The Office also serves as the designated lead entity for police and corrections issues and as chair or cochair of the inter-agency United Nations working groups established in the areas of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, mine action and security sector reform. Priority areas of engagement include developing joint programming and assessments with United Nations and non-United Nations partners; producing technical guidance materials and training; developing rapidly deployable police and civilian expert capacities and other resources; and undertaking public information and outreach activities to increase awareness of activities undertaken to support rule of law and security institutions. The Office is led by an Assistant Secretary-General, who reports to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. The Office consists of six organizational units: the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General; the Police Division; the Criminal Law and Judicial Advisory Section; the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section; the Mine Action Service; and the Security Sector Reform Unit. 5. Policy, Evaluation and Training Division 22. The Policy, Evaluation and Training Division is an integrated resource that provides an institutional strengthening capacity for peacekeeping through peacekeeping policy and doctrine formulation; capturing and sharing of best practices; standardized training for peacekeeping; evaluation of programme performance towards mandate implementation; and operational frameworks for strategic cooperation with various United Nations and external partners. The Division provides operational support to field missions in several thematic areas, including training, gender, HIV/AIDS, child protection and civil affairs. 23. The Division provides services to operations led by the Department, Member States and the programmes and subprogrammes of the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support. The Division comprises the Office of the Director, the Integrated Training Service and the Peacekeeping Best Practices Section. B. Department of Field Support 24. In accordance with ST/SGB/2010/2 the Department of Field Support: (a) Provides administrative and logistical support services to the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Political Affairs through the delivery of dedicated support to United Nations peacekeeping operations, special political missions and other field presences, including services in the areas of human resources, finance, budget, conduct and discipline, logistics and ICT; (b) Contributes to the development of organizational policies, procedures, rules and regulations, including the proposal of adjustments to meet field requirements; ensures consistency in the application of support-related policies and practices in field operations; delegates to field missions and administers and monitors authorities in the areas of human resources, finance, local procurement, conduct and discipline, logistics, ICT and other general management issues; (c) Recruits, manages and administers civilian staff serving in field operations, including the administration of the senior field leadership selection process, the provision of policy guidance on entitlements of military observers and civilian police officers and the management of recruitment, benefits and entitlements of civilian staff in field operations; (d) Solicits input from field operations and proposes organizational, structural staffing and resource requirements for field operations to the Controller for the budgetary approval process and monitors and manages mission and extrabudgetary funds for field operations; (e) Supports compliance with the highest standards of conduct and discipline among United Nations personnel in field operations, including the implementation of the zero-tolerance policy of the Secretary-General regarding sexual exploitation and abuse and the Organization's strategy to address sexual exploitation and abuse; (f) Directs and implements global peacekeeping logistics support and supply-chain management, conducts integrated logistics support planning and maintains the rapid deployment capacity for field operations; (g) Provides global ICT services for field operations; (h) Liaises with departments and offices within the Secretariat, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, Member States and non-governmental organizations and coordinates with troop- and police-contributing countries and regional organizations on the administrative and logistical support aspects of field operations. 25. The Department of Field Support comprises the Office of the Under-Secretary-General, the Field Personnel Division, the Field Budget and Finance Division, the Logistics Support Division and the Information Communications and Technology Division. Approved posts, Department of Field Support Field Service Principal level National General Security Field Personnel Division Field Budget and Finance Division Logistics Support Division Information and Communications Technology Division 26. The core functions of the Office of the Under-Secretary-General are as follows: (a) Assisting and advising the Under-Secretary-General in carrying out his/her duties; (b) Advising on support policy issues requiring strategic decisions by relevant services, departments and agencies; (c) Developing and maintaining an efficient system of review of incoming communications and correspondence, screening items submitted for clearance and initiating or designating actions to be taken; (d) Monitoring strategic support issues and operational requirements in United Nations field operations and ensuring that they are effectively addressed; (e) Supporting and coordinating the preparation or provision of inputs to reports of the Secretary-General to the Security Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, the Fourth and Fifth Committees and other legislative bodies with regard to all areas of support; (f) Coordinating and serving as a facilitator to solve problems raised by the management of field operations for the effective provision of support to field-based special political missions; (g) Exchanging information on behalf of the Under-Secretary-General, as required, with peacekeeping missions, special political missions and other field operations along with external partners, including permanent missions and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes; (h) Coordinating with the Public Affairs Section of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on the management of media relations, publicity and external relations for the Department of Field Support, including the development and implementation of communications plans and campaigns, as well as representational activities; (i) Coordinating with the Department of Management in the areas of finance, budget and human and physical resources; (j) Coordinating and preparing position papers, briefing notes and talking points for meetings and conferences. 27. The Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support comprises the front office of the Under-Secretary-General, the Senior Leadership Appointments Section, the office of the Assistant Secretary-General, the Conduct and Discipline Unit, the Audit and Board of Inquiry Team and the Field Procurement and Liaison Team. 2. Field Personnel Division 28. The Field Personnel Division's mission is to enable United Nations peace operations to fulfil their mandates by designing, recruiting, developing and maintaining a high-quality civilian workforce. The Division is headed by a Director at the D-2 level, who is accountable to the Under-Secretary-General, and comprises two services, each headed by a Chief at the D-1 level. The Field Personnel Operations Service provides operational support in the functional areas of travel and administration (including on-boarding) to all field operations that do not have delegated human resources management authority. The Field Personnel Specialist Support Service provides strategic services in the areas of policy implementation guidance, organizational design and classification, self-monitoring, information management, outreach, roster maintenance and succession planning. 3. Field Budget and Finance Division 29. The Field Budget and Finance Division is headed by a Director, who is accountable to the Under-Secretary-General. The Division comprises the Office of the Director, the Budget and Performance Reporting Service and the Memorandum of Understanding and Claims Management Section. 30. The Budget and Performance Reporting Service is headed by a Chief of Service, who is accountable to the Director of the Division. The Service consists of two Sections, each headed by a Chief. The core function of the Budget and Performance Reporting Service is to support field operations in the areas of budget and finance, including: (a) Supporting the preparation of budget proposals, performance reports and other budgetary documents by providing guidance to field operations, including through field support visits, and offices at Headquarters, particularly the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Field Support, on budget policies, procedures, processes, systems, practices, rules and regulations; results-based budgeting; and the implementation of recommendations by advisory and legislative bodies; (b) Representing the Department of Field Support and field operations in discussions with legislative and advisory bodies, as necessary, including the provision of inputs to the Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts for formal responses and communication to legislative bodies; (c) Supporting the implementation of approved budgets for field operations by providing guidance to field operations and offices at Headquarters on policies, procedures, processes, systems, rules and regulations with regard to budgetary/ allotment authorizations, redeployments and actual and projected expenditures within the financial regulations and rules and budgetary and financial policies established by the Controller. 31. The Memorandum of Understanding and Claims Management Section is headed by a Chief, who is accountable to the Director of the Division. The core function of the Section is to undertake, in consultation with the Office of Military Affairs, the Police Division and the Mine Action Service of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Logistics Support Division of the Department of Field Support, the financial aspects of the management of contingent-owned equipment and memorandums of understanding related to Member States participating in peacekeeping operations. 4. Logistics Support Division 32. The Logistics Support Division is headed by a Director, who is accountable to the Under-Secretary-General, and comprises the Office of the Director, the Operational Support Service, the Transportation and Movements Service and the Specialist Support Service. Each Service is headed by a Deputy Director/Chief of Service who is accountable to the Director of the Division. The Logistics Support Division is responsible for the implementation and monitoring of policies and procedures for all logistics issues in all peacekeeping operations and field-based special political missions. 33. The Operational Support Service is responsible for planning logistics operations and programme support, including overall direction of the strategic deployment stocks and the implementation of the aviation safety programme. The Service comprises the Logistics Operations Section, the Strategic Deployment Stocks Unit and the Aviation Safety Section. 34. The Transportation and Movements Service ensures effective logistics capabilities in terms of air transport and strategic air and sea lifts for the movement of military and civilian personnel and cargo, and provides vehicles and spare parts at the required time and place in the most efficient manner. The Service comprises the Movement Control Unit, the Surface Transport Section and the Air Transport Section. 35. The Specialist Support Service ensures the effective delivery of logistics commodities and services, including in the areas of supply, engineering, contingent-owned equipment and property management and cartographic and medical support. The Service comprises the Medical Support Section, the Engineering Section, the Supply Section, the Contingent-Owned Equipment and Property Management Support Section and the Cartographic Section. 36. The Logistics Support Division also coordinates its operations with the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy (UNLB), which manages reserve equipment and strategic deployment stocks that assist in the rapid establishment of new missions. The services in the Division provide direction to the tenant units at UNLB, which include the Strategic Air Operations Centre, the Aviation Safety Regional Office, the Geographic Information Systems Centre and the Engineering Standards and Design Centre. 5. Information and Communications Technology Division 37. The Information and Communications Technology Division is headed by a Director, who is accountable to the Under-Secretary-General, and comprises the Office of the Director, the Field Communications and Information Technology Operations Service and the Field Technology and Security Operations Service. Each area is headed by a Chief, who is accountable to the Director of the Division. 38. The Division is responsible for supporting peace operations worldwide through the provision of innovative and reliable telecommunications and information technology solutions. The Division delivers voice, video and high-speed data systems, network services and field-specific systems and applications that qualitatively and quantitatively satisfy the requirements of field operations worldwide. 39. The Division also supports the work of the Office of Information and Communications Technology by: (a) Establishing information and communications technology architecture and standards; (b) Planning and implementing major infrastructure improvements for field operations; (c) Implementing and supporting Organization-wide applications and major shared applications for the field; (d) Providing centralized information and communications technology project management support; (e) Coordinating disaster recovery and business continuity planning for the field; (f) Reviewing and approving information and communications technology field budget requests; (g) Maintaining strategic oversight of the enterprise data centres and major communications facilities, including review and approval of strategic directions. C. Department of Management Approved posts, Department of Management Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts Office of Human Resources Management Office of Central Support Services 40. The Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management comprises the secretariat of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts and the Headquarters Property Survey Board, the Management Support Service, the Fifth Committee secretariat, the Management Evaluation Unit and the Executive Office. 41. The secretariat of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts and the Headquarters Property Survey Board provides services to the Committee, which reviews proposed procurement cases over $500,000, or $200,000 for letters of assist, and the Board, which reviews proposed disposal of assets cases. The Chair has been requested to provide services to the Award Review Board as registrar on a pilot basis. The Board is a mechanism for reviewing procurement challenges by unsuccessful vendors and rendering independent advice on the merits of the procurement challenge to the Under-Secretary-General for Management. 42. The role of the Management Support Service is to partner with Secretariat departments to lead change management activities, supporting their efforts to improve management practices and simplify administrative processes and procedures, and to provide advice to programme managers on implementing managerial reforms to enhance efficiency and effectiveness, particularly through the introduction of best practices and support for restructuring, process improvement and self-evaluation. 43. The specific areas of expertise in support of the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support and peacekeeping operations are process improvement, change management and organizational restructuring and design. Specifically, and in direct response to comments of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its consideration of the Secretary-General's comprehensive report on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peace operations (A/61/858 and Corr.1), the focus is on achieving sustained process improvements and enabling the institutionalization of a continuous process improvement capacity. Lastly, the Service's assignment to the Umoja project will enhance its ability to synergize strategic management initiatives with an Organization-wide impact. In addition the Service will continue to support management activities throughout the Secretariat, with a particular focus on peacekeeping operations. 44. The secretariat of the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly provides services in support of the Committee, which is responsible for administrative and budgetary matters. 45. The Management Evaluation Unit, established by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/228, will conduct prompt management evaluations of contested administrative decisions. 2. Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts 46. The Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts comprises the Office of the Controller, the Accounts Division, the Peacekeeping Financing Division, the Treasury, the Financial Information Operations Service and the Programme Planning and Budget Division. The Office is headed by the Assistant Secretary-General, Controller. The Controller and the officials in charge of each organizational unit, in addition to the specific functions set out in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/2003/16, perform the general functions applicable to their positions, as set out in ST/SGB/1997/5. 47. The Office, which is the central service on matters related to programme planning, budget and accounts: (a) Administers and ensures compliance with the Financial Regulations and Rules and the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation; and relevant legislative mandates; (b) Establishes and applies the budgetary and accounting policies and procedures of the United Nations; (c) Plans, administers and coordinates the use of all resources made available to the Organization and ensures their effective and efficient use, directly or through delegation of authority and/or instructions to other offices of the United Nations at Headquarters and overseas; (d) Accounts for and reports to the appropriate authorities on the use made of United Nations finances; (e) Implements and operates the Integrated Management Information System, in particular by providing specifications for changes and conducting user acceptance tests, supporting the departments and offices with delegated administrative authority and monitoring the operations of the system. 3. Office of Human Resources Management 48. The Office of Human Resources Management seeks to align the Organization's human resources capacity with its mission and changing mandates and to ensure that the Secretariat can carry out its functions effectively and efficiently. It endeavours to act with sensitivity and appropriate flexibility, taking into account the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the mandates of the General Assembly, the Staff Regulations and Rules and the principles and practices of a good employer. In developing solutions, it addresses strategic organizational needs as well as those of individual staff. 49. Accordingly, as the central authority for matters pertaining to the management of human resources, the Office is responsible for: (a) Identifying, championing, developing and implementing, in strategic partnerships with clients, suitable policies, programmes, procedures and supporting systems, including technology-based support tools, that together will lead to: (i) The creation of an organizational culture that is responsive and results-oriented, rewards creativity and innovation and promotes continuous learning, high performance and managerial excellence; (ii) Greater transparency, responsibility, accountability, due process, equity and fairness in the management of human resources; (iii) The development of a more versatile, multi-skilled and mobile staff; (b) Selecting, retaining and developing staff of the highest competence and integrity, taking into account the provisions of Articles 8 and 101 of the Charter; (c) Managing programmes concerning staff and career development, staff mobility, performance management, contractual arrangements and conditions of service that meet the needs and aspirations of both staff and the Organization, in coordination with the International Civil Service Commission as appropriate; (d) Planning human resources objectives, at the global Secretariat, departmental and office levels; (e) Monitoring the implementation of rules, policies and programmes; guiding and advising staff and managers in the performance of their roles and responsibilities in the area of human resources; and taking or recommending corrective measures or sanctions, as appropriate, to improve management practice and increase efficiency of work; (f) Developing, implementing and monitoring health and medico-administrative policies and the health and medical care provided to staff worldwide, including those in peacekeeping, humanitarian and field missions and United Nations funds and programmes; (g) Providing support to intergovernmental, inter-agency and expert bodies in the field of human resources management; (h) Conducting staff-management consultation and promoting staff welfare and security. 4. Office of Central Support Services 50. The Office of Central Support Services comprises the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General, the Procurement Division and the Facilities and Commercial Services Division. The Office is headed by the Assistant Secretary-General. The Assistant Secretary-General and the officials in charge of each organizational unit, in addition to the specific functions set out in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/1998/11, perform the general functions applicable to their positions, as set out in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/1997/5, including: (a) Ensuring the efficient, effective and economical administration of procurement and related services for Headquarters, offices away from Headquarters and peacekeeping and other field missions; (b) Providing cost-effective, qualitative and timely travel, transportation and related services to the United Nations, its staff, members of delegations and others at Headquarters; (c) Providing for the effective and efficient management, maintenance and operation of existing facilities, including office and conference facilities and the support services necessary for the Organization to carry out its work; (d) Overseeing the commercial activities carried out on United Nations premises and in support of the work of the Organization, and administering the related contracts; (e) Managing the operations of the United Nations Postal Administration; (f) Maintaining custody of the archives of the United Nations. D. Office of Internal Oversight Services 51. In accordance with Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/273, the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) is the internal oversight body of the United Nations. Established in 1994 by the General Assembly, the Office assists the Secretary-General in fulfilling his oversight responsibilities in respect of the resources and staff of the Organization through the provision of audit, investigation, inspection and evaluation services. The Office is headed by the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services. 52. OIOS consists of the Internal Audit Division, the Inspection and Evaluation Division and the Investigations Division, each headed by a Director who reports directly to the Under-Secretary-General. 53. In accordance with Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/1997/5, the Executive Office assists the head of OIOS, programme managers and staff members in carrying out the financial, personnel and general administrative responsibilities delegated by the Under-Secretary-General for Management, including overall administration and management, the administration of OIOS staff and financial resources located at Headquarters, Vienna, Nairobi and other duty stations under the delegation of authority granted by the Secretary-General (see ST/AI/401/Corr.1 and ST/AI/2003/4) and in accordance with the regulations and rules of the United Nations, the recruitment and administration of oversight staff in peacekeeping missions and the provision of advice to OIOS senior managers on administrative, financial, personnel and budgetary matters. 54. The Internal Audit Division is responsible for conducting comprehensive internal audits in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing. The Division uses risk-based audit plans in determining its programme of work. 55. The core functions of the Division are as follows: (a) Conducting financial, operational and management audits for all United Nations activities under the administrative responsibility of the Secretary-General; (b) Providing internal audit services as requested by separately administered funds and programmes; (c) Conducting audits of programme output delivery as provided for in rule 106.1 (c) of the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation (ST/SGB/2000/8); (d) Assessing the effectiveness of internal controls; (e) Recommending measures to strengthen internal controls, ensure compliance with legislative mandates, regulations, rules and policies and enhance the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of operations; (f) Monitoring the implementation of agreed internal audit recommendations and reporting on the status thereof. 56. The Inspection and Evaluation Division is headed by a Director at the D-2 level (funded from the regular budget), and comprises three sections committed to undertaking inspections and evaluations of Secretariat programmes, including peacekeeping, and providing timely, valid and reliable information from an independent perspective that can be used to strengthen the Organization. Guided by the norms and standards for evaluation established by the United Nations Evaluation Group, the Division's outputs consist of inspection and evaluation reports. The Division's unique oversight role is differentiated from the other OIOS oversight functions, such as audits (which focus on internal controls and compliance with United Nations rules and regulations) and investigations (which focus on the determination of wrongdoing), by its focus on assessing how well a programme is working and why. 57. The Division's programme of work is shaped by its role of ensuring programme accountability, its core principle of independence and its dual "clientele" consisting of both the Member States and the Secretary-General. Evaluation and inspection topics may be identified through a strategic risk assessment or they may be requested by the Secretary-General or Member States (e.g. through intergovernmental bodies such as the Committee for Programme and Coordination or the General Assembly), or by Secretariat programme managers. 58. In accordance with Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/273, the Investigations Division conducts preliminary administrative fact-finding investigations into reports of possible misconduct and transmits to the Secretary-General the results of those investigations together with appropriate recommendations. The Division is mandated to undertake proactive investigations into high-risk operations or activities, especially with respect to fraud and corruption, and to provide recommendations for corrective action to minimize the risk of exposure. Approved posts, Office of Internal Oversight Services Subtotal E. Executive Office of the Secretary-General 59. The Executive Office of the Secretary-General is headed by the Chef de Cabinet and performs the functions set out in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/1998/18. In particular, the Executive Office: (a) Assists the Secretary-General in the establishment of general policy and in the exercise of executive direction in relation to the work of the Secretariat, United Nations programmes and other entities within the Organization; (b) Assists the Secretary-General in his relations with the principal organs of the Organization; (c) Assists the Secretary-General in supervising and coordinating the work of the Organization, pursuant to his/her decisions and the relevant directives of the intergovernmental bodies concerned, relating to political missions, preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, economic, social, humanitarian and human rights, and administration and management; (d) Assists the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and in his inter-agency coordination function in relation to the United Nations system of organizations; (e) Assists the Secretary-General in his contacts with Governments, delegations, non-governmental organizations, the press and the public; (f) Prepares speeches and statements for the Secretary-General and prepares or coordinates the preparation of briefing material for his personal attention; (g) Deals with protocol, liaison and representation, organizes official ceremonies and similar functions and makes arrangements for official receptions and other functions hosted by the Secretary-General; (h) Provides the Secretary-General with administrative support, makes travel arrangements for the Secretary-General and his/her party on official missions and maintains the personal security of the Secretary-General and his/her family. 60. The Executive Office similarly assists the Deputy Secretary-General in the exercise of the responsibilities assigned to that Office. Approved posts, Executive Office of the Secretary-General F. Office of the Ombudsman 61. The Office of the Ombudsman was established by the Secretary-General in 2002 pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 55/258 and 56/253 to make available the services of an impartial and independent person to address the employment-related problems of staff members, including matters pertaining to conditions of employment, administration of benefits, managerial practices and professional and staff relations. In the performance of his/her duties, the Ombudsman is independent of any United Nations organ or official. Approved posts, Office of the Ombudsman G. Office of Legal Affairs 62. As set out in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/2008/13 concerning the organization of the Office of Legal Affairs, the Office is the central legal service of the Organization and provides legal advice to the Secretary-General, Secretariat departments and offices and United Nations organs, including peacekeeping missions, in the field of public and private law. 63. The Office is headed by the Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, the Legal Counsel of the United Nations, who is supported by the heads of the various units that are described in the above-referenced bulletin. The Legal Counsel and the heads of those units carry out the functions described in the bulletin, as well as the general functions applicable to their positions, as set out in Secretary-General's bulletin ST/SGB/1997/5. Two of the units, the Office of the Legal Counsel, headed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, and the General Legal Division, headed by a Director, furnish the main legal support and services provided by the Office to the Organization's peacekeeping operations and activities. 64. The Office of the Legal Counsel and the General Legal Division support the Organization's peacekeeping operations by advising on and providing legal assistance and services for a wide range of legal matters, including: (a) the institutional and operational arrangements of the Organization's peacekeeping operations, general questions of public international law, the development or application of rules of engagement and the negotiation, interpretation and implementation of status-of-forces, status-of-mission and other similar agreements with Governments and agreements with international organizations concerning such operational arrangements; (b) the commercial and logistical aspects of peacekeeping operations, including contracts for supplies, logistical support, insurance, demining and similar operations, disposition of assets and air and sea charter arrangements; (c) the arbitration or other resolution of claims with respect to contractual and real property disputes, as well as claims for property damage, personal injury and death; (d) personnel and financial matters, including the interpretation and application of the staff and financial regulations and rules; and (e) security arrangements. Approved posts, Office of Legal Affairs H. Department of Public Information 65. The mission of the Department of Public Information is to help fulfil the substantive purposes of the United Nations by strategically communicating the activities and concerns of the Organization to achieve the greatest public impact. 66. The overall work of the Department is guided by four strategic choices: achieving greater effectiveness in its communications work through targeted delivery; making enhanced use of the new information and communications technologies in all areas of its work; expanding the grass-roots support base through partnerships with civil society organizations; and assessing departmental activities through an annual performance impact review. 67. The Department comprises three divisions, namely, the Strategic Communications Division, the News and Media Division and the Outreach Division. The Department also administers the Office of the Spokesperson of the Secretary-General. Approved posts, Department of Public Information I. Department of Safety and Security 68. The overall objectives of the Department of Safety and Security are to enable the effective conduct of the Division of Headquarters Security and Safety Services, the Division of Regional Operations and the Field Support Service; to ensure effective risk mitigation through the establishment of a coordinated security threat and risk assessment mechanism in the framework of a common system-wide methodology; to develop high-quality best-practice security policies, standards and operational procedures across the United Nations system, including the appropriate degree of standardization; and to support their implementation and monitor compliance. 69. The Division of Headquarters Security and Safety Services, headed by a Director at the D-2 level, is responsible for integrating the uniformed services under one set of common policies and operational procedures, streamlining reporting mechanisms and determining and prioritizing operational requirements. The core functions of the services include planning and carrying out a security, fire prevention and safety programme to provide protection for United Nations delegates, staff, visitors, buildings and the grounds at large; maintaining liaison with local and foreign law enforcement authorities to ensure the protection of United Nations officials and visiting dignitaries; and carrying out various other security-related requirements. The Division of Regional Operations mobilizes staff to meet field requirements, supports designated officials in emergency situations and maintains up-to-date security and threat information. The Field Support Service is headed by a Chief who reports to the Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General. The Service comprises the Training and Development Section, which is responsible for managing the development and implementation of system-wide security management; the Critical Incident Stress Management Unit, which is responsible for developing and implementing a comprehensive United Nations policy regarding the management of critical incident stress; the Information Management Section, which is responsible for managing systems that provide security-related information to a variety of stakeholders ranging from staff members to heads of agencies; and the Crisis Management Unit, which is responsible for the provision of a cross-cutting system-wide capacity for the development of coordinated crisis management response plans. Approved posts, Department of Safety and Security J. Office of Information and Communications Technology 70. The Office of Information and Communications Technology was established by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/262 as an independent organizational unit to provide strong, central leadership for the establishment and implementation of Organization-wide ICT standards and activities in order to ensure the efficient utilization of resources, the modernization of information systems and improvement in the ICT services available to the United Nations. The Office is headed by the Chief Information Technology Officer, Assistant Secretary-General. The primary functions of the Office are to set the strategic direction for the Organization overall in terms of ICT, plan and coordinate Secretariat-wide ICT activities and provide enterprise systems and infrastructure; develop the ICT strategy for the Secretariat and coordinate its implementation; monitor and evaluate the performance of ICT units against established goals, objectives and budgetary targets; and determine the technological direction and architecture standards for the Organization. 71. The Office of Information and Communications Technology comprises the front office; the Strategic Management Service, which is responsible for planning and coordinating a number of essential activities that affect all ICT units in the Secretariat in five functional areas: strategy and performance, security and audit, the Project Management Office, architecture and standards and client services; the Operations Support Section, which provides administrative support, including Executive Office functions, ICT-related procurement activities, the processing of contracts and related invoices, telephone- and facsimile-related billing services for the Secretariat, the management of service-level agreements and the management of computer equipment in the Secretariat, such as inventory, receiving, testing, destruction and donation or disposal; the Resource Management Service, which works closely with departments across the Organization to develop ICT systems and tools to improve institutional work processes for the effective management of financial, human and other resources; the Knowledge Management Service, which is responsible for overseeing efforts to capture and share the Organization's information assets through the development and management of such tools as web-based services, collaborative environments, geographic information systems and document repositories to enhance the Organization's ability to gather, store, share and disseminate information; the Field Systems Service, which provides application planning, development and support services to the field, consolidates application needs in the field and develops and leverages common solutions that can be implemented broadly to meet the needs of the field; and the Infrastructure Management Service, which supports all ICT systems and services and provides the technological foundation for the global ICT environment. Approved posts, Office of Information and Communications Technology Annex I Abbreviations (used in annexes I-IX): USG, Under-Secretary-General; ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; GS, General Service; PL, Principal level; OL, Other level; NGS, national General Service; TC, Trades and Crafts; SS, Security Service; LL, Local level; FS, Field Service; NO, National Officer. a GTA positions less than 12 months. Annex II Authorized staffing of the Department of Field Support for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Annex IV Annex V Approved staffing of the Office of Legal Affairs for the period from Annex VII 