%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|KYRGYZSTAN|CONSULTATIONS|

General Assembly Security Council Sixty-fourth session Agenda item 70 Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance Sixty-fifth year Letter dated 25 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit herewith the text of the statement adopted by the Secretaries of the Security Councils of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) member States at the conclusion of the consultations held in Moscow on 14 June 2010 concerning the situation in Kyrgyzstan (see annex). I should be grateful if you would arrange for this statement to be circulated as a document of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, under agenda item 70, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Vitaly Churkin Statement by the Secretaries of the Security Councils of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) member States -- the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, the Republic of Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan On the proposal of the President of the CSTO Council on Collective Security, President Medvedev of the Russian Federation, the Secretaries of the Security Councils held urgent consultations at the CSTO Secretariat on 14 June 2010, with the participation of the plenipotentiary representative of the Kyrgyz Republic to CSTO, to assess the situation in the Kyrgyz Republic in connection with the strained situation in the southern part of the country. The Secretaries of the Security Councils of the CSTO member States expressed serious concern at the events occurring in recent days in southern Kyrgyzstan, which have resulted in numerous human casualties and have been accompanied by large-scale rioting, massacres and atrocities. The participants in the consultations noted that the country has long been subject to illegal activities and rampant crime, but the efforts of the interim government of the Kyrgyz Republic thus far have been insufficient to stabilize the situation in the country. The Secretaries of the Security Councils of the CSTO member States called upon the interim government of the Kyrgyz Republic to adopt all necessary additional measures for the speedy restoration of order in the country and the safety of its citizens. The participants in the consultations appealed to the multi-ethnic people of Kyrgyzstan to resist provocation and incitement, and to refrain from seeking to solve the growing problems by means of violence and the resort to arms. In the light of their assessment of the situation and in conformity with the CSTO mandate, the Secretaries of the Security Councils of the CSTO member States, with a view to a further report to the Presidents of the CSTO member States and the members of the CSTO Council on Collective Security, prepared a detailed proposal for reducing the level of inter-ethnic tension, containing the illegal activities of criminal elements and gangs, putting an end to extremist acts and strengthening security along the frontiers. The participants in the consultations expressed their conviction that the collective measures that have been worked out and the efforts of the law enforcement agencies of the Kyrgyz Republic would, with the support and active cooperation of the CSTO member States, bring about the conditions necessary for a stabilization of the situation in the Kyrgyz Republic. Secretary of the National Security Council of the Republic of Armenia A. V. Bagdasaryan Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation N. P. Patrushev State Secretary of the Security Council of the Republic of Belarus L. S. Maltsev Secretary of the Security Council of the Republic of Tajikistan A. N. Azimov Assistant to the President and Secretary of the Security Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan M. M. Tazhin Secretary of the National Security Council in the Office of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan M. I. Ataev Moscow, 14 June 2010 