%%%NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|MIDDLE EAST|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|

Sixty-fifth session Agenda items 93 and 100 Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East The risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East Report of the Secretary-General Addendum* Contents Page Replies received from Governments Algeria Egypt Islamic Republic of Iran Jordan * The information contained in the addendum was received after the submission of the main report. [Original: French] [7 July 2010] Algeria believes that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones is an effective contribution towards nuclear disarmament, the consolidation of regional and international peace and security and the strengthening of the nuclear nonproliferation regime. Article VII of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons confirms and encourages this approach. Therefore, Algeria actively supports the promotion of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all regions of the world, and is engaged in sustained efforts for the development of denuclearized zones in its own geographical region. In that regard, on 11 February 1998, it was one of the first countries in Africa to ratify the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Pelindaba Treaty), which entered into force in July 2009. Similarly, Algeria continues to reaffirm its commitment to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, both as a way of providing regional and international stability and of strengthening the climate of trust between the States in the region. This is all the more necessary since the proliferation of nuclear weapons in the Middle East is a constant concern for States in the region and a genuine threat to international peace and security. The goal of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East is the subject of the resolution adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty reaffirmed the importance and validity of that resolution until its goals and objectives are achieved. In that document, the States parties to the Treaty explicitly called upon Israel to accede to the Treaty and accept International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards on all its facilities. In that regard, Algeria recalls that the United Nations Security Council, in resolution 487 (1981), explicitly called upon Israel to place its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. All States in the Middle East placing all their nuclear facilities under the Agency's safeguards system is a necessary precondition for the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction in that region. Algeria also calls for the implementation of the two aforementioned resolutions, insofar as they constitute concrete steps leading towards the establishment of a denuclearized Middle East. Algeria deplores the fact that, 15 years after its adoption, the 1995 resolution on the Middle East has still not been implemented, even though its adoption was the crucial element of the compromise that led to the acceptance by all States parties to the Treaty of the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of the Treaty's indefinite extension. While almost all States in the region have acceded to the Treaty, the establishment of a denuclearized zone in the Middle East is being delayed by Israel's refusal to accede to the Treaty and to place its facilities under the IAEA safeguards regime. Israel's military nuclear capabilities continue to be a source of great concern for the security of the States in the region and a major challenge for the international non-proliferation regime. In that regard, Algeria welcomes the recommendations and practical steps adopted recently by the 2010 Treaty Review Conference concerning the implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, including, in particular, the reaffirmation of the validity of that resolution until its goals and objectives are achieved. Algeria therefore calls for the implementation, within the prescribed deadlines, of the recommendations, particularly those relating to the convening of an international conference in 2012 on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction, and the appointment of a facilitator with a mandate to support the implementation of the 1995 resolution, who will report to the forthcoming 2015 Treaty Review Conference and its Preparatory Committees. To that end, there is an urgent need for Member States, particularly States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, nuclear-weapon States and those exporting nuclear technologies, to show their support for the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction by adopting specific measures that go beyond simple declarations of good intent. These measures should include, inter alia: :: Denying Israel any nuclear cooperation, including within the IAEA framework, until the country has placed all its nuclear facilities under the IAEA safeguards system. :: Voting in favour of the IAEA General Conference resolutions on the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East and on Israeli nuclear capabilities. :: Urging Israel to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as a non-nuclear-weapon State, and to place all its nuclear facilities and stockpiles of nuclear materials under the IAEA safeguards system. :: Not transferring to Israel, either individually or through the Nuclear Suppliers Group, nuclear materials, equipment or technology, in accordance with article 1 of the Treaty, until the country has renounced the military nuclear option and placed all its nuclear facilities and materials under IAEA safeguards. Lastly, Algeria believes that the submission of annual reports by all States parties to the Treaty, concerning the implementation of General Assembly resolution 64/26 and the resolution of the 1995 Treaty Review and Extension Conference, is an important and useful exercise that makes it possible to measure the actions accomplished by each State involved in the implementation of those resolutions and, where appropriate, the progress made in that regard. [Original: English] [20 September 2010] The item entitled "Establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East" was first included in the agenda of the General Assembly in 1974 at the request of Egypt and the Islamic Republic of Iran. While the General Assembly has annually adopted, since 1980, a resolution calling for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, Egypt continued to pursue consistently the objective of ridding the Middle East of the threat of nuclear weapons. Egypt notes with grave concern that, while all States of the Middle East have become parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Israel persists in ignoring repeated calls for its adherence to the Treaty and the placement of its nuclear facilities under full-scope International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards, thereby perpetuating a dangerous imbalance, and a threat to regional and international peace and security. Recognizing such a threat to international and regional peace and security, and while reaffirming the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, the States parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty reaffirmed unanimously, at the 2000 Review Conference, the importance of Israel's accession to the Treaty as a non-nuclear-weapon State and the placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive IAEA safeguards. Indeed, in its final document, the 2000 Review Conference: ... Recalls that in paragraph 4 of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, the Conference calls upon all States in the Middle East that have not yet done so, without exception, to accede to the Treaty as soon as possible and to place their nuclear facilities under full-scope International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards. The Conference notes, in this connection, that the report of the United Nations Secretariat on the implementation of the 1995 resolution in the Middle East (NPT/CONF.2000/7) states that several States have acceded to the Treaty and that, with these accessions, all States of the region of the Middle East, with the exception of Israel, are States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The Conference welcomes the accession of those States and reaffirms the importance of Israel's accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive IAEA safeguards, in realizing the goal of universal adherence to the Treaty in the Middle East. In addition to urgent calls for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, inter alia, in the context of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Review process, IAEA and the United Nations General Assembly, the Security Council called upon Israel to urgently place its nuclear facilities under the safeguards of IAEA (resolution 487 (1981)) and recalled the objective of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East (resolution 687 (1991)). Egypt firmly believes that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in the areas of tension and conflict does indeed contribute significantly to easing tensions, confidence-building, preventing conflicts and developing peaceful relations and mutual cooperation. Egypt believes that the only prerequisite for the commencement of negotiations on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East is the existence of political will, both in the region, and among parties that have a direct stake in the region's security and stability. At the 2010 Review Conference, the existence of political will was reaffirmed through the consensual adoption by States parties, including all States parties in the region, of a process leading to the establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. Such manifestation of commitment by States parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons needs to be implemented promptly. Egypt looks forward to earnest efforts by the Secretary-General of the United Nations as well as the depositary States of the Treaty to take the necessary agreed measures, paving the way for the early commencement of negotiations on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. The negotiations and their success would represent a serious breakthrough in efforts geared towards regaining security in a region currently facing an Israeli nuclear threat that is provoking further proliferation risks and challenges. Egypt expresses its intent to cooperate actively with all parties in an effort to safeguard the Middle East against all nuclear threats through a comprehensive and balanced approach that can ensure the security of all States of the region against nuclear dangers through the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons. [27 August 2010] The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that a nuclear-weapon-free zone is a recognized regional instrument to strengthen regional and international peace and security through preventing the threat of nuclear war. Such an arrangement is in conformity with the provisions of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly, devoted to disarmament. More than three decades have elapsed since the introduction of the idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East for the very first time by Iran in 1974. The resolutions on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, which have been constantly adopted without a vote by the General Assembly since 1980, represent the significance of the realization of this noble idea in the vital region of the Middle East. The following paragraphs list the achievements of the Islamic Republic of Iran in fulfilling the principles and objectives of the resolution on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East at the national, regional and international levels, with conclusions on the way ahead. I. National measures The Islamic Republic of Iran, by renouncing the possession of nuclear weapons and placing its nuclear facilities under the safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), has shown its resolute determination to achieve the total elimination of weapons of mass destruction. Therefore, such an act underscores the undiminished support for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, with the ultimate objective of securing a world free from nuclear weapons. The Islamic Republic of Iran ratified the IAEA statute in 1958 and subsequently signed and ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1969 and 1970 respectively. This process was furthered by the ratification of the IAEA Safeguards Agreement in 1973 and ultimately further accomplished by the signature of the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty in 1996. Furthermore, having ratified all major treaties relating to weapons of mass destruction, namely the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention, and fully complied with their provisions, the Islamic Republic of Iran supports the establishment of a weapons of mass destruction free zone in the Middle East and calls all countries of the region to intensify their efforts for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction threats from this region. II. Regional measures While supporting all regional measures taken to date to develop nuclear-weapon-free zones in Latin America, the South Pacific, Africa and South-East Asia, the Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the establishment of the first nuclear-weapon-free zone located entirely in the northern hemisphere in its immediate neighbourhood, namely the Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia. The Islamic Republic of Iran firmly believes that such measures and attempts, if considered seriously and globally by States, will be a step towards promoting international peace and security for the whole world as well as further strengthening the nuclear disarmament goal. Nevertheless, there are enough reasons to indicate that the establishment of such a zone is more significant in the Middle East, especially in the present circumstances. Notwithstanding the global attempts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone particularly in the Middle East, it is regretful that 35 years after the adoption of the General Assembly resolution, initially proposed by Iran, on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, no progress has been achieved for its realization due to the intransigent policy of the Zionist regime. Owing to the nonadherence of this regime to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and, more importantly the refusal of this regime to place its unsafeguarded nuclear facilities under the IAEA verification system, the establishment of such a zone as a lofty and long-sought aspiration of the countries in the region has yet to be materialized. The irresponsible behaviour of this regime in this respect has put the establishment of such a zone in the region for the near future in serious doubt. In an effort in this regard, the 2010 Review Conference of the parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons reaffirmed the importance of the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and recalled the affirmation of its goals and objectives by the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty. The Conference also stressed that the resolution remains valid until the goals and objectives are achieved, since it is an essential element of the outcome of the 1995 Conference and of the basis on which the Treaty was indefinitely extended without a vote in 1995. Accordingly, States parties renewed their resolve to undertake, individually and collectively, all necessary measures aimed at its prompt implementation. While expressing its regret that little progress has been achieved towards the implementation of the 1995 resolution on the Middle East, the Conference recalled the reaffirmation by the 2000 Review Conference of the importance of Israel's accession to the Treaty and the placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive IAEA safeguards. Moreover, the Conference reaffirmed the urgency and importance of achieving universality of the Treaty and in this context called on those in the Middle East that have not yet done so to accede to the Treaty as nonnuclear-weapon States so as to achieve its universality at an early date. Quite reasonably, the next step is to take concrete measures towards securing the adherence of the Zionist regime to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons without any delay and without any condition as a non-nuclear-weapon party, and to place all its nuclear-related facilities under the IAEA verification system. As requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/26, the Secretary-General would inform the Assembly of the result of his consultations with the countries in the region on the realization of the idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. It is still our conviction that the Secretary-General should dispatch his special envoy to the countries in the region for the required consultations to facilitate the establishment of such a zone. At present, the Zionist regime is the only non-party to the Treaty in the region. Despite repeated calls by the international community demonstrated in the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference and reaffirmed by the 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences, related resolutions of the General Assembly, IAEA and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, this regime, confident of the political and military support of the United States of America, has neither acceded to the Treaty nor placed its nuclear facilities under the IAEA full-scope safeguards. While the Zionist regime's clandestine nuclear activities seriously threaten both regional and international peace and security and endanger the non-proliferation regime, it has not even declared its intention to accede to the Treaty. The Zionist regime's history is replete with aggressions, wars and threats. The 33-day war against Lebanon and 22-day barbaric attack on Gaza are only two recent examples of this regime's atrocities. This regime still continues the inhuman blockade of the Gaza Strip that led to the worsening humanitarian crisis therein. The worst is that, on 31 May 2010, Zionist forces attacked the international civilian convoy carrying humanitarian aid to the Gaza Strip, that is, the Freedom Flotilla, in international waters. These measures show the grave threat posed by such an irresponsible regime and prove how much nuclear weapons in the hands of such a regime could endanger regional as well as international peace and security. Unfortunately, the inaction imposed upon the Security Council over the past several decades in addressing the well-documented illicit nuclear weapons programme of the Zionist regime has given the audacity to this regime to explicitly acknowledge possession of nuclear weapons, as was divulged by the then Israeli Prime Minister in an interview with German television on 12 December 2006, in contradiction to the long-sought idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Moreover, this regime's clandestine development and possession of nuclear weapons not only violate basic principles of international law, the Charter of the United Nations, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as well as numerous General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, but also clearly defy the demands and concerns of the overwhelming majority of United Nations Member States and constantly and obstinately disregard the international community which has, time and again, called on this regime to renounce nuclear weapons and accede urgently to the Treaty as a non-nuclear-weapon party. Considering the above-mentioned reasons, the Security Council should have fulfilled its Charter-based responsibility to address such a clear and serious threat to international peace and security and take prompt and appropriate actions accordingly. The Zionist regime is the only obstacle to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Peace and stability cannot be achieved in the Middle East while the massive nuclear arsenal of that regime continues to threaten the region and beyond. III. International measures As a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Islamic Republic of Iran is fully committed to its international undertakings and believes that this international instrument is the cornerstone of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. Universal adherence to this Treaty, particularly in the Middle East, would effectively ensure the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in this region. The Islamic Republic of Iran participated actively in the 2010 Review Conference and supported its Final Document which includes, inter alia, measures for the implementation of the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference. Despite all shortcomings of the relevant section of the aforesaid Final Document, which neglects current political realities of the region, it recalls the reaffirmation by the 2000 Review Conference of the importance of Israel's accession to the Treaty and the placement of all its nuclear facilities under comprehensive IAEA safeguards. Taking into account the fact that, in the Middle East region, only the Zionist regime is a non-party to the Treaty and thus the only obstacle to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in this region, Iran believes that the implementation of relevant measures contained in the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference will lead to the prompt and unconditional accession of this regime to the Treaty as a non-nuclear-weapon party. Due to the significant provisions of the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, the Islamic Republic of Iran and other States in the region would expect that resolution to be swiftly implemented especially by its co-sponsors, namely, the Russian Federation, the United States of America and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as depositaries of the Treaty. The Islamic Republic of Iran, in its bilateral and multilateral disarmament dialogues with other Member States, in particular some nuclear-weapon States and members of the European Union, has always urged their active and nondiscriminatory contributions towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. In line with its principled position in the field of disarmament, including furthering the idea of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, the Islamic Republic of Iran convened an International Conference on Disarmament and Non-Proliferation in Tehran, on 17 and 18 April 2010. The participants in the Conference, namely Foreign Ministers and high-ranking officials of more than 60 countries and the heads and senior officials of some regional and international organizations, under the motto of "Nuclear energy for every one, Nuclear weapon for no one" discussed a variety of issues, and emphasized, among other things, the significance of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and the urgency of the Zionist regime's accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. IV. The way ahead Islamic Republic of Iran is of the opinion that, pending the realization of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, no country in the region should develop, produce or test or otherwise acquire nuclear weapons or permit the stationing on their territories, or territories under their control, of nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices, and they should refrain from actions that run counter to both the letter and spirit of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and other international resolutions and documents relating to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. The Islamic Republic of Iran is of the firm belief that an agreed plan of action and timetable for universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, especially in the Middle East, should be a top priority on the agenda of all States parties to the Treaty especially the nuclear-weapon States. There should be enough pressure on the Zionist regime to accede to the Treaty and place all its nuclear facilities under the IAEA safeguards to pave the way for the long-sought-after goal of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. Finally, the unconditional adherence by that regime to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the conclusion of a full-scope safeguards agreement with IAEA would, undoubtedly, lead to the early realization of the nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. [Original: Arabic] [22 July 2010] 1. Introduction Since the Kingdom gained its independence, Jordan has held a clear and transparent position on the subject of nuclear weapons and nuclear, biological and chemical weapons of mass destruction. It has consistently sought to free the Middle Eastern region of such weapons and, in particular, nuclear weapons, and to ensure that all States in that region ratify all the international instruments that prohibit the acquisition, manufacture, use and proliferation of those weapons and related tests, and that all States in the region are subject to international monitoring and inspection systems, with no exceptions as to State, type of weapon of mass destruction or circumstance. 2. Position of Jordan on weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East Jordan is a country free of nuclear weapons: it does not possess any such weapons or the means of their delivery. It has no direct or indirect dealings with them and has no aspirations or ambitions to possess or develop any programme related to those weapons. Jordan has never provided scientific, technical or material assistance to any party that aims to own or develop nuclear weapons and does not permit any activities related to those weapons to be conducted on its territory. Jordan supports and upholds all regional and international attempts and endeavours to prohibit the use of and eliminate nuclear weapons, with a view to freeing the world of those weapons. Jordan has expressed its position by means of the following: (a) Accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which it ratified in February 1970. (b) Accession to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which it ratified in August 1998. (c) Participation, as a member of the League of Arab States, in the formulation of a draft convention on making the Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction and, in particular, nuclear weapons. (d) Jordan supported the inauguration of multilateral negotiations in 2010, with a view to the early signature of a comprehensive, non-discriminatory treaty banning the invention, production, testing, proliferation, stockpiling and transport of nuclear weapons and the use or threat of their use, and the complete elimination of all such weapons. 3. The principles of the initiative to make the Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction All nuclear, biological and chemical weapons of mass destruction should be banned from the Middle East. All States of the region, without exception, should give equal and reciprocal undertakings in that regard. Guarantee measures should be put in place that commit all States of the region, without exception, to total prohibition. 4. International support for the initiative to make the Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction The United Nations has supported this initiative in two resolutions that are presented to the General Assembly annually. The first concerns the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons, while the second demands that Israel should accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The League of Arab States has shown its support for the initiative through the technical committee for the formulation of a draft treaty on a region free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. The committee was established in 1994 pursuant to a decision by the Council of the League, and meets biannually at League headquarters. Jordan regularly takes part in the work of the monitoring committee on Israeli nuclear activity in violation of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which was established in 1996 pursuant to a decision by the Council of the League, and meets biannually. 5. The position of Jordan on programmes for the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes With a view to achieving development, Jordan aspires to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, a right guaranteed to States parties by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Jordan is committed to its undertakings with respect to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) comprehensive safeguards agreement. The nuclear programme in Jordan is wholly directed to peaceful purposes, in accordance with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons dispensations, and is subject to IAEA inspection. Jordan regularly seeks IAEA expertise in order to build capacities in respect of the comprehensive safeguards regime. Jordan is consistent in its desire for the universality of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons and for all nuclear installations in the Middle East to be subject to the IAEA safeguards regime. 6. The universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons The universality of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons must be achieved by the accession of all States that have neither signed or ratified that Treaty. Those States include Israel. All its nuclear installations must be placed under the IAEA safeguards regime. Israel is the only State in the region that is not party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and failure to make progress with regard to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons universality puts the credibility of the whole Treaty in jeopardy. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons guarantees to States parties the right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and in order to achieve development, prosperity and well-being for their peoples. A uniform approach to weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East should be applied to all States in the region without discrimination. There should be transparency with regard to the nuclear materials imported by the States of the region. There should be transparency with regard to the nuclear materials exported to the States of the region. 7. Jordan's aims in seeking to establish in the Middle East a zone free of weapons of mass destruction To build confidence and improve relations between the States of the region. To contribute to security and stability at the regional and international levels. To spare the States of the region the dangers of nuclear weapons. To prevent the proliferation of those weapons. To facilitate and promote cooperation between States in and beyond the region in the development of nuclear energy and its use for peaceful purposes. 8. IAEA safeguards All States in the region must give serious consideration to the initiative to free the Middle East of nuclear weapons and to accession to Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a step towards establishing a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the region. In order to reinforce security and peace, all States in the region must apply IAEA safeguards to all their nuclear programmes. All States in the region must adopt confidence-building measures and refrain from any action that could obstruct endeavours to free the Middle East of nuclear weapons. All regional States must cooperate with the IAEA Director General and support him in continuing consultations with Middle Eastern States that aim to convince them that all nuclear programmes in the region should be subjected to IAEA safeguards. All States with an interest in maintaining international peace and security should extend every assistance to the Director General in the course of his consultations. 9. Conclusion Jordan signed and ratified the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in February 1970 and is committed to the strict application of the provisions of the IAEA comprehensive safeguards regime. Israel's reluctance to accept the initiative to free the Middle East of all weapons of mass destruction before the Arab-Israeli conflict has been settled is illogical. The development of nuclear programmes is not consonant with opportunities to establish peace in the region. All the Arab States have become parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; it is only Israel that refuses to become a party thereto or to place its nuclear installations under comprehensive international safeguards. The presence in the Middle East of nuclear installations that may not meet international safety standards and are not subject to the comprehensive safeguards regime is a matter that must be addressed at the regional and international levels. The lack of international monitoring of Israeli installations threatens the security and stability of the whole region, and if that deficiency is not addressed, we are likely to run the risk of nuclear proliferation on a wide scale throughout the Middle East. 