%%%BALLISTIC MISSILES|

Sixty-fifth session * A/65/50. Agenda item 99 (e) of the preliminary list* General and complete disarmament Missiles Report of the Secretary-General Contents Page Introduction Replies received from Member States Mexico Qatar Serbia 1. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 55/33 A, the first Panel of Governmental Experts was established from July 2001 to July 2002 to assist the Secretary-General in the preparation of a report on the issue of missiles in all its aspects. That first report was welcomed by the Assembly in its resolutions 57/71 and 58/37, entitled "Missiles". Pursuant to Assembly resolution 58/37, the second Panel of Governmental Experts was established in 2004 to assist the Secretary-General to explore further the issue of missiles in all its aspects. However, at that time and given the complexity of the issues at hand, no consensus was reached on the preparation of a final report. 2. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 59/67, the Secretary-General, with the support of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, prepared a report to contribute to the United Nations endeavour to address the issue of missiles in all its aspects by identifying areas where consensus could be reached. In its resolution 61/59, the Assembly took note of the report of the Secretary-General. 3. Also pursuant to General Assembly resolution 59/67, the Secretary-General appointed a third Panel of Governmental Experts to explore further the issue of missiles in all its aspects, including identifying areas where consensus could be reached. 4. The Panel held one session in 2007, from 4 to 8 June 2007, and two sessions in 2008, from 25 to 29 February 2008 and from 2 to 6 June 2008 at United Nations Headquarters in New York. The Panel had a comprehensive, in-depth exchange of views on all aspects of the issue of missiles and agreed on the final report by consensus. In its resolution 63/55 entitled "Missiles", the General Assembly welcomed the report of the Secretary-General. 5. In resolution 63/55, the General Assembly also requested the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States on the report on the issue of missiles in all its aspects and to submit those views to it at its sixty-fifth session. In a note verbale dated 26 February 2010, Member States were invited to submit their views on the report. As at 28 June 2010, replies had been received from Mexico, Qatar and Serbia, and these are reproduced in section II of the present report. Additional replies received will be issued as addenda to the present report. II. Replies received from Member States [Original: Spanish] [20 May 2010] In accordance with operative paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 63/55 entitled "Missiles", adopted on 2 December 2008, Mexico hereby submits its views concerning the report on the issue of missiles in all its aspects: (a) The report is a United Nations initiative that provides the information needed in order for international actors to be able to reach consensuses that will facilitate the transfer and use of all types of missiles; (b) Mexico has demonstrated its commitment to promoting international peace and security by supporting the measures taken by the United Nations to strengthen conventional arms control and to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; (c) Mexico reaffirms its support for the policy of non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and its position regarding the need to restrict and prohibit the use of missiles; it should, however, be pointed out that arms regulation must not restrict the use of conventional weapons, given that article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations recognizes that States have an inherent right to self-defence; (d) Moreover, Mexican armed forces do not produce, use or transfer any type of missile, and are not planning to develop or acquire systems relating to this class of weapon. [Original: English] [22 March 2010] Due to the complicated and sensitive nature of the topic of missiles, we are of the view that, although no such weapons are produced or possessed or stored in the State of Qatar, this is a multifaceted disarmament issue that we emphasize must be addressed according to the principles of international law within the framework of the United Nations system in a comprehensive and balanced manner without discrimination between States. Therefore, we support a ban on the proliferation of missiles through a global, binding treaty that includes monitoring mechanisms within the United Nations institutions and agencies. We also affirm our position that a ban should be imposed on missile-launching tests and the development, production and marketing of inter-continental ballistic missiles and medium-range missiles. There is a need to work towards the adoption of The Hague Code of Conduct against the Proliferation of Ballistic Missiles that are capable of carrying weapons of mass destruction. The adoption of such a treaty cannot be attained without engaging all States Members of the United Nations and all parties to bilateral and multilateral instruments, and drawing on their experience that contributed in one way or another to the prohibition of the proliferation of missiles. This would contribute to a strategy that achieves stability and fosters global peace and security, especially given that these steps are not in conflict with international cooperation to spur the exploration of outer space and its use for peaceful purposes. [19 May 2010] Serbia is a signatory party to a number of international instruments in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation, including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction and the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. Serbia is not a signatory party to export control regimes, such as the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), Australian Group (AG) or the Wassenaar Arrangement (WA) (accession negotiations under way). However, Serbia has established an effective regime of foreign trade control of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods. It has regulated by law the trade in goods and services, trade mediation and the transfer of technologies. National control of the list of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods is brought in line with the Common Military List and the List of Dual-Use Goods and Technologies of the European Union. Serbia submits regular annual reports to the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) which, among others, contain information on light portable missile systems. As a signatory party to The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation, Serbia is obliged to submit annual declarations for preceding years. It has no technologies for the production of long-range ballistic missiles and takes no part, bilaterally or multilaterally, in any ballistic programme, so that the implementation of this Code of Conduct does not affect the present or future programmes on the research, development and production of arms and military equipment. Resolved to maintain its national security while honouring relevant Security Council resolutions and international conventions and treaties, Serbia has consistently implemented the relevant norms in the field of non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The national system of the export control of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods, regulated by law in accordance with relevant European Union and OSCE rules, is a necessary instrument to strengthen vigilance and prevent proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as well as to preclude an unauthorized end-user from coming into possession of exported goods and technologies. Pursuant to its conclusion in April 2008, the Government of the Republic of Serbia set in motion a negotiation mechanism for Serbia's accession to international regimes for the export control of arms and dual-use goods (WA, AG, NSG and MTCR). Proceedings from its strategic objective to become a member of the European Union, Serbia has opted, on the basis of a wide consensus of competent Government institutions and agencies, to accede to relevant international institutions of arms export control. 