%%%DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|AFRICA|DEVELOPMENT|PREVENTIVE DIPLOMACY|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|PEACEBUILDING|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|HUMAN RIGHTS|RULE OF LAW|GENOCIDE|GOVERNANCE|DEMOCRACY|CLIMATE CHANGE|HEALTH SERVICES|COUNTER-TERRORISM|DISARMAMENT|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|INSTITUTIONAL MACHINERY|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|PARTNERSHIP|CIVIL SOCIETY|PRIVATE SECTOR|

United Nations Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization General Assembly Official Records Sixty-fifth Session Supplement No. 1 United Nations * New York, 2010 ISSN 0082-8173 Note Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document. [30 July 2010] Contents Chapter Page Introduction Delivering results for people most in need Development The Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development goals The special needs of Africa Peace and security Preventive diplomacy and support for peace processes Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Humanitarian affairs Human rights, the rule of law, genocide prevention and the responsibility to protect, and democracy and good governance Human rights Rule of law Genocide prevention and the responsibility to protect Democracy and good governance Securing global goods Climate change Global health Countering terrorism Disarmament and non-proliferation Creating a stronger United Nations The Secretariat, the intergovernmental machinery, system-wide coherence and cooperation with regional organizations The Secretariat Intergovernmental machinery System-wide coherence Cooperation with regional organizations Global constituencies Strengthening partnerships with civil society Engaging the business community Conclusion Annex Millennium Development Goals, targets and indicators, 2010: statistical tables Chapter I 1. Over the past year, the world moved from being on the brink of a global economic depression to witnessing the beginnings of a global recovery. To be sure, the recovery is fragile and uneven, and there is no guarantee that a relapse will not occur. Unemployment remains unacceptably high, and vulnerable employment continues to rise. Economic volatility, eruptions of conflict, natural disasters, challenges to food security and strains on natural resources are unlikely to disappear. Moreover, analysis by the United Nations suggests that while Governments have made substantial efforts to stimulate growth and spur recovery, those efforts have not always met the needs of the poor and most vulnerable. 2. Nonetheless, there are grounds for a new optimism in what was previously a dim prognosis for millions around the world. Specifically, there is a convergence of several important elements that will help guide the United Nations through these uncertain times. The United Nations has a concrete framework to guide its action: the Millennium Declaration and the Millennium Development Goals. It has significant resources and knowledge to help address the current challenges, as well as increasingly robust partnerships with business, civil society and academia that will help elevate the response. 3. These measures will be adopted only if the United Nations is able to mobilize collective global political leadership and will. Over the past year, the Organization has sought to provide leadership and to generate such will. But this is not a task that can be successfully completed by the Organization on its own. The unswerving and proactive engagement of all Member States, developing and developed -- especially at the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals to be held in September -- is essential. 4. In addition, over the next five years the Organization and its Member States must focus on accelerating progress through further measures. These include adopting innovative financing and investments needed to support the provision of global public goods, dedicating resources to promote peace and security, and mobilizing to meet humanitarian and human rights needs around the world. 5. In this challenging environment, the need to act has never been more pressing. One of the Organization's single most important choices will be whether to take action to leverage one of the greatest forces for positive change worldwide: women. 6. Women can provide the strength and dynamism that the world desperately needs in order to meet global challenges. They are the essential foundation on which the pillars of peace, security, respect for human rights and development must be built. Empowered women will heal societies disrupted by war, drive markets and economic growth, anchor families, and fight for justice, human rights and human dignity. Without their full engagement, the international system cannot meet the demands made of it. 7. This year, which marks the fifteenth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the tenth year of the global effort towards the Millennium Development Goals, the message to Member States and the Organization is clear: gender equality and women's empowerment are indispensable goals that the United Nations must champion for the benefit of all. 8. In too many societies, discriminatory access to land, technology, finance, jobs and education persists, suppressing women's entrepreneurial spirit and condemning them to destitution and second-class citizenship. Violence against women -- in all its forms -- causes irrevocable suffering and undermines societal stability, peace and development. 9. For that reason, in 2010 the Secretary-General is encouraging the United Nations to lend its full support to programmes that empower women and protect them from discriminatory practices and violence. The leadership of Member States is essential. 10. Over the past decade, the international community was able to make considerable progress towards reducing poverty, promoting sustainable development, securing peace and stability, and promoting women's empowerment. As the Organization and its Member States look to the next decade, they should be even more ambitious. They should work together to strengthen the Organization so that it can be the hub for multilateral action and a catalytic driver of change. If collective force is brought to bear, a brighter future can be achieved for all. Chapter II 11. The year 2010 is proving to be critical for meeting the promises that the United Nations and the international community have made to those most in need around the world: promises to deliver on the Millennium Development Goals, promises to bring peace to conflict areas and stimulate recovery from conflict and natural disaster, and promises to promote human rights, the rule of law and democracy globally. The tragic earthquake in Haiti was a powerful reminder of the complex challenges that the Organization and its Member States must be ready and equipped to address. 12. The challenges are immense, but experience has shown that when strong commitments are backed by the right policies and adequate resources, even the greatest needs can be met and real progress can be achieved. A. Development 13. Over the past two decades, with the establishment of the internationally agreed development goals, there has been a groundbreaking shift in the way in which the world thinks about development. The Millennium Development Goals, in particular, underpin an unprecedented collective endeavour to address the many dimensions of poverty and inequality, and to build a global partnership for development. 14. By identifying and embracing the Millennium Development Goals, Member States put human development at centre stage and resolved to spare no effort to transform our world into a safer, more equitable, more sustainable and more prosperous place. 1. The Millennium Development Goals and the other internationally agreed development goals 15. Five years away from the agreed target date of 2015 for achieving the Millennium Development Goals, success is still within reach but not guaranteed. The Organization and its Member States have made great strides. Yet, progress is uneven, gaps are significant and new challenges have emerged. Intensified effort on the part of all will be needed in order to accelerate progress towards the Goals. 16. Progress in poverty reduction has been unbalanced across regions and is now threatened in some parts of the world. In 2005, there were 1.4 billion people living in extreme poverty (living on less than $1.25 a day), down from 1.8 billion in 1990, with China accounting for most of the decline. Newly updated estimates from the World Bank suggest that, owing to the recent financial and economic crises, an additional 64 million people will fall into extreme poverty by the end of this year. Nevertheless, the momentum of economic growth in developing countries is strong enough to sustain progress on poverty and put the world on track to meet the poverty reduction target. 17. While there is no deadline for achieving "full and productive employment and decent work for all", no country can claim to have reached that target. The lack of progress in creating productive and decent jobs in urban areas, and stagnant farm productivity in many rural areas, have been the key reasons for the persistence of poverty and the rise in the numbers of the working poor. Women's lack of access to land, with secondary effects on access to credit, inputs and extension services, has also had serious impacts on food security. The food and energy crises and the global financial and economic crisis have further undermined progress. 18. Remarkable progress has been made since 2000 towards achieving universal primary education, with many developing countries having crossed the 90 per cent enrolment threshold. Primary school enrolment has increased fastest in sub-Saharan Africa. There is some concern that the rapid rise in enrolment may place undue pressures on the capacity of schools and teachers to deliver high-quality education. 19. The gender gap in primary school enrolment has narrowed over the past decade, although at a slow pace. Progress at the secondary school level, which is especially important for women's empowerment, has been even slower and in some cases is being reversed. 20. Addressing gender inequality and achieving women's empowerment remain among the most difficult goals, with cross-cutting implications. Worldwide, women's share of national parliamentary seats has increased only slowly, averaging 19 per cent as of January 2010. A number of developing countries, however, have led the way in using temporary special measures, including quotas, to make rapid progress in this area. 21. Violence against women and girls takes an unacceptable toll and is a serious impediment to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals globally. In recognition of this, the Secretary-General's campaign UNiTE to End Violence against Women encourages countries to adopt and enforce national laws to address and punish all forms of violence against women and girls, adopt and implement multisectoral national action plans, strengthen data collection on the prevalence of violence against women and girls, increase public awareness and social mobilization, and address sexual violence in conflict. 22. In the case of the health-related Millennium Development Goals, significant progress has been achieved. Globally, the number of deaths per year among children under 5 has been reduced from 12.5 million (1990) to 8.8 million (2008). The number of people in low- and middle-income countries receiving antiretroviral therapy for HIV increased tenfold in five years (2003-2008). Yet, rates of HIV infection among women continue to grow in some regions, with women and girls bearing the disproportionate burden of providing care to those who are ill. Major progress has been made in reducing measles deaths and in providing interventions to control malaria and tuberculosis. This includes a sharp decrease in the number of measles deaths across Africa and indications that malaria control measures may also be yielding results. 23. Nonetheless, current trends indicate that many countries are unlikely to achieve the health targets by 2015, particularly in the area of reducing maternal mortality, which has shown the least progress. Access to reproductive health services remains insufficient where women's health risks are greatest. 24. Despite an increase in the number of deliveries attended by skilled health workers in the developing regions, from 53 per cent in 1990 to 63 per cent in 2008, a recent academic analysis found an annual rate of reduction in maternal mortality of 1.3 per cent between 1990 and 2008, well short of the 5.5 per cent reduction needed in order to meet the Millennium Development Goal target. Access to maternal health-care for poor and rural women is an area of particular concern. 25. Some movement forward has been made towards halving the proportion of people without access to clean water. The number of people having access to an improved water source in developing countries rose from 71 per cent in 1990 to 84 per cent in 2008. But the proportion with improved sanitation increased by only 11 percentage points between 1990 and 2008. And the goal of improving the lives of at least 100 million slum-dwellers has proved to be much less ambitious than what would be needed to reverse the trend of increasing numbers of slum-dwellers. 26. Since 1986, the implementation of the Montreal Protocol has successfully phased out the production and use of more than 98 per cent of all controlled ozone-depleting substances. In contrast, the rate of growth of carbon dioxide emissions was much higher during the period 1995-2004 than during the period 1970-1994, and the trend has yet to change. While net deforestation rates have come down, partly because of reforestation efforts, around 5.6 million hectares of forest cover are still lost worldwide every year. The target of reducing the rate of biodiversity loss by 2010 has not been met. Nearly 17,000 plant and animal species remain at risk of extinction as a result of major threats such as overconsumption, habitat loss, invasive species, pollution and climate change. 27. Official development assistance delivered in 2009 was almost $120 billion. Flows of some $20 billion (in 2009 prices) in addition to the projected delivery will be needed this year to reach the Gleneagles Group of Eight official development assistance (ODA) target for 2010, which amounts to approximately $146 billion in 2009 prices. Of the shortfall, $16 billion will be required in order to meet the commitment for Africa. In 2008, ODA to the least developed countries was equivalent to 0.09 per cent of the total gross national income of countries members of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), with less than half of member countries meeting their target of 0.15-0.20 per cent of gross national income in aid to the least developed countries. 28. A number of important initiatives are currently under way with a view to accelerating progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals. In 2009, as a follow-up to the United Nations Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, the General Assembly charged an ad hoc open-ended working group with addressing a range of challenges in crisis response and reform. The working group has focused on mitigating the effects of the economic crisis on development, systemic reform issues and strengthening the role of the United Nations in global economic governance. 29. The United Nations system is advancing the implementation of its nine joint crisis initiatives designed to help countries weather and recover from the reverberating impact of the economic crisis, including the Social Protection Floor Initiative and the Global Jobs Pact. With a similar focus on employment and decent work, the system has come together in devising a plan of action for the Second United Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty, which should contribute to a more coherent and integrated system-wide response to the economic crisis and its ongoing impacts. 30. Overall, the experience of the past year underscores the urgency of moving the development agenda towards nationally owned development strategies that combine bold economic growth with social and sustainable development goals. Such strategies should address full employment and decent work deficits, boost job creation through investment in green jobs and the expansion of public infrastructure, strengthen social protection, offer incentives to the private sector to retain existing jobs as well as create new ones, and reorient industrial policy towards a low-carbon development path. 31. The High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals in September will provide a unique opportunity to strengthen collective efforts and partnerships for the push to 2015, and to advance progress across the broader global development agenda. All stakeholders are strongly encouraged to engage in the summit process and to bring with them a renewed commitment to achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. 2. The special needs of Africa 32. A decade of deep commitment to reform and political and economic stability is beginning to have an impact on Africa's development path. In fact, since 2000 subSaharan Africa has had a higher growth rate than a number of emerging economies. Overall, Africa has shown greater resilience to the financial and economic crisis than many other regions of the world and is expected to rebound faster than Latin America, Europe and Central Asia. Nevertheless, the crises have slowed the economic growth that Africa had previously experienced, reducing export earnings, remittances from the African diaspora and foreign direct investment. According to the World Economic Situation and Prospects 2010: update as of mid-2010, the aggregate economic growth rate in Africa was estimated to be 2.4 per cent in 2009 and is projected to be 4.7 per cent in 2010, down from an average of about 5.7 per cent during the period 2004-2007. 33. Even after the recovery gathers pace in advanced economies, the impact of the crises on unemployment and social welfare in Africa may linger, owing to the lack of social protection to offset the negative impact of a global recession on households and specific vulnerable groups. 34. Improving the status of women and girls in Africa requires specific attention if progress towards development is to be accelerated. Some positive steps have been taken. As of February 2010, 4 out of the top 10 countries in the world in terms of percentage of women parliamentarians were in Africa. Rwanda is the only country in the world in which women make up the majority of parliamentarians. Nevertheless, throughout the region, women still face violence and discrimination, are victim to harmful traditional practices and beliefs, and suffer disproportionately from hunger and poverty. 35. Africa has the potential to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. It has vast human and material wealth. Africa's people need neither pity nor charity; they need the tools to create jobs and generate incomes. Developed countries should make good on promises made repeatedly at summit meetings of the Group of Eight and the Group of 20, and at the United Nations, to double aid to Africa. Yet, according to OECD, in 2010 Africa is likely to receive only about $11 billion (in current prices) of the $25 billion increase (measured in 2004 prices and exchange rates) in ODA envisaged at Gleneagles. This is due largely to the unmet commitments of a number of major donors that give large shares of ODA to Africa. 36. The Secretary-General's Millennium Development Goals Africa Steering Group has focused on specific needs in such strategically vital areas as health, education, agriculture, infrastructure and trade. It has provided the international community with a clear sense of direction on what it will take to sustain Africa's own efforts to fulfil its abundant potential and achieve the Millennium Development Goals. For example, across Africa, progress is being made against diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS. Africa is now on track to attain the objective of zero deaths from malaria by 2015 in sub-Saharan Africa. In addition, efforts of the United Nations system have focused on support in the areas of governance and institutional capacity-building, including through the strengthening of human resource and leadership capacity in public service at all levels, as well as egovernance and the utilization of information and communications technology for development. In these areas too, Africa's commitments have yielded fruit, and many countries are now enjoying political stability. B. Peace and security 37. The duty to prevent, contain and resolve violent conflict is enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and forms a central pillar of the work of the Organization. Over the past year, the United Nations system redoubled its efforts to engage in preventive diplomacy, to improve its crisis response capacity, to manage violent conflict and to build sustainable peace following conflict. It is clear that if the United Nations is to better address political crises and resolve them more durably, such tools as peacekeeping and peacebuilding must be regarded as part of a political solution, not alternatives to one. 1. Preventive diplomacy and support for peace processes 38. Working closely with national actors, the United Nations has become more proactive, agile and effective in addressing rising political tensions and emerging crises. Throughout the past year, the Organization led or assisted mediation processes in more than 20 countries on four continents. The mediation support service has been professionalized through the building up of knowledge, capacity and a network of expertise, and a strategy on gender and mediation has been developed to promote more effective participation by women in peace processes. To support the latter, the Department of Political Affairs partnered with members of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict in organizing a high-level colloquium on addressing conflict-related sexual violence in mediation and peace agreements. There have also been increased efforts to provide greater political support and guidance to United Nations country teams working in politically complex environments. 39. The Organization's efforts over the past year have devoted significant attention to Africa and the Middle East and have required the entire range of interventions, from conflict prevention to support for peace consolidation. 40. In Africa, the United Nations worked closely together with regional and subregional organizations to promote a rapid and peaceful return to constitutional order and avert violence in Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar and the Niger. 41. In Guinea, the International Commission of Inquiry conducted a thorough investigation of the 29 September 2009 massacre, paying special attention to the sexual violence that took place. In partnership with the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union, the United Nations engaged in preventive diplomacy. Together with those partners, the United Nations also conducted a needs assessment in the area of security sector reform, a critical element needed for the consolidation of long-term stability in the country. 42. The United Nations assisted the Government of Sierra Leone in both peace consolidation and conflict prevention. The former took the form of assistance in follow-up to key political agreements, while the latter involved confidence-building measures in preparation for the 2012 elections. 43. In Western Sahara, the United Nations continued to work with Morocco and the Frente Polisario, as well as neighbouring countries, to find a mutually acceptable solution of self-determination for the people of Western Sahara. 44. The United Nations facilitated the peace process in the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which contributed to a rapprochement between Kinshasa and Kigali. It also continued to assist in the peaceful settlement of the border disputes between Cameroon and Nigeria and between Equatorial Guinea and Gabon. 45. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations helped to shore up critical elements of the peace process, such as the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants. It further encouraged the participation of all armed groups in the peace process. 46. To bolster the conflict prevention architecture in West Africa, the Organization supported, through the Regional Office, the fight against drug trafficking and organized crime. 47. In Somalia, the Organization and its Member States implemented a strategy to support fragile peace processes. Throughout the year, preparedness plans were continuously updated in the event that the Security Council decided to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping mission. 48. In the Middle East, the Organization's political missions supported several countries navigating the difficult transition from war to peace. The Organization strived to create conditions conducive to a resumption of political negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. The United Nations helped to manage a cessation of hostilities between Israel and Lebanon and encouraged the Government of Lebanon to develop a comprehensive border strategy to enforce the arms embargo. The United Nations has consistently advocated a full reopening of the crossings in Gaza. 49. The United Nations actively participated in the Middle East Quartet in supporting a broader Middle East settlement and responding to unfolding developments in the region. More recently, in the aftermath of the Israelis' attack on and diversion of a humanitarian flotilla bound for Gaza, the Secretary-General has been engaged in formulating proposals, consistent with the Security Council presidential statement on the issue (S/PRST/2010/9), for a credible, transparent and independent international inquiry into the events. 50. In Iraq, the United Nations helped to resolve a stalemate over the country's electoral law, paving the way for national elections in March 2010. Representatives of the Government of Iraq and the Iraqi Kurdistan Regional Government met under the auspices of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, through a high-level task force, to discuss Mission reports on disputed internal boundaries. 51. In Sri Lanka, the Secretary-General has engaged with the Government in line with the commitments made in the joint statement issued in May 2009. Accordingly, the United Nations system supports reconciliation and a sustainable political solution that addresses the aspirations and grievances of all communities; is providing assistance in the return and resettlement of displaced persons, including former child soldiers; and has called for an accountability process to address any alleged violations of international humanitarian and human rights law. 52. Engagements in other parts of the world included: assisting Governments in Central Asia in developing arrangements for the joint management of shared water and energy resources as part of a conflict prevention programme; supporting the dialogue on the name issue between Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; facilitating full-fledged negotiations towards a comprehensive settlement in Cyprus; and assisting in the peaceful settlement of the border dispute between the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Guyana. 2. Peacekeeping 53. Peacekeeping plays a critical role in helping to maintain or restore durable peace and stability in countries emerging from conflict around the world. United Nations peacekeeping reached an unprecedented level of 124,000 deployed personnel last year, as compared with only 20,000 merely a decade ago. 54. Creating an enabling environment for elections and negotiations was a core focus of four peacekeeping missions this year. In the Sudan, the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) supported the elections held in April 2010, while strengthening its capacity to protect civilians. UNMIS also began supporting key stakeholders in planning for the upcoming 2011 referendums and in engaging those stakeholders on post-referendum arrangements. Meanwhile, in Darfur, negotiations led to the conclusion of preliminary agreements between the Government of the Sudan and one of the coalitions of opposition groups. However, much remains to be done to ensure that the North-South peace process remains on track and that an inclusive and comprehensive peace agreement is reached for Darfur. Restrictions on the freedom of movement of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur continued to hamper the Operation's ability to implement its mandate. 55. In Côte d'Ivoire, disagreements over the final voter list led to the postponement of elections, amid several violent incidents. The United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire and the United Nations country team continued to provide support to the implementation of the Ouagadougou Political Agreements and the consolidation of peace. 56. In Afghanistan, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) provided technical assistance to the conduct of elections in August 2009, including support for women's participation, and facilitated political dialogue to resolve the issues arising in their aftermath. UNAMA continued to support the coordination of international aid and assisted the new Government in assuming increasing responsibilities. Insecurity, however, poses challenges for the Mission's work, and a tragic attack on a United Nations guesthouse in Kabul on 28 October 2009 claimed the lives of five United Nations personnel. 57. Efforts to strengthen institutions and support stability and economic recovery dominated the work undertaken by yet another set of peacekeeping missions. The operations in Liberia and Timor-Leste focused on strengthening national security institutions and the rule of law while facilitating recovery and peacebuilding tasks. In Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste supported the resumption of primary policing duties by the Timorese national police and continued to support the Government in strengthening state institutions. In Liberia, the Mission was able to continue its gradual drawdown, which is linked to the achievement of specific benchmarks. 58. Significant progress was also achieved in the peace process in Burundi, which has embarked on a round of critical elections that will extend beyond the summer. It is a sign of the maturation of the peace agreement between formerly hostile parties that the elections were peaceful, despite disagreements and contested results. The peacekeeping mission in the country was transformed into a peacebuilding mission on 1 January 2010. 59. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon monitored the implementation of the cessation-of-hostilities agreement, contributing, under difficult conditions, to the establishment of a relatively stable environment in southern Lebanon. The mission has actively attempted to facilitate an agreement that would allow the Israeli forces to leave the northern part of Ghajar, as contemplated by Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). 60. Haiti, with the support of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), had been making steady progress towards stability and economic recovery when the country was hit by a devastating earthquake. More than 220,000 persons were killed, including 101 of the Organization's own staff. More than 300,000 Haitians were injured, and damages and losses are estimated at $7.8 billion. A massive international assistance effort was immediately launched, and additional troops and police were authorized by the Security Council to support MINUSTAH. 61. Following the earthquake, MINUSTAH increased its overall force levels to support the immediate relief, recovery, and stability efforts. The Mission is providing logistical support and technical expertise to help the Government of Haiti to continue operations, supporting the Government in strengthening rule-of-law institutions at the national and local levels, and implementing its resettlement strategy for displaced persons. It is also supporting the Government and the Provisional Electoral Council in the preparation and conduct of the country's elections and coordinating international electoral assistance to Haiti in cooperation with other international stakeholders. 62. Withdrawal or drawdown dominated the peacekeeping strategies of two other missions. In Chad, discussions on the future of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad began after the Government had called for its withdrawal. Special attention was devoted to the continued protection of refugees and internally displaced persons, and to facilitating the provision of humanitarian assistance in eastern Chad. The drawdown has been successful thus far and is on target for completion by 31 December 2010. 63. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a new phase began with the transformation of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo into the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the agreement between the Government and the United Nations that drawdown would be gradual and based on joint assessments of conditions on the ground. Meanwhile, given the ongoing insecurity in the east, the Mission continued its efforts to protect civilians and support the implementation of national plans to address the presence of armed groups, based on a policy of strict conditionality related to the conduct of the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo in terms of human rights. Efforts at stabilization and strengthening governance, including with regard to the security sector, also continued. 64. Over the past year, the widespread or systematic use of sexual violence against civilians in armed conflicts as a tactic of war was of great concern. The first report of the Secretary-General on the subject (S/2009/362) was issued mainly on the basis of reports from peacekeeping missions and identified serious gaps in the capacity of domestic security and justice systems to tackle impunity, as well as shortcomings in the provision of services for survivors. Among other key recommendations, the Secretary-General proposed the appointment of a senior person with the responsibility across the United Nations system for attending to the prevention and response to sexual violence in post-conflict and conflict situations. Subsequently, the Secretary-General appointed a Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. 65. As part of a broader strategy for empowering women, the Secretary-General has encouraged Member States to provide more female peacekeepers. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations has developed gender guidelines for military peacekeepers, as well as a gender training strategy. 66. The continued scale of deployment and the diversity and complexity of mission mandates is not matched by adequate capabilities. In recent times, differing views within the Security Council and on the part of other stakeholders on the political strategy for missions, and insufficient consent by host Governments, have hampered the implementation of Council mandates in several operations. The increased demands have exposed the limitations of the basic systems, structures and tools of the Organization, which are challenged by the size, tempo and complex tasks of today's missions. 67. Under the banner of the New Horizon process, the Secretariat has worked intensively with Member States over the past year to examine these challenges and make recommendations to address them. In a series of Security Council and General Assembly deliberations, this agenda received broad support. The ongoing support of Member States for further implementation will be essential if the United Nations is to provide stronger peacekeeping capabilities in the future. 3. Peacebuilding 68. The past year saw momentum building behind United Nations peacebuilding efforts, with the implementation of a number of important recommendations set out in the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict (A/63/881-S/2009/304). Specifically, progress was made in the deployment of leadership teams in the field, in the development and implementation of integrated strategic frameworks for peace consolidation in certain field locations, and in the improvement of collaboration with the World Bank. 69. The Peacebuilding Support Office initiated a global review of international civilian capacities. The review is designed to examine how the international system can bridge persistent gaps in standards, training and the timely deployment of civilian capacities for peacebuilding. 70. The Security Council has requested the Secretary-General to submit a report on women's participation in peacebuilding, analysing the needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations and setting out recommendations to ensure that peacebuilding planning and financing processes respond fully to those needs. 71. The Peacebuilding Commission has remained engaged in the four countries on its agenda, with the support of the Peacebuilding Support Office and the integrated peacebuilding missions. Over the past year, it improved its working methods and strengthened its partnerships with the international financial institutions with regional and subregional organizations and with the national actors in the countries on its agenda. 72. The Peacebuilding Fund has provided funding assistance to an increasingly large and diverse number of countries emerging from conflict. As at 28 February 2010, with more than $334 million in deposits, the Fund had already allocated more than $196 million to 16 countries for a total of 115 projects. 73. The five-year review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture was launched in February 2010. The 2010 review process offers an excellent opportunity to reaffirm and deepen the political commitment to the role of the Peacebuilding Commission and explore ways in which to realize its full potential. C. Humanitarian affairs 74. During the reporting period, emerging humanitarian challenges such as climate change, the food and financial crises, resource scarcities, population growth and urbanization increased vulnerabilities and humanitarian needs around the world. The year was also marked by the continuation of disasters associated with natural hazards and by an escalation in armed conflicts. 75. In support of Governments and working with other partners, the United Nations system responded to some 43 new emergencies: 33 natural disasters, 9 armed conflicts and 1 epidemic. In terms of regional patterns, 15 occurred in Africa, 14 in Asia and the Pacific, 8 in Latin America and the Caribbean and 6 in Central Asia. In comparison with last year, the number of new emergencies increased in Africa and Asia and the Pacific, while decreasing in Europe and Central Asia. 76. In Latin America and the Caribbean, the United Nations system was called to respond to the devastating 12 January earthquake in Haiti. Within 36 hours, the United Nations had deployed staff to coordinate and integrate the emergency response effort in the face of the loss of the Mission's leadership. 77. In March 2010, the United Nations, the United States of America and the Government of Haiti, with the support of Brazil, Canada, the European Union, France and Spain, co-hosted the ministerial-level International Donors' Conference "Towards a New Future for Haiti" in New York. The aim of the Conference was to mobilize international support for the development needs of Haiti in an effort to lay the foundation for Haiti's long-term recovery. Member States and international partners pledged $5.3 billion for the next 18 months to begin Haiti's path towards long-term recovery. 78. By the end of May 2010, emergency shelter materials had been distributed to almost all those identified as being in need and the revised Humanitarian Appeal of $1.5 billion for ongoing humanitarian operations had been 58 per cent funded, at $878 million. 79. In addition to relief assistance and the previously described mandated areas of support provided by MINUSTAH, the United Nations system is supporting the recovery efforts of the Government of Haiti by providing shelter, making cash for work available, removing rubble, supporting rebuilding efforts and, more broadly, strengthening the Government's capacity to deliver basic services. The events in Haiti point once again to the importance of disaster management and risk reduction, areas of competency that the Organization must further develop and expand. 80. While the United Nations has rallied to help the Haitians recover from the disaster, this is not a time for complacency. Much remains to be done, and the Organization and its Member States must strengthen their efforts to deliver on the commitments they have made to the Government and to the Haitian people. 81. The reporting period also saw the shrinking of humanitarian space as humanitarian workers came under attack. In Afghanistan, Pakistan, Somalia, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, the number of staff deaths, kidnappings and attacks increased. Attacks and threats against the United Nations have forced the Organization to review and adjust security arrangements and take measures to mitigate risks by changing the way in which programmes are implemented. At the same time, the Organization is working to ensure enhanced access for humanitarian actors and respect for humanitarian principles in a range of conflict situations. Advocacy efforts are helping to draw attention to neglected emergencies, attracting much-needed political and financial support. 82. Owing to a more tightly coordinated and needs-based humanitarian financing system, consolidated and flash appeals worldwide reached a value of some $10 billion over the past year, of which 71 per cent was funded. This represents an approximate doubling of the 2007 figures ($7.1 billion requested, 71 per cent funded) and a tripling of the 2004 figures ($3.4 billion requested, 64 per cent funded). Although funding for the Central Emergency Response Fund dropped from $453 million in 2008 to $401 million in 2009, some 23 Member States increased contributions in their national currencies. Another 17 countries joined the ranks of Fund donors in 2009, bringing to 117 the total number of Member States that have contributed to the Fund. Levels of funding for country-based pooled funds also decreased, from $407 million in 2008 to $339 million in 2009, while 5 emergency response funds were established in new countries, bringing the total to 18. Funding decreases were due largely to global currency fluctuations. The United Nations is asking Member States to increase the average amount contributed per fund, adjusted for local exchange rates. Funding for the humanitarian coordination system and common planning processes, including financing, has flattened and not kept pace with requirements. 83. There has been an increasing focus on accountability for funds, including the development of a draft performance and accountability framework for the Central Emergency Response Fund. Country-based pooled funds continued to make progress in strengthening their respective monitoring systems, notably in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Iraq, the Occupied Palestinian Territory and Somalia. 84. The Organization focused on advancing three policy areas. First, the Organization joined with humanitarian partners to successfully advocate the mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction and management into climate change discussions. Secondly, it supported the Security Council's new informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians in developing more principled, transparent and systematic action on protection issues. Thirdly, it worked to embed gender perspectives more thoroughly into humanitarian response, contingency planning and integrated mission planning by providing technical support on gender equality programming. D. Human rights, the rule of law, genocide prevention and the responsibility to protect, and democracy and good governance 85. The protection of human rights, the establishment of the rule of law, genocide prevention and the responsibility to protect, and democracy and good governance are prerequisites for the promotion of human welfare and permit the realization of a stable polity. Those elements provide the foundation for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. Without them, violence, corruption, inequity and conflict ensue, creating instability, uncertainty and societal fragmentation. For that reason, the Organization is unrelenting in its commitment to their advancement through its work around the world. 1. Human rights 86. Over the past year, the United Nations witnessed the negative impact of ongoing global challenges, such as the economic and food crises and climate change, on the status of human rights. Of particular concern were increasing incidents of xenophobia and discrimination against non-citizens and ongoing impunity for human rights violations. 87. In response, the United Nations system increased its efforts to integrate human rights into the development efforts of Member States. Accordingly, the United Nations Development Group established a standing mechanism to assist the United Nations system at Headquarters and in the field in mainstreaming human rights into policy development and operational activities. 88. The Organization also used the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the twentieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the twentieth anniversary of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families to remind the international community of the need to take decisive action to protect the most vulnerable groups, particularly women and children, migrants, refugees, internally displaced persons and asylum-seekers. Following the successful conclusion of the Durban Review Conference in April 2009, the Organization began to take practical steps to realize the aspirations reflected in the Outcome Document. 89. An increased presence of human rights expertise in the field enhanced the Organization's ability to provide assistance to Governments and other partners in addressing prevailing human rights challenges. Human rights officers supported the Human Rights Council's fact-finding mission to Gaza and the Secretary-General's Commission of Inquiry for Guinea in the aftermath of the violence that occurred on 28 September 2009 in Conakry. They also supported transitional justice processes in numerous countries around the world. In addition, the United Nations system continued to monitor the situation of children affected by conflict, as called for in Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005) and 1882 (2009). 90. The Secretary-General sincerely hopes that during the forthcoming review of the Human Rights Council in 2010-2011, the focus of discussions will be on building upon the achievements of the Council, such as the universal periodic review mechanism. The Council can and must do more to address serious and chronic human rights situations and respond to emerging crises. It should also strengthen its interaction with the independent experts who constitute the special procedures mandated by the Council. 91. As the September High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals approaches, the international community must seek to leverage the momentum generated in support of the Goals to strengthen the human rights commitment underpinning the Millennium Declaration. 2. Rule of law 92. Many of the world's poor and marginalized groups do not benefit from the protection provided by the rule of law. This is particularly true for the disproportionately high number of women who find themselves without access to justice. 93. Over the past few years, the Organization has been seeking to address that imbalance by expanding its programming worldwide. Over the past year, the United Nations system conducted rule-of-law programming in more than 120 countries, 19 of which host peace operations mandated by the Security Council, which have as part of their mission the goals of "addressing exclusion" and "enhancing justice and security for all". 94. The link among peace, development and justice was strengthened through the outcome of the First Review Conference of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The Kampala Declaration of the International Criminal Court, the amendments to the Rome Statute and the agreement on the crime of aggression adopted over the past year provide the international community with additional tools for fighting impunity. 95. In order to promote women's empowerment in particular, the Organization took definitive steps to establish a deployable team of experts to strengthen the ruleof-law response to sexual violence in armed conflict pursuant to Security Council resolution 1888 (2009), and to build on existing United Nations efforts in many conflict-affected countries. New United Nations rules on the treatment of women prisoners and offenders, and revised model strategies and measures on the elimination of violence against women in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice, have also been formulated. In addition, a global effort was launched to encourage Member States to deploy more women in the United Nations police, with a view to increasing their participation from 6.5 per cent to 20 per cent by 2014. 96. To enhance coherence, the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group issued system-wide guidance on a United Nations common approach to transitional justice. The approach is guided by the principle of the centrality of victims and international law, takes into account the particular context of the country situation, emphasizes the importance of combating impunity and upholding the protection of human rights in peace agreements, and calls for efforts to address violations of social and economic rights. 97. The Group also launched the United Nations Rule of Law website and document repository (www.unrol.org), a central resource making more than 1,200 United Nations documents readily accessible and linking 42 United Nations entities and 126 partners worldwide. Both initiatives are part of a broader United Nations effort to provide more strategic and effective rule-of-law assistance. Member States and other partners are encouraged to collaborate on strengthening global and country-level coordination and coherence in the area of security and justice. 3. Genocide prevention and the responsibility to protect 98. The concept of the responsibility to protect is gaining traction within the United Nations system. The Special Adviser who focuses on the responsibility to protect led the preparation of the January 2009 report of the Secretary-General on implementing the responsibility to protect (A/63/677) and, together with the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, consulted widely with Member States and other stakeholders in the months leading up to the General Assembly's three-day debate on the report in July. The largely positive debate led to the adoption of the Assembly's first resolution on the subject, resolution 63/308, by consensus. 99. The Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide continues to provide a unique analytical perspective within the United Nations system, to sound the alarm when necessary and to increase the capacity of the United Nations to prevent genocide. Over the past year, the Office strengthened its information management system that allows for the monitoring of developments in all countries. The Office put into practice an analysis framework to assess the risk of genocide in a given situation, which was made public and was welcomed by Member States, experts and non-governmental organizations. The Panel of the Wise of the African Union requested that it be integrated into the Organization's early warning mechanism. 100. The office also expanded its outreach and awareness-raising activities. In an effort to mainstream genocide prevention and encourage a culture of prevention throughout the United Nations system and beyond, it established contacts with the African Union; the Organization of American States, including the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights; and the European Union. 101. Further conceptual, political and implementation work on the part of all stakeholders is necessary. 4. Democracy and good governance 102. Democratic norms permeate the fabric of the Organization and are strengthened by the progressive adoption of international standards and practices. The Secretary-General's Guidance Note on Democracy has served as a key document in harmonizing the work of the Organization in support of democracy by establishing specific goals and norms. 103. Poor governance can be both a source and a consequence of conflict. Addressing weak governance, in particular by promoting the empowerment and participation of women, is now accepted as an integral part of approaches to development, conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding. Promoting good governance is also reflected in the mandates of many field missions, contributing to a measurable improvement in democratic governance in their host countries. 104. Over the past year, the United Nations provided electoral assistance to more than 50 Member States. In peacekeeping or post-conflict environments, such as Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti and Iraq, it was provided through components of field missions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations or the Department of Political Affairs. Technical assistance in the context of development, such as in Bangladesh, El Salvador, Malawi, the United Republic of Tanzania and Timor-Leste, was provided mainly by the United Nations Development Programme as part of its democratic governance programmes. In other contentious environments, such as Kyrgyzstan and Guinea, electoral assistance contributed to ongoing processes of the restoration of constitutional order, seeking to ensure inclusiveness and transparency, even under very difficult circumstances. 105. The United Nations Democracy Fund has enhanced the Organization's efforts by providing grants, especially to local non-governmental organizations, to strengthen the voice of civil society, promote human rights and encourage the participation of marginalized groups in democratic processes. To date, the Fund has received more than $105 million in contributions and has supported 271 projects worldwide. Chapter III 106. Addressing climate change, advancing on a global health agenda, countering terrorism and making progress on disarmament and non-proliferation have been priorities for the Secretary-General since he first came to office. These issues share some important traits: they can have a dramatic impact on human welfare and on peace and security, they ignore borders and affect populations indiscriminately, they are highly complex in nature, and the remedies needed are cross-sectoral in nature and require the coordination of activities across a broad range of actors. They constitute global threats that must be addressed if the global good is to be secured. The United Nations, with its engagement across a wide range of sectors and with its universal membership, is the only institution in the world that has the scope, expertise and legitimacy to be able to craft and implement effective policies to address these challenges. A. Climate change 107. Political momentum on climate change swelled during the second half of 2009 as the world prepared for the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen in December. In September, the Secretary-General hosted a Summit on Climate Change with 101 world leaders, which helped to place climate change at the top of the global agenda. No issue is more fundamental to long-term sustainable development and prosperity, energy security, food security and international security. 108. While Copenhagen did not fulfil all public expectations, it was an essential step forward in global efforts to address the climate challenge. Copenhagen marked the largest-ever gathering of heads of State and Government on climate change. Important progress was achieved in building a broad political consensus that can invigorate global negotiations. 109. The challenge now is to build on the elements of agreement that emerged from Copenhagen within the global, dual-track negotiating process under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Strengthening trust between countries and increasing the transparency and effectiveness of the process are critical. The ultimate goal remains an effective, ambitious and comprehensive global agreement that sets the world on the path towards low-emissions development and helps to catalyse clean-energy growth in developing countries. 110. The timing -- and the precise form -- of that agreement is for Governments to decide. Every year of delay increases the risk of dangerous climate impacts and adds to the human and economic toll. 111. Since the end of 2009, the Secretary-General has been working closely with the world leaders to ensure that the subject of climate change remains a strategic imperative. He is encouraging Governments to press forward with national pledges to minimize emissions and to take ambitious action at every level to strengthen mitigation and adaptation. 112. In addition, the Secretary-General is urging countries to build on the progress made at Copenhagen on an adaptation framework; an agreement on reducing deforestation and forest degradation; a system for measuring, reporting on and verifying mitigation and finance; technology development and transfer; and short- and long-term finance. The United Nations will continue to support Governments as needed in each of those areas. 113. To accelerate momentum, the Secretary-General launched a High-level Advisory Group on Climate Change Financing to identify potential funding sources to support climate action in developing countries. He will also establish a high-level panel on global sustainability to address the linkages between climate change and sustainable development. 114. There is still much work ahead of us. Global greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise, with climate impacts affecting millions of people worldwide, especially the most vulnerable. That is why the United Nations system is committed to assisting Governments in implementing existing and future climate change agreements while building global green prosperity. The United Nations system will continue to provide expertise and assistance within a sustainable development context, including in core climate-related sectors such as energy, water, food security and disaster risk reduction. In addressing climate change, the world can help to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and chart a path towards a safer, healthier, cleaner and more prosperous future for all. B. Global health 115. The importance of health for economic productivity, social stability and security, and poverty reduction has been firmly demonstrated. Over the past year, the Secretary-General has called for a renewed focus on achieving the health-related Millennium Development Goals, which so clearly underpins progress in other areas. 116. A focus on results has spurred innovation, not just in terms of medicines and vaccines, but also in ways of doing business and raising resources, and in attention to measurement and the setting of priorities. The creation of new partnerships has produced impressive results, notably in the field of immunization and in the fight against AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. 117. Over the past year, the influenza A (H1N1) pandemic reminded us of the rapid spread of new pathogens and demonstrated the effectiveness of the International Health Regulations promulgated by the World Health Organization. 118. Malaria still kills more than 800,000 people a year, most of them children under 5 and pregnant women. However, there has been tremendous progress over a short period of time: more than 150 million insecticide-treated nets were delivered to Africa during the two-year period 2008-2009, and nine countries have reduced child deaths by more than 50 per cent. 119. There has been measurable forward movement in the AIDS response. Since 2001, the global rate of new infections has decreased by 17 per cent. At the same time, HIV treatment access in low- and middle-income countries increased tenfold over a span of just five years, bringing to 4 million the number of people on antiretroviral therapy at the end of 2008. Today, the tools and techniques exist to virtually eliminate mother-to-child HIV transmission. HIV-based stigma and discrimination are being confronted more strongly, as demonstrated by several countries that have lifted decades-old travel restrictions on people living with HIV. 120. The global response to AIDS must be leveraged more effectively to meet women's health needs. AIDS remains the leading cause of death among women of reproductive age worldwide. A total of 15.7 million women are living with HIV. Shortfalls in public financing threaten the progress made in curbing the epidemic's spread and saving the lives of those infected. Four out of five low- and middle-income countries are currently not on track to reach their universal access targets. 121. The world has made unacceptably slow progress on maternal health, the critical indicator of the health and prosperity of a nation. With hundreds of thousands of women and girls dying in pregnancy or childbirth every year and 10 million to 15 million more suffering long-term disabilities, the Secretary-General has officially launched a global effort on women's and children's health. The global effort seeks to build upon and revitalize existing commitments, to secure new commitments from a range of influential partners and to provide organization and accountability for delivery at the highest levels. 122. Beyond the Millennium Development Goals, the United Nations has made major strides in the eradication of guinea worm. Attention to addressing noncommunicable diseases such as cancer, heart disease, diabetes and stroke has also increased. 123. Yet, for all of these advancements, significant challenges remain in achieving better health. This is due largely to deficient health systems, threats to health security posed by pandemic influenza and other emerging diseases, and profound inequities -- illustrating a failure to allocate adequate resources to health care for the poor, women and children. For example, there has been a relative lack of progress in improving access to treatment for the two biggest killers of children, diarrhoea and pneumonia. The strategic role of the United Nations in shaping the future of global health requires focused attention on support for equitable access to health systems that deliver high-quality services within a coherent policy framework. 124. Further effort is needed to support the formulation by countries of coherent national health policies, strategies and plans and their implementation in keeping with the scale of national and global health challenges. The United Nations will continue to play an important role through advocacy, the development of guidelines and the provision of support to countries in the development of innovative models for reaching those in need. C. Countering terrorism 125. Terrorism is a major threat to international peace and security that calls for a firm and concerted global response. Mobilizing resources of the United Nations system to combat terrorism is crucial to that end, and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force provides a key mechanism for doing so. 126. In supporting the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the Task Force has launched initiatives, developed specific recommendations and support activities and produced reports on supporting victims of terrorism, countering terrorist financing, countering the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, and private-public partnerships for the protection of vulnerable targets. The Task Force, together with the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, is assisting Member States in the region in developing an action plan on strategy implementation, with a particular focus on addressing conditions conducive to terrorism. It has also supported the International Criminal Police Organization in creating a Vulnerable Targets Referral Centre and an information system for the facilitation of enhanced information-sharing and the coordination of technical assistance delivery. 127. Counter-terrorism efforts must be systematically integrated into the broader agenda of international peace, security and development and must be in compliance with human rights, humanitarian and refugee law. In that spirit, and following the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), on the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida, Usama bin Laden and the Taliban, the Secretary-General, on 14 July 2010, appointed an Ombudsperson mandated to consider delisting requests from individuals and groups named on the Consolidated List. 128. The support of Member States will be essential for the continued implementation of the Counter-Terrorism Strategy. D. Disarmament and non-proliferation 129. The year 2010 is proving to be critical for defining the direction that disarmament and non-proliferation efforts will take. The international community has achieved some meaningful progress, particularly in the nuclear arena. Positive developments have included the signing, on 8 April, of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Russian Federation on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms by President Barack Obama and President Dmitry Medvedev, the declarations by the United States and the United Kingdom of the size of their nuclear-weapon stockpiles and the successful outcome of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons. At the latter, a plan of action was adopted to advance nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy over the next five years. The agreement on forward-looking action halts years of deteriorating confidence in the Treaty regime. The Secretary-General particularly welcomed the agreement on a process leading to the full implementation of the 1995 resolution on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of weapons of mass destruction. In addition, the Final Document of the NPT Review Conference noted the Secretary-General's action plan for nuclear disarmament and addressed the benchmarks outlined therein. 130. Less positive, however, has been the lack of substantive progress on the part of the Conference on Disarmament. There has been no progress on the peaceful and negotiated denuclearization of the Korean peninsula through the Six-Party Talks. 131. Similarly, the issue involving the nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran remains a matter of concern. 132. It is clear that more needs to be done. Following the successful conclusion of the 2010 Review Conference, States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and relevant organizations need to start implementing the action plan now. A nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East must be pursued with increasing urgency. The universality of the Treaty must be achieved. The action plan specifically mandates the Secretary-General to convene a high-level meeting on the margins of the General Assembly so as to reinvigorate the Conference on Disarmament. 133. The Conference on Disarmament must begin to work without delay, in particular to commence negotiations and substantive deliberation on the main substantive issues. New efforts are also required to achieve the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, and the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism needs to be strengthened. 134. In the field of conventional arms, there have been some promising developments. In 2010, the Convention on Cluster Munitions entered into force. The United Nations will remain actively involved in all aspects of mine action and is firmly committed to continuing to support the implementation and universalization of the key humanitarian treaties, including the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, the Anti-personnel Mine Ban Convention and the Convention on Cluster Munitions, while seeking to strengthen synergies between them. 135. Importantly, in 2010 negotiations began within the United Nations on an arms trade treaty, to be concluded in 2012. Member States must develop a strong and robust treaty in order to counter the negative effects of unregulated arms transfers on regional stability, development and human rights. 136. The excessive accumulation and the easy availability of small arms and light weapons in zones of conflict and crime remain an issue of enduring concern. The recent initiative of the General Assembly to focus on the broader issue of armed violence, including how it undermines development, is a promising development. 137. The Secretary-General has highlighted the close relationship between disarmament and other global challenges, stressing that "the world is over-armed and development is under-funded". The Organization will work with Member States to maintain and reinvigorate effective disarmament and non-proliferation norms so that stability and security can prevail and so that the resources necessary to combat climate change and achieve the Millennium Development Goals are liberated. Chapter IV 138. Effective United Nations action across a wide range of issue areas is essential if the Organization is to attain its long-term objectives of delivering to those most in need and addressing the new set of twenty-first-century global challenges that confront the international community. The Organization must make an explicit effort to ensure that it takes action to modernize its processes, introduces cost-effective measures, and rewards excellence and achievement. It must also strive to ensure that the component parts of the Organization and of the United Nations system work well together, leveraging each other's respective strengths. In addition, the future of the Organization will rest in part on its ability to forge strong working relationships with a variety of stakeholders, including regional organizations and civil society. For that reason, outreach and partnership-building are important elements of the Organization's activities. A. The Secretariat, the intergovernmental machinery, system-wide coherence and cooperation with regional organizations 139. With a view to strengthening the Organization, the Secretary-General initiated a number of important changes in human resource policy, in budget planning and in the accountability framework. These included adopting a variety of measures to support women's empowerment in the Organization and laying the groundwork for the establishment of a new gender entity. The Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly provided important platforms for stimulating discussion and forging consensus on a wide range of global concerns. Important progress was also made on system-wide coherence and the further strengthening of the Organization's cooperation with regional organizations. 1. The Secretariat 140. In order to deliver results for people most in need, the Organization must be able to recruit and deploy staff members quickly and efficiently, and staff must continually learn and grow. To that end, the Secretary-General is continuing to implement his human resources reform agenda, including by reducing the various types of employment contracts from 16 to 3, harmonizing conditions of service between staff in the field and those at Headquarters, and launching a new talent management system to modernize recruitment, performance management and staff learning and development. 141. As part of his efforts to strengthen the Organization, the Secretary-General has adopted various policies designed to empower and promote women working in the Secretariat. These complement the important initiatives he has championed to empower women in the context of war and internal conflict previously discussed: his seminal report on sexual violence in armed conflict (S/2009/362), his appointment of a Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and his insistence on a zero-tolerance policy regarding abuse and violence in peacekeeping missions. 142. More women have been appointed by the Secretary-General to senior United Nations posts than at any time in the history of the Organization, and the Secretary-General has overseen a gender balance strategy and action plan within the Secretariat to ensure managerial and departmental accountability with respect to gender balance targets. 143. At the end of 2009, the Secretary-General provided the General Assembly with a comprehensive proposal to create a new United Nations gender entity, consolidating current structures and enabling the United Nations to provide enhanced support to our national partners in a more effective manner. The Assembly endorsed the Secretary-General's proposal by adopting unanimously, on 2 July 2010, the landmark resolution 64/289 on system-wide coherence. In the resolution, the Assembly, inter alia, called for the merging of the four parts of the United Nations system dealing with women's issues into one composite gender entity, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, to be known as UN Women. The Assembly also called for the appointment of an Under-Secretary-General to head the new body, and for the establishment of an executive board to provide intergovernmental support for and supervision of its operational activities. The Beijing Platform of Action, adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women, will serve as the framework for the new body's work. 144. A more strategic and effective budget is critical to identifying the results that must be delivered within a given time period and to determining whether or not goals have been achieved. To improve the presentation of the budget, the Secretary-General engaged in a dialogue with Member States that explored various scenarios for ways in which to modify the format of budgetary documents and identified several options for further consideration. That important dialogue needs to continue, as the Secretariat requires a budget process that is less cumbersome and provides more flexibility to managers in the utilization of resources. Such flexibility should go hand in hand with increased accountability. 145. The Organization's service delivery and resource management will improve dramatically through the Umoja reform initiative, aimed at enterprise resource planning, and the introduction of International Public Sector Accounting Standards. Umoja will modernize the Secretariat's business practices, upgrade staff skills and put in place a single, integrated information system. The endeavour will enhance transparency and support improved performance monitoring and reporting of results, linked to objectives and resource usage. In anticipation of significant annual capacity improvements and cost recovery, the General Assembly endorsed the Secretary-General's proposal that Umoja be deployed through the "pilot first" strategy, which will provide the fastest and least expensive path towards benefit realization. 146. Progress on the Capital Master Plan is providing modern facilities to support the delivery of results. During the reporting period, offices and staff were moved to swing spaces with precision and efficiency, the North Lawn Building was inaugurated, the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council were successfully relocated, construction continued in the basements, and renovation work commenced in the Secretariat and Conference buildings. 147. The most fundamental way to ensure the efficient delivery of results for those most in need is to have in place effective systems for internal control and to strengthen accountability within the Organization and between the Secretariat and Member States. To that end, the Secretary-General completed the agenda for procurement reform during the reporting period by submitting reports on procurement governance and sustainable procurement, to be further considered by the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session. The Secretary-General's most urgent priorities for the remainder of 2010 and for next year are to strengthen personal accountability, promote a culture of results-based management, institute proactive risk management, and continue to analyse and monitor the implementation of the recommendations of oversight bodies in order to draw lessons for continued management improvement. 2. Intergovernmental machinery 148. In 2010, the Security Council has focused its agenda on intra-State conflicts, threats of terrorism, nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament and, increasingly, the security implications of transnational organized crime and drug trafficking. The Economic and Social Council has focused on the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals and has advanced accountability for global development commitments. Its annual ministerial review on gender equality and women's empowerment brought together Governments, the private sector and civil society at a number of events throughout the year. The Secretary-General's participation and his strong advocacy on behalf of women and public health built a greater sense of engagement. The 2010 session of the multistakeholder Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council focused on increasing aid flows and quality, and policy coherence. The Forum process permitted an open debate among Member States, civil society, the private sector, parliamentarians and local Governments on promoting and improving development cooperation for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 149. The General Assembly has been engaged in intensive preparations for its High-level Plenary Meeting on the Millennium Development Goals to be held at United Nations Headquarters in September. Important inputs on ways to strengthen the implementation of the global development agenda have been provided through the Assembly's high-level dialogues on "Water for Life" and financing for development, as well as through various informal meetings convened by the Assembly with the United Nations system, academia, civil society and the private sector. 150. The Secretary-General has increased his personal interaction with the intergovernmental bodies through numerous exchanges. In the case of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General briefed Member States on issues ranging from the meetings of the Group of 20 and the Quartet to the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, as well as the natural disasters in Haiti and Chile. 3. System-wide coherence 151. On 2 July 2010, the General Assembly unanimously adopted the landmark resolution 64/289 on system-wide coherence, which brought to a close a major intergovernmental process that had begun at the sixty-first session. In the resolution, the Assembly, in addition to deciding to establish a composite gender entity, adopted a number of important decisions in other areas of the system-wide coherence process. These included: introducing a new approach to determining the level of "critical mass" of core funding for funds and programmes; strengthening the participation of national policymakers of programme countries in meetings of the executive boards of the funds and programmes and the operational activities segment of the Economic and Social Council; enhancing the training of delegates of the permanent missions of Member States on the roles and responsibilities of governing bodies; inviting the President and the Bureau of the Council to convene informal coordination meetings with the governing bodies responsible for United Nations operational activities for development; requesting the Secretary-General, under the auspices of the Council, to prepare and put in place periodic surveys on operational activities for development, addressed to Governments of programme countries; and requesting the Secretary-General to commission a comprehensive review of the existing institutional framework for the system-wide evaluation of operational activities for development. 152. In the resolution, the Assembly approved a modality for countries to submit a common country programme document on a voluntary basis, which represented another significant step forward in improving the coherence of the United Nations development activities. In addition, the Assembly welcomed the intergovernmental meetings of countries implementing the "delivering as one" approach held in Kigali in October 2009 and in Hanoi in June 2010. In the outcome documents of those meetings, the countries implementing "delivering as one" affirmed that the approach had added value by providing renewed Government leadership to United Nations programmes and better alignment with national priorities, and had brought enhanced coherence and effectiveness to United Nations support. The Assembly also encouraged the Secretary-General to proceed with the independent evaluation of lessons learned from the "delivering as one" pilots, with a report to be submitted to the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session. 153. During the reporting period, the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, through its three pillars, continued to advance a coordinated and collective approach to common United Nations system objectives. Noteworthy in that regard are the development of a coordinated United Nations system approach to climate change and the support provided to countries preparing United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks. Furthermore, in 2010, the Chairs of the High-level Committee on Management and the United Nations Development Group deployed a joint high-level mission to several countries to identify and address country-level bottlenecks in the area of business practice harmonization. 4. Cooperation with regional organizations 154. Today's crises and challenges require multifaceted solutions, making cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations more vital than ever. The Secretary-General's retreat with heads of regional and other organizations in January 2010 provided an important forum in which to discuss joint strategies for preventing and resolving conflict. Participants explored intensifying cooperation with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Caribbean Community. 155. In Africa, efforts to strengthen our partnership with the African Union within the framework of the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme included: strengthening the capacity of the secretariat of the African Union Peace and Security Council, collaborating on the establishment of the African Union Democracy and Electoral Assistance Unit, and supporting the development of a mediation strategy for Africa. The United Nations also engaged with the African Union to increase awareness about the importance of integrating a gender perspective into conflict resolution. In order to enhance further strategic partnerships with the African Union, the Organization's presence in Addis Ababa has been restructured. Specifically, the United Nations has established the United Nations Office to the African Union, headed by an Assistant Secretary-General. The Organization continues to work closely with the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States to encourage an early return to constitutional order in Guinea and the Niger. In addition, the Organization has deployed several of its staff to the Southern African Development Community secretariat in Gaborone and to the Economic Community of Central African States to assist in building the mediation and early warning capacities of those subregional organizations. 156. Desk-to-desk dialogues continued with the European Union, the Organization of American States and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and a joint mediation training programme was conducted with the latter. Looking ahead, cooperative efforts with relevant regional organizations will be important in assisting the Government of Haiti in rebuilding after the 12 January 2010 earthquake. B. Global constituencies 157. Civil society, the business community and academia are essential partners in our work to achieve the goals of the United Nations, particularly the Millennium Development Goals. Across the Organization, partnerships are a common and increasingly sophisticated mechanism for addressing priority challenges. Over the past year, the United Nations has made important strides in expanding the geographic and demographic diversity of its audiences and in leveraging the contributions of civil society in its work. 1. Strengthening partnerships with civil society 158. The Organization is actively reaching out to civil society and encouraging increased citizen engagement in the formulation and implementation of international policy. It is employing both traditional means of outreach and more innovative techniques, including the use of new media tools that help to inform and inspire the next generation of the global citizenry. 159. The past year saw a dynamic collaboration between representatives of civil society and the United Nations on climate change, disarmament and women's empowerment. The international community joined together in support of the "Seal the Deal!" campaign, a communications effort that helped to create massive global awareness of climate change as one of the greatest challenges of the twenty-first century. More than 1,300 people, representing 55 countries and 340 nongovernmental organizations, came together for the 62nd Annual Conference of the Department of Public Information for NonGovernmental Organizations, on the theme "For peace and development: disarm now!", which was hosted by the Government of Mexico in Mexico City from 9 to 11 September. Non-governmental organizations participated in record numbers in the fifty-fourth session of the Commission on the Status of Women, commemorating the fifteenth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women. A special event of the Economic and Social Council on smart philanthropy catalysed engagement by the private sector, foundations and civil society in the area of women's economic empowerment. 160. It is hoped that the same energy that civil society brought to these issues will be directed at making the September Summit on the Millennium Development Goals and its outcome a success. 161. It is heartening to note that the overall number of non-governmental organizations associated with the Organization continues to increase. This suggests not only that the Organization's outreach and communications are having an impact, but also, and more important, that mutual interest and respect exist between the two constituencies. The informed and active participation of civil society in the work of the United Nations is essential to making a difference in the lives of ordinary people. 2. Engaging the business community 162. Significant efforts have been made to enhance engagement with the business community. The revised Guidelines on cooperation between the United Nations and the business sector and the United Nations-Business website are milestones and essential to the modernization of the Organization. The Guidelines, issued on 20 November 2009, help staff to develop effective partnerships while ensuring the Organization's integrity and independence. Launched on 14 January 2010, business.un.org is the first online gateway to match business resources with the needs of the Organization with respect to humanitarian crises and long-term partnerships. 163. Important contributions were made by business to advance United Nations objectives. On 24 and 25 June 2010, the Secretary-General chaired the third Global Compact Leaders Summit, where hundreds of companies showcased work that is advancing development. The Summit launched many initiatives that are contributing to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, including the Women's Empowerment Principles, anti-corruption reporting guidance and an environmental stewardship framework. Two Global Compact initiatives, Caring for Climate and the CEO Water Mandate, continue to bring business solutions to these critical areas. 164. Looking ahead, encouraging corporate action in support of United Nations goals will remain a priority. The Organization must scale up this work by further building its capacity to partner with business and by facilitating greater collaboration among partners, including business, civil society, academia and local governments. Chapter V 165. The Organization is more than just a collection of buildings, a sequence of meetings, a set of reports and consultations or even a set of principles and programmes. Fundamentally, the Organization is about its people and the passion and commitment that they bring to the work of the United Nations. 166. While the past year brought some important successes and achievements, it also brought tremendous losses in the work and life of the Organization. The United Nations lost more of its dedicated staff than ever before in its 65-year history. The relatives, friends and colleagues of those who gave their lives in the service of the United Nations should know this: the Organization will not waver from the ideals that they served. Their sacrifice will not be forgotten, and it will not have been in vain. The responsibility is now on those who remain to work tirelessly to reinvigorate and support the mission of the United Nations, for which colleagues gave their lives. Goal 1 Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger Target 1.A Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than one dollar a day Indicator 1.1 Proportion of population living below $1.25 purchasing power parity (PPP) per daya,b (Percentage) Developing regions Northern Africa Sub-Saharan Africa Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean Latin America Eastern Asia Southern Asia Southern Asia excluding India South-Eastern Asia Western Asia Oceania Commonwealth of Independent States Commonwealth of Independent States, Asia Commonwealth of Independent States, Europe Transition countries in South-Eastern Europe Least developed countries Landlocked developing countries Small island developing States a High-income economies, as defined by the World Bank, are excluded. b Estimates by the World Bank, March 2010. a,b a The poverty gap ratio measures the magnitude of poverty. It is the result of multiplying the proportion of people who live below the poverty line (at $1.25 PPP per day) by the difference between the poverty line and the average income of the population living under the poverty line. b High-income economies, as defined by the World Bank, are excluded. Indicator 1.3 Share of poorest quintile in national consumptiona,b b No new global or regional data are available. Data presented are from 2008 report (A/63/1). Target 1.B Achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all, including women and young people Indicator 1.4 Growth rate of gross domestic product (GDP) per person employed (a) Annual growth rate of GDP per person employed 2009a World Developed regions a Preliminary data. (b) GDP per person employed (2005 United States dollars (PPP)) Indicator 1.5 Employment-to-population ratio (a) Total a Men Women Youth Indicator 1.6 Proportion of employed people living below $1.25 (PPP) per day a Forecast. Indicator 1.7 Proportion of own-account and contributing family workers in total employment (a) Both sexes (c) Women Target 1.C Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger Indicator 1.8 Prevalence of underweight children under 5 years of age Eastern Asia excluding China (b) By sex, 2003-2008 Boys Girls Boy-to-girl ratio Transition countries of South-Eastern Europe (c) By residence, 2003-2008 Rural Urban (d) By household wealth, 2003-2008 Poorest quintile Richest Indicator 1.9 Proportion of population below minimum level of dietary energy consumption Worlda Developing regionsa 6b 16b <5b a Includes countries/territories in Oceania. b Refers to 1993-1995. Target 2.A Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling Indicator 2.1 Net enrolment ratio in primary education (a) Totala a Primary- and secondary-level enrolees of official primary school age per 100 children of the same age. Ratios correspond to school years ending in the years for which data are presented. (b) By sexa Indicator 2.2 Proportion of pupils starting grade 1 who reach last grade of primary school a Primary completion rates correspond to school years ending in the years for which data are presented. Since there are no regional averages for the official indicator, the table displays the gross intake ratio at last grade of primary, which corresponds to the "total number of new entrants in the last grade of primary education, regardless of age, expressed as a percentage of the population of the theoretical entrance age to the last grade" (Global Education Digest 2009: Comparing Education Statistics Across the World (Montreal, Canada, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Institute for Statistics, 2009), annex B, p. 255). a Primary completion rates correspond to school years ending in the years for which data are presented. Since there are no regional averages for the official indicator, the table displays the gross intake ratio at last grade of primary, which corresponds to the "total number of new entrants in the last grade of primary education, regardless of age, expressed as a percentage of the population of the theoretical entrance age to the last grade" (Global Education Digest 2009: Comparing Education Statistics Across the World (Montreal, Canada, UNESCO Institute for Statistics, 2009), annex B, p. 255). Indicator 2.3 Literacy rate of 15- to 24-year-olds, women and men (Percentage who can both read and write) a The regional averages presented in this table are calculated using a weighted average of the latest available observed data point for each country or territory for the reference period. UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates have been used for countries with missing data. Goal 3 Promote gender equality and empower women Target 3.A Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and in all levels of education no later than 2015 Indicator 3.1 Ratios of girls to boys in primary, secondary and tertiary education (a) Primarya a Using gross enrolment ratios. (b) Secondarya (c) Tertiarya Indicator 3.2 Share of women in wage employment in the non-agricultural sector (Percentage of employees) Proportion of seats held by women in national parliamenta 2010b a Single or lower house only. b As at 31 January 2010. Target 4.A Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate Indicator 4.1 Under-5 mortality ratea a Deaths of children before reaching age 5 per 1,000 live births. Indicator 4.2 Infant mortality ratea a Deaths of children under age 1 per 1,000 live births. Indicator 4.3 Proportion of 1-year-old children immunized against measlesa a Children aged 12-23 months who received at least one dose of measles vaccine. Target 5.A Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio Indicator 5.1 Maternal mortality ratioa,b a Maternal deaths per 100,000 live births. Indicator 5.2 Proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel Around 1990 Around 2008 Latin America and the Caribbeana a Includes only deliveries in health-care institutions. Target 5.B Achieve, by 2015, universal access to reproductive health Indicator 5.3 Contraceptive prevalence ratea a Among women aged 15-49 who are married or in union. Indicator 5.4 Adolescent birth ratea a Births per 1,000 women aged 15-19 years. Indicator 5.5 Antenatal care coverage (at least one visit and at least four visits) (a) At least one visita a Proportion of women aged 15-49 years who received antenatal care during pregnancy from skilled health personnel, at least once. (b) At least four visitsa 2003- 2009b a Proportion of women aged 15-49 years who received antenatal care during pregnancy from any provider (skilled or unskilled), at least four times. b Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. Indicator 5.6 Unmet need for family planninga a Among women, married or in union, of reproductive age (aged 15-49 years). Goal 6 Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases Target 6.A Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS Indicator 6.1 HIV prevalence among population aged 15-24 years Estimated adult HIV prevalence Adults living with HIV who are women Estimated adult Adults (15+) living with HIV who HIV prevalence Indicator 6.2 Condom use at last high-risk sex,a 2003-2008b Number of countries covered by surveys Percentage who used a condom at last high-risk sex Latin America and the Caribbeanc Commonwealth of Independent States, Asiac a Percentage of young women and men aged 15-24 years reporting the use of a condom during sexual intercourse with a non-regular (non-marital and non-cohabiting) sexual partner in the last 12 months, among those who had such a partner in the last 12 months. c Data refer to the most recent year available during the period 2002-2008. Indicator 6.3 Proportion of population aged 15-24 years with comprehensive correct knowledge of HIV/AIDS,a 2003-2008b who have comprehensive knowledge Worldc Developing regionsc a Percentage of young women and men aged 15-24 years who correctly identify the two major ways of preventing the sexual transmission of HIV (using condoms and limiting sex to one faithful, uninfected partner), who reject two common local misconceptions and who know that a healthy-looking person can transmit the AIDS virus. c Excludes China. Indicator 6.4 Ratio of school attendance of orphans to school attendance of non-orphans aged 10-14 years,a 2003-2008b Number of countries with data School attendance ratio a Ratio of the current school attendance rate of children aged 10-14 years both of whose biological parents have died, to the current school attendance rate of children aged 10-14 years both of whose parents are still alive and who currently live with at least one biological parent. Target 6.B Achieve, by 2010, universal access to treatment for HIV/AIDS for all those who need it Indicator 6.5 Proportion of population with advanced HIV infection with access to antiretroviral drugsa,b South-Eastern Asia and Oceania a Receiving antiretroviral therapy. c Values for developing regions include two countries from Western Asia. Target 6.C Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases Indicator 6.6 Incidence and death rates associated with malaria (a) Incidencea a Number of new cases per 1,000 population, 2008, in malaria endemic countries. (b) Deathsa All ages Children under 5 a Number of deaths per 100,000 population, 2008, in malaria endemic countries. Indicator 6.7 Proportion of children under 5 sleeping under insecticide-treated bed nets, 20062009 Sub-Saharan Africa (33 countries) 20a a Data for a subset of 26 countries in sub-Saharan Africa with trend data showed that the use of insecticide-treated bed nets among children increased from 2 per cent in 2000 to 22 per cent in 2008. (b) By sex Sub-Saharan Africa (29 countries) (c) By residence Sub-Saharan Africa (32 countries) Indicator 6.8 Proportion of children under 5 with fever who are treated with appropriate antimalarial drugs, 2006-2009 Developing regions (44 countries) Sub-Saharan Africa (34 countries) Southern Asia (4 countries) Southern Asia excluding India (3 countries) South-Eastern Asia (3 countries) Southern Asia (3 countries) Developing regions (41 countries) Indicator 6.9 Incidence, prevalence and death rates associated with tuberculosis (a) Incidence (Number of new cases per 100,000 population, including HIV-infected)a a Lower and upper bounds in brackets. (Number of existing cases per 100,000 population, including HIV-infected)a (c) Deaths (Number of deaths per 100,000 population, excluding HIV-infected)a Indicator 6.10 Proportion of tuberculosis cases detected and cured under directly observed treatment short course (a) New cases detected under directly observed treatment short course (DOTS) (DOTS smear-positive case detection rate: percentage)a (b) Patients successfully treated under directly observed treatment short course Ensure environmental sustainability Target 7.A Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country policies and programmes and reverse the loss of environmental resources Indicator 7.1 Proportion of land area covered by forest (millions of metric tons) Commonwealth of Independent Statesb Commonwealth of Independent States, Asiab Commonwealth of Independent States, Europeb Annex I countriesc,d (b) Per capita (Metric tons) (c) Per $1 GDP (PPP) (kilograms) a Total CO2 emissions from fossil fuels (include emissions from solid fuel consumption, liquid fuel consumption, gas fuel consumption, cement production and gas flaring (United States Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center). b The 1990 column shows 1992 data. c Based on the annual national emission inventories of annex I countries (with the exception of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine, which are included in the Commonwealth of Independent States) that report to the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change; non-annex I countries do not have annual reporting obligations. d Excluding emissions/removals from land use, land-use change and forestry. Indicator 7.3 Consumption of ozone-depleting substances (Tons of ozone depletion potential) 1990a -1 792b a For years prior to the entry into force of the reporting requirement for a group of substances, missing country consumption values have been estimated at the base year level. This applies to substances in annexes B, C and E, whose years of entry into force are 1992, 1992 and 1994, respectively. b Negative numbers will occur where exports plus destruction exceed actual production plus imports. Indicator 7.4 Proportion of fish stocks within safe biological limitsa Total Fully exploited Under and moderately exploited a No new global or regional data are available. Data presented are from 2009 report (A/64/1). Indicator 7.5 Proportion of total water resources useda, around 2000b a Surface water and groundwater withdrawal as percentage of total actual renewable water resources. b Differences between these figures and those set out in the statistical annex to the Millennium Development Goals Report 2009 (see http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg) are due to the availability of new data. Reduce biodiversity loss, achieving, by 2010, a significant reduction in the rate of loss Indicator 7.6 Proportion of terrestrial and marine areas protected (a) Terrestrial and marinea,b a Ratio of protected area (terrestrial and marine combined) to total territorial area. Differences between these figures and those set out in the statistical annex to the Millennium Development Goals Report 2009 (see http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg) are due to the availability of new data and to revised methodologies. b Protected areas with an unknown year of establishment are included in all years. c Including territories that are not considered in the calculations of aggregates for the Commonwealth of Independent States, developed regions and developing regions. a Ratio of terrestrial protected area to total surface area. Differences between these figures and those set out in the statistical annex to the Millennium Development Goals Report 2009 (see http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg) are due to the availability of new data and to revised methodologies. (c) Marinea,b Least Developed Countries Landlocked developing countriesd a Ratio of marine protected area to total territorial waters. Differences between these figures and those set out in the statistical annex to the Millennium Development Goals Report 2009 (see http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg) are due to the availability of new data and to revised methodologies. d Some landlocked developing countries have territorial water claims within inland seas. Indicator 7.7 Proportion of species threatened with extinctiona,b (Percentage of species not expected to become extinct in the near future) Birds Mammals a No new global or regional data are available for mammals. Data presented are from 2009 report (A/64/1). b International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List Index values for non-data-deficient species. Target 7.C Halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation Indicator 7.8 Proportion of population using an improved drinking water source 93a 97a 80a a Data from 1995. Proportion of population using an improved sanitation facility 86a 88a 78a a Data from 1995. These data are based on a subset of countries different from those used for the 2008 estimates. Target 7.D By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum-dwellers Indicator 7.10 Proportion of urban population living in slumsa a Represented by the urban population living in households with at least one of the four characteristics: lack of access to improved drinking water, lack of access to improved sanitation, overcrowding (three or more persons per room) and dwellings made of nondurable material. Half of pit latrines are considered improved sanitation. These new figures are not comparable with previously published estimates in which all households using pit latrines were considered slum households. Develop a global partnership for development Target 8.A Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, nondiscriminatory trading and financial system Includes a commitment to good governance, development and poverty reduction -- both nationally and internationally Target 8.B Address the special needs of the least developed countries Includes: tariff- and quota-free access for least developed countries' exports; enhanced programme of debt relief for heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) and cancellation of official bilateral debt; and more generous official development assistance (ODA) for countries committed to poverty reduction Target 8.C Address the special needs of landlocked developing countries and small island developing States (through the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States and the outcome of the twenty-second special session of the General Assembly) Target 8.D Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing countries through national and international measures in order to make debt sustainable in the long term Official development assistance Indicator 8.1 Net ODA, total and to the least developed countries, as a percentage of Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development/Development Assistance Committee donors' gross national income (a) Annual total assistancea (Billions of United States dollars) 2009b All developing countries a Including non-ODA debt forgiveness but excluding forgiveness of debt for military purposes. b Preliminary data. (b) Share of OECD/DAC donors' gross national income Indicator 8.2 Proportion of total bilateral, sector-allocable ODA of OECD/DAC donors to basic social services (basic education, primary health care, nutrition, safe water and sanitation) Billions of United States dollars Indicator 8.3 Proportion of bilateral official development assistance of OECD/DAC donors that is untieda a Excludes technical cooperation and administrative costs as well as ODA whose tying status is not reported. The percentage of bilateral ODA, excluding technical cooperation and administrative costs, with reported tying status was 99.6 in 2008. Indicator 8.4 ODA received in landlocked developing countries as a proportion of their gross national incomes Indicator 8.5 ODA received in small island developing States as a proportion of their gross national incomes Market access Indicator 8.6 Proportion of total developed country imports (by value and excluding arms) from developing countries and least developed countries, admitted free of duty 2008a (a) Excluding arms Developing countriesa (b) Excluding arms and oil a Includes Commonwealth of Independent States countries. Indicator 8.7 Average tariffs imposed by developed countries on agricultural products and textiles and clothing from developing countries (a) Agricultural goods Developing countries (b) Textiles (c) Clothing Agricultural support estimate for OECD countries as a percentage of their gross domestic product Indicator 8.9 Proportion of ODA provided to help build trade capacitya Trade policy and regulations and trade-related adjustmentb Economic infrastructure Building productive capacity Total aid for trade a Aid-for-trade proxies as a percentage are of bilateral sector-allocable ODA. b Reporting of trade-related adjustment data commenced in 2007. Only Canada and the European Commission reported. Debt sustainability Indicator 8.10 Total number of countries that have reached their HIPC decision points and number that have reached their HIPC completion points (cumulative) 2000a Reached completion point Reached decision point but not completion point Yet to be considered for decision point Total eligible countries a As of December 2000; including only countries that are heavily indebted poor countries in 2010. b As of March 2010. (Billions of United States dollars, cumulative) To countries that reached decision or completion point a Expressed in end-2008 net present value terms; commitment status as of March 2010. b Excludes $38.4 million (in nominal terms) of committed debt relief from the International Development Association to Afghanistan and $201.3 million (in nominal terms) of committed debt relief from the Association and the International Monetary Fund to the Congo. Indicator 8.12 Debt service as a percentage of exports of goods and servicesa,b 0.6c a Debt service as a proportion of exports of goods and services and net income from abroad. b Including countries reporting to the World Bank Debtor Reporting System. Aggregates are based on available data, and for some years, might exclude countries that do not have data on exports of goods and services and net income from abroad. c Data for 1993. In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to affordable, essential drugs in developing countries Indicator 8.13 Proportion of population with access to affordable essential drugs on a sustainable basis (No global or regional data are available) Target 8.F In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of new technologies, especially information and communications Indicator 8.14 Number of fixed telephone lines per 100 population Cellular subscribers per 100 population Least developed countriesa a The 1995 column shows 1996 data. Indicator 8.16 Internet users per 100 population Southern Asia excluding Indiaa Commonwealth of Independent States, Asiaa Least developed countriesb Landlocked developing countriesa b The 1995 column shows 1998 data. : United Nations Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Millennium Development Goals Indicators and Millennium Development Goal Indicators Database (http://mdgs.un.org). Notes: Except where indicated, regional groupings are based on United Nations geographical regions, with some modifications necessary to create, to the extent possible, homogeneous groups of countries for analysis and presentation. The regional composition adopted for 2010 reporting on Millennium Development Goal indicators is available at http://mdgs.un.org, under "Data". Commonwealth of Independent States comprises Belarus, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation and Ukraine in Europe, and Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan in Asia. Where shown, "Developed regions" comprises Europe (except Commonwealth of Independent States countries), Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand and the United States of America. Developed regions always include transition countries in Europe. 