%%%ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|WORKING CONDITIONS|LABOUR CONTRACTS|RECRUITMENT|GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION|PROFESSIONAL STAFF|COMPETITIVE EXAMINATIONS|INTERNATIONAL CIVIL SERVICE|STAFF REPRESENTATION|LABOUR RELATIONS|CONTRACT MANAGEMENT|HEALTH PROGRAMMES|HUMAN RESOURCES|

Sixty-fifth session * A/65/150. Item 136 of the provisional agenda* Human resources management Overview of human resources management reform Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250, by which the Secretary-General was requested to report to the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the progress of the human resources reform efforts. The report presents an overview of human resources management in the Organization, specifically addressing human resources management reforms implemented or in the process of implementation since the sixty-third session of the General Assembly. These reforms focus on the priority areas of contractual arrangements and harmonization of conditions of service, talent management and rejuvenating the entry of young professionals into the Organization. The report includes four addenda, which focus on contractual arrangements and harmonization of conditions of service (A/65/305/Add.1); the system of desirable ranges (A/65/305/Add.2); the talent management tool, Inspira (A/65/305/Add.3); and the young professionals programme (A/65/305/Add.4). Page Introduction Broader organizational context and imperatives Broader organizational context Imperatives Progress made in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 63/250 and next steps Specific initiatives Contractual arrangements and harmonization of conditions of service Talent management Talent management tool, Inspira National competitive recruitment examination and United Nations young professionals programme Staff health and well-being Human resources management scorecard Staff-management relations Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Annex. Summary of follow-up action taken to implement requests of the General Assembly in its resolutions 63/250 and 64/269 and requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the General Assembly 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/250, by which the Secretary-General was requested to report to the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the progress of the human resources reform efforts. 2. The report presents an overview of human resources management in the Organization, specifically addressing human resources management reforms implemented or in the process of implementation since the sixty-third session of the General Assembly. These reforms focus on the priority areas of contractual reform, harmonization of conditions of service in non-family duty stations of the United Nations common system, talent management and rejuvenating the entry of young professionals into the Organization. Within those major areas, the report and its addenda contain sections on conditions of service, continuing contracts, permanent contracts, staff selection and recruitment, the new talent management tool, the system of desirable ranges, outreach, performance management, learning and career development, the national competitive recruitment examinations and the young professionals programme, staff health and well-being and the human resources management scorecard, for which either follow-up actions were requested by the Assembly or significant progress has been made since the submission of previous reports on human resources management reform. 3. The Secretary-General is submitting an overview report on human resources management reform with four addenda for the consideration of the General Assembly, rather than separate reports as was the practice in previous years. This approach is aimed at creating more direct linkages among the proposals, in order to facilitate review and decision-making by Member States. The status of implementation of requests made by the Assembly in its resolutions 63/250 and 64/269 and requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions that were endorsed by the Assembly is presented in the annex to the present report. 4. The Assembly also has before it the report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat (A/65/350), which, for the first time, presents consolidated data on the use of gratis personnel, consultants and individual contractors, and on the employment of retired staff. II. Broader organizational context and imperatives A. Broader organizational context 5. The Organization's greatest resource is its workforce, representing 70 per cent of the regular budget and approximately a quarter of the combined support account and peacekeeping operations budget. Human resources management must play a central, strategic role in creating the framework and necessary foundational elements to ensure that the Organization works in an integrated and interoperable fashion. Human resources management must continuously work to develop an Organization that is more responsive and flexible; supports a culture of empowerment and performance; allows equal access to career opportunities irrespective of programmes and sources of funding; and provides staff with the chance to learn and grow so that they can reach their greatest potential. Only then can the Secretariat attract and retain a wide pool of global, dynamic and adaptable talent that meets the evolving needs of the Organization in order to deliver its mandates. 6. The Organization has become truly global in scope, with a shift from conference servicing to operating in rapidly evolving, field-based environments with increasingly high security risks. As figure I illustrates, more than half of staff in the Organization are located in field operations. Figure I Secretariat staff by entity 7. Further evidence of this shift to the field is found in the budgets for peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding missions and humanitarian operations. 8. The budget for peacekeeping operations increased dramatically, from $4.2 billion per year in 2004/05 to $7.3 billion in 2010/11, as indicated below in figure II. Figure II Peacekeeping budgets, 2004/05 to 2010/11 (Billions of United States dollars) 9. During the same time period, there was a more than sixfold increase in funding for special political and peacebuilding missions, as indicated in figure III. Figure III Special political and peacebuilding mission budgets, 2004/05 to 2010/11 (Millions of United States dollars) 10. Regular and extrabudgetary funding for humanitarian operations also showed a marked increase, of almost 200 per cent, from 2004 to 2010, as indicated in figure IV. Figure IV Budget for humanitarian operationsa a Includes regular budget, extrabudgetary core activities and projects, and field activities. 11. Similarly, figure V illustrates how, from 2005 to 2010, the number of international and national civilian staff serving in peacekeeping and special political missions increased by 75 per cent and almost tripled in humanitarian field operations. In addition to this contextual shift from normative to operational activities, the Organization faces a host of related challenges. There have been high vacancy rates and a high turnover, particularly in certain difficult duty stations. The international staff vacancy rate in the field was 24.1 per cent as at 30 June 2010. The turnover rate for all international staff in field missions from January to December 2009 was 19.9 per cent. Figure V Staff in the field 12. Throughout the Secretariat there are problems filling vacancies efficiently. In non-field locations, the time a vacancy is posted to the time the head of department makes a selection was, on average, 182 days in 2008 and 197 days in 2009. Taking six and half months to select a candidate affects the Organization's ability to carry out its mandates. B. Imperatives 13. The environments in which the United Nations operates vary from locations that are relatively predictable, stable and limited in number, to shifting, large scale and geographically dispersed field operations. The Organization must therefore have the capacity and tools it needs to meet current and future mandates. 14. The scope, scale and often immediacy of the work of the United Nations, covering everything from humanitarian to peacekeeping to peacebuilding activities, requires a fully integrated and harmonized United Nations Secretariat and seamless interoperability with the specialized agencies and separately administered funds and programmes. Therefore, the Organization has started to apply the principle of integration of field missions to create a broader array of integrated United Nations presences in post-conflict countries (see the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict (A/63/881-S/2009/304) and the statement by the President of the Security Council contained in document S/PRST/2009/23). Only when full integration and interoperability are achieved can the United Nations truly serve as one and deliver as one. 15. Integration includes ensuring that policies apply across the Organization, that procedures are followed consistently and that the tools the Organization uses are modern, multifunctional and enable access to everyone. Interoperability means that the organizations within the United Nations common system have harmonized conditions of service and are able to fully coordinate and cooperate, working together to achieve the shared goals of the United Nations. 16. The present report and its addenda provide a detailed picture of the initiatives in human resources management reform, including an overview of the progress made to date and the next steps to implement the reforms. III. Progress made in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 63/250 and next steps 17. Since the General Assembly adopted resolution 63/250, the Organization has undertaken a variety of human resources management initiatives to respond to the issues mentioned in section II above and to create an improved Secretariat. The contractual reform that began in July 2009, streamlining contracts and harmonizing the conditions of service within the Secretariat, and the establishment of the new system for administration of justice, laid the foundation for change. The talent management reforms currently under way build on that foundation to create a solid framework that enhances recruitment, performance management and career development (see figure VI). Figure VI 18. Through the continued implementation of the reform initiatives, the Organization will be better equipped to address a variable and demanding environment. Integration and harmonization will provide the basis for longer-term efficiencies in productivity and an improved work environment that will, in turn, better enable the Organization to meet its mandates. 19. The Organization has made progress in implementing contractual reform and the four pillars of the talent management framework (workforce planning, staff selection and recruitment, performance management, and learning and career development). There has also been progress in improving the monitoring of performance. Table 1 captures the progress made as at August 2010. Additional detailed information on implementation of resolution 63/250 as a whole is provided in the annex to the present report. Table 1 Progress made in implementation of General Assembly resolution 63/250 Area Activities/milestones Contractual reform :: 15 types of contract streamlined into three: temporary, fixed term and continuing :: One set of staff rules and harmonized conditions of service established to integrate Headquarters and field staff into one global Secretariat :: Staff and management agreed on proposal for implementation of continuing appointments to be presented to the General Assembly :: 1,396 staff (out of 5,220 eligible) converted to permanent appointments (as at 12 August 2010) Workforce planning :: Strategic workforce carried out for headquarters locations and the field Staff selection and recruitment :: Overhauled staff selection policy implemented :: New United Nations careers portal Web interface launched :: New e-staffing tool, Inspira, launched to support policy changes :: Business process review of the national competitive recruitment examination conducted Performance management :: New policy on performance management and development promulgated :: Performance management system revised :: Pilot of new system and e-performance tool, Inspira, initiated Learning and career development :: New learning policy, including five days for training per staff member per year, issued :: Learning Advisory Board established :: Development of new learning strategy initiated :: Voluntary mobility pilot implemented :: Voluntary mobility initiative based on job networks launched :: Development of new human resources management scorecard (a system to better monitor progress on General Assembly mandates and delegation of authority) initiated 20. While much progress has been made, there is still work to be done. The reforms resulting from General Assembly resolution 63/250 are a continuum that will extend to future bienniums. Table 2 below presents the next steps for the Organization to continue to implement human resources reform. Member States will continue to be apprised of future progress. The Office of Human Resources Management is committed to keeping these reforms cost-neutral. Table 2 Next steps in continued implementation of General Assembly resolution 63/250 :: Establish harmonized conditions of service in non-family duty stations among the organizations of the United Nations common system :: Align family/non-family designation to security phase :: Implement continuing contracts :: Complete conversion of eligible staff to permanent appointments :: Focus on targeted short-term planning activities Staff selection and recruitment :: Continue roll-out of staff selection tool to the field :: Roll-out of new performance management system and tool throughout the Organization Learning and Career development :: Implement learning strategy :: Launch learning management system and e-learning platform :: Build upon job networks :: Develop career models Organization-wide :: Implement the new human resources management scorecard IV. Specific initiatives 21. The next sections specifically describe the background and imperatives for reform, the progress made since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/250 and the next steps to be taken. A. Contractual arrangements and harmonization of conditions of service 22. Following the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/250 on 1 July 2009, the Organization began reforming its contractual framework in order to streamline its numerous contracts, harmonize conditions of service and fully integrate the Secretariat into one global organization. The first addendum to the present report (A/65/305/Add.1) provides further details on progress to date in contractual reform, a proposal for the implementation of continuing contracts and an update on the review of permanent contracts, and outlines the challenges still faced with respect to conditions of service for staff in non-family duty stations, together with the relevant recommendations of the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC). B. Talent management 23. Talent management is an approach to using and developing the talents and skills of employees in order to help the organization achieve its specific objectives. 24. The United Nations has recognized the importance of the talent management system to help ensure that there is more consistency and alignment within the Secretariat so that the same human resources practices are followed and the same related tools are available across the Organization. 25. The talent management framework developed at the United Nations was introduced in the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Investing in people" (A/61/255) and focuses on four core areas: workforce planning; staffing and recruitment; performance management; and learning and career development. By addressing these four areas in a comprehensive and more integrated manner, the Organization can better attract and manage a dynamic, adaptable and global workforce to carry out the Organization's evolving mandates. Figure VII below illustrates how these four areas are connected and highlights that common policies and information systems, particularly the new Inspira tool, support talent management. Figure VII Talent management framework 26. The Organization has begun to make changes to policies and processes in all these four areas, including undertaking a strategic workforce planning exercise for headquarters locations and the field; review and implementation of an overhauled staff selection system; a new approach to performance management that includes a stronger linkage to learning and career development and provides for feedback from multiple sources; and a formalized policy on learning, strengthening the relationship between learning and the needs of the Organization and introducing a more comprehensive approach to career development. 27. To support the policies underlying these reforms, a common technology platform to strengthen the Organization's internal capacity to plan, execute, monitor and report on issues related to its talent was launched in April 2010. This new system replaces the several different human resources systems currently existing in the Organization, including Galaxy, Nucleus and e-PAS. 28. The changes in policies and processes are described in more detail below and are key elements of the efforts to promote integration and interoperability. 29. The reforms implemented since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/250 are a continuum and will continue going forward. Figure VII provides more detail on the progress of the various components of talent management. Figure VIII Overview of the implementation of talent management 1. Workforce planning Background and imperatives 30. As previously stated in the report of the Secretary-General on the strategy for recruitment and staffing in the United Nations (A/63/285), workforce planning is the first element in the talent management framework, aiming to provide the Organization with a forecast of vacancies based on the Organization's mandates and required skills, so it can take action to fill those staffing needs. Workforce planning was envisaged to be a systematic process that would allow the Organization to make informed, long-term human resources management decisions and in order to ensure that the right number of people with the right skills and experiences are in the right position at the right time. It was also envisaged to be an important tool to address the staffing challenges resulting from an anticipated high rate of retirements in the coming years. 31. To address this last concern, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions also supported efforts to put in place a medium-term, integrated workforce planning system and the necessary supporting tools (see A/63/526 and Corr.1). In addition, in resolution 63/250, the General Assembly noted the upcoming demographic transition of the United Nations staff and urged the Secretary-General to pursue efforts in respect of workforce planning as a priority. Progress made since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/250 32. During 2009 the Organization carried out a Secretariat-wide, long-term workforce planning exercise to identify the supply of available staff in the Organization and compare it with the projected staffing demands, in order to determine future gaps so that strategies to effectively fill those gaps could be identified and implemented. This exercise involved more than 60 departments, offices and field operations. 33. The workforce planning exercise revealed a number of challenges. The exercise did yield an analysis of the internal availability of staff, but the only firm variable for staff movements were retirements. At the same time, from a forecasting perspective, the demand analysis did not yield much additional information beyond the number of budgeted posts that were already available. In addition, there had previously been an understanding that a major demographic transition, that is a wave of projected retirements, was under way. Upon more detailed review of the data, however, this major demographic transition does not appear to be occurring. The average age of the staff of the Secretariat has remained unchanged from June 2006 to June 2010 at 42 years. Forecast retirements, as noted in table 3 below, are slightly decreasing, and retirements as a percentage of staff are also expected to decrease slightly. Table 3 Actual and forecast retirements, 2007 to 2015 Retirements/staff Actual Forecast Retirements, average per year Retirements, as a percentage of average annual staff population Notes: Forecast of staff retirements for 2011-2015 based on information contained in A/65/350. Staff population comprises all internationally and locally recruited staff, field and non-field, with permanent/probationary, fixed-term and temporary appointments, excluding staff not administered in IMIS (i.e., staff administered by the United Nations Development Programme/United Nations Office for Project Services, some staff of the International Tribunals and field operations local staff). 34. These combined factors revealed that this all-encompassing workforce planning exercise for the Secretariat proved to be of limited added value. Next steps 35. For the field, operational shorter-term workforce planning is an important element in a reformed roster-based staffing process. The roster-based staffing system takes a proactive, centrally managed approach to staffing by developing rosters of qualified candidates, for existing and projected vacancies, who have the appropriate skill sets, have been pre-vetted by a central review body and are available for immediate selection by field operations. This workforce planning entails quarterly assessments of immediate and short-term requirements for each mission by function and level against the availability of rostered candidates. This exercise enables better management of the recruitment process because it allows the Secretariat to plan both the frequency of posting generic job openings and the schedule of expert panels which interview, evaluate and recommend candidates to the field central review body for placement on a roster. 36. Moving forward, the Organization will refocus how it conducts workforce planning based on experience to date and how it will complement the recently overhauled staff selection system. In particular, the staff selection system requires the development of field rosters of qualified candidates for field openings who will have been pre-vetted by a central review body and available for immediate selection by field missions. Approaching workforce planning from an operational shorter-term perspective to address already identified demands will be a useful tool to manage these field rosters. 2. Staff selection and recruitment (a) Overhauled staff selection and recruitment system 37. In its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly approved contractual reforms that helped to create a single, integrated global Secretariat. After implementing those reforms in July 2009, the Organization was in a position to take the next step, which was to establish a staffing system that would apply in the field and at headquarters locations. The staff selection system was therefore overhauled to integrate the formerly separate selection policy and processes for headquarters locations and field operations into one framework. 38. Building upon the integration, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General in resolution 63/250 to report on steps taken to ensure that the staff selection system is transparent and non-discriminatory and that all anticipated and immediate vacancies are properly advertised and filled quickly. The new system therefore needed to ensure transparency in the process for both applicants and programme managers; be supported by a tool that was capable of handling the large volume of applications received for job openings and automated initial screening of candidates where feasible; and reduce recruitment timelines. 39. The General Assembly has consistently recognized, for example in resolutions 61/244 and 63/250, the importance of speeding up the recruitment and staffing process in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations. The Secretary-General proposed in 2004 a reduction in the number of days for advertising vacancies from 60 days to 45 days (see A/59/263, para. 58), which was based, at the time, on an analysis that found that the vast majority of applications were received in the first 45 days of posting a vacancy. In its resolution 59/266, the Assembly noted the proposal of the Secretary-General and decided to revert to the issue in the context of a comprehensive study addressing all factors contributing to the process of selection, recruitment and placement at its sixty-first session. A comprehensive review was undertaken and presented to the Assembly at its sixty-first session. In that report, the Secretary-General proposed to reduce the period of circulation for advertising position-specific job openings from 60 to 30 days (see A/61/255, reiterated in A/63/285). No specific decision was taken by the Assembly at either the sixty-first or sixty-third session to reduce the time for circulating vacancies. 40. While taking note of the past concerns expressed by Member States that reducing the period of advertising vacancies would disadvantage potential candidates from some Member States with limited access to the United Nations website due to gaps in technology, the Secretary-General noted in his report contained in document A/63/285 that the technology gap was becoming less of an issue. Bearing in mind the existence of new information technology systems and improvements to the staff selection system, including outreach activities to attract nationals from unrepresented and underrepresented Member States, the Secretary-General requests the General Assembly to reconsider the proposal to reduce the time for vacancy circulation from 60 to 45 days, as originally proposed in 2004, as a means to further speed up the recruitment and staffing process. 41. In April 2010 the new policy governing staff selection was issued in administrative instruction ST/AI/2010/3 and the new United Nations careers portal and e-staffing tool (Inspira) were launched. The policy ensures that the same standards of recruitment are applied to all staff of the Secretariat, regardless of where they are serving, whether at a headquarters duty station or a field mission or office (including staff serving in humanitarian operations). Accordingly, the administrative instruction on staff selection sets out, for the first time, the policy, business norms and practices that enable the global Secretariat to improve staffing at headquarters locations, field missions and field offices. The policy also includes measures to support interoperability among the organizations of the United Nations common system. 42. The present section provides information on the actions taken through the promulgation of the administrative instruction on the new staff selection system. In addressing General Assembly resolution 63/250, the Office of Human Resources Management, in consultation with staff representatives through the Staff-Management Coordination Committee, has made enhancements to the staffing process that are described below. Improvements in informing candidates how they will be assessed 43. Any staff selection tool should provide information to candidates on the status of and assessment methods used during the consideration of their application. Inspira provides updated information on the status of the vacancies to which candidates have applied. Candidates also have access to a dedicated help desk to answer any technical questions that may arise. In addition, position-specific job openings now contain information on the type of assessment method to be used by hiring managers. Improvements to the pre-screening and assessment of candidates 44. Under the new system, the release of applicants at different stages has been discontinued. The eligibility of an application is now automatically pre-screened for suitability on the basis of questions supplied by the hiring manager, and eligible candidates are released on a dynamic, daily basis, starting on the day of posting of the job opening. Roster candidates associated with the job opening are similarly released on a dynamic, daily basis. 45. These improvements will streamline the process of consideration of candidates by eliminating cumbersome manual screening of candidates and automatically creating lists of the candidates most suitable for the advertised position. 46. As a result of this automated pre-screening process, hiring managers are provided with shorter lists of candidates to be reviewed to determine whether the candidates meet the technical requirements and competencies of the job opening. This enhancement will save time by allowing hiring managers to review and assess a smaller number of candidates who, through the pre-screening process, are deemed most suitable for consideration. It will also help applicants, since the assessment methodology to be used has already been indicated in the job opening, so they will be in a position to prepare for the assessment. Measures to support integration between headquarters locations and field missions and interoperability among United Nations common system organizations 47. The new staffing policy contains incentives to support the movement of staff to field positions. Under the new system, a staff member holding a permanent, probationary or fixed-term appointment (with no appointment limitation) assigned from a headquarters location, including the regional commissions, to a position one level higher than his or her current grade in a peacekeeping operation or special political mission, where a lien is maintained against a position at the parent duty station, may temporarily be promoted to the level of the position in the peacekeeping operation or special political mission for the duration of the assignment. 48. This temporary promotion provides financial benefits as well as expanded career opportunities. Specifically, a staff member temporarily promoted may apply during the assignment to job openings one level higher than the temporary grade level, provided that the staff member has spent more than 12 months continuously in the peacekeeping operation or special political mission. These provisions also apply to a staff member appointed to a peacekeeping mission or special political mission (with no appointment limitation) who is selected for an assignment to a position one level higher than his or her current grade at a headquarters location or regional commission. 49. For purposes of interoperability among organizations in the United Nations system, an internal staff member who is on secondment to a separately administered United Nations fund or programme, specialized agency or organization of the United Nations common system is granted a lien against a specific post for up to two years. If the staff member, while on secondment, applies for positions in the Secretariat he or she will be considered an internal applicant and is eligible to apply for a position one level higher than the one he or she currently occupies in the organization to which the staff member is seconded. Selection decisions 50. As stipulated in Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, the paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity. In addition, as is also stated in the Charter, due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. 51. In addition to the driving principle of merit for selecting staff and the geographical considerations mentioned above, other pertinent information can be reviewed at the selection decision stage, as provided in section 9.3 of ST/AI/2010/3. 52. With regard to selection of external candidates, the revised policy on the staff selection system balances career development for serving staff by maintaining that the fullest consideration for vacancies should be given to staff already serving in the Secretariat. Thus, prior to selection of an external candidate, the head of department must justify the decision in writing for approval by the Office of Human Resources Management. This is facilitated with the introduction of the requirement to undertake transparent assessments of candidates, as detailed above. Under this enhancement to the policy, heads of department will be able to objectively consider all candidates, including external candidates and, if the record indicates that an external candidate is the most suitable based on the objective criteria contained in the job opening, there will be a solid evidentiary basis to be presented to the Office of Human Resources Management. Accordingly, both the objective of ensuring the consideration of internal candidates, and recruiting fresh talent at all levels, are met. 53. It is also noted that heads of department may select a roster candidate (regardless of whether the roster candidate is considered external or internal for purposes of eligibility) for a job opening at any time during the process. Use of rosters 54. In its resolution 61/244, the General Assembly recognized that pre-screened rosters could considerably expedite the recruitment process in the United Nations. The General Assembly also recognized that there were design flaws associated with the pre-screened roster system resulting in it not being widely utilized to fill vacancies. The Office of Human Resources Management conducted a review of the roster component and other components of Galaxy in order to address design flaws. Two key reasons were identified for the non-utilization of the pre-screened rosters: (a) Insufficient information on the assessment methods used for the position; (b) Uncertainty about the identities of the assessors/panel members and whether they were qualified experts in the subject matter. 55. Process improvements have resulted in enhancements, which have been included in the new provisions of the administrative instruction. New provisions regarding rostering of candidates provide for: (a) A common approach to conducting assessments set out in instruction manuals (see ST/AI/2010/3, para. 2.6); (b) An understanding of the role of assessment panels, whose membership will include experts in the subject matter of the occupational group; (c) Sharing of rostered candidates across the global Secretariat, including field missions administered by the Department of Field Support for the first time; (d) Provision of information to the hiring manager on how a candidate was placed on the roster (i.e., the assessment leading to the recommendation). 56. The Department of Field Support has introduced the function of occupational group manager to assist in expediting the filling of positions in the field through roster-based recruitment. The occupational group manager is responsible for managing the supply of available rostered candidates with the necessary qualifications and expertise to meet staffing requirements. 57. A comprehensive and robust staff selection system is a cornerstone of the Organization's talent management framework. Following the introduction of Inspira, the Organization will continue to roll out different modules of Inspira, including the roster management module, the central review bodies module and the onboarding and reference checking module, as well as other analytical and technical modifications required to improve the overall functioning of the system. (b) Desirable ranges 58. In its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit proposals for a comprehensive review of the system of desirable ranges with a view to establishing a more effective tool to ensure geographical distribution in relation to the total number of staff of the global Secretariat. The second addendum to the present report (A/65/305/Add.2) reviews the origin and purpose of the system of desirable ranges and updates the scenarios presented in the previous report of the Secretary-General, on a comprehensive assessment of the system of geographical distribution and assessment of the issues relating to possible changes in the number of posts subject to the system of geographical distribution (A/59/724), as well as the proposals contained in his report on the criteria used for recruitment to support account posts (A/58/767). 59. Three groupings of scenarios are presented for the consideration of the General Assembly: (a) varying the weights of existing factors; (b) changing the number of posts considered in the system of desirable ranges; and (c) adjusting the system by applying a weighted system of ranges where different weights are given to each grade level. (c) Outreach 60. The Organization has intensified its outreach efforts to address the continuing challenges faced in attracting external talent in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and pursuant to the provisions of General Assembly resolution 63/250 relating to geographic distribution and gender balance, as well as to identify candidates for certain occupational groups. In 2008, a dedicated outreach unit was established in the Office of Human Resources Management to provide leadership at the global level to reduce, to the extent possible, the number of unrepresented and underrepresented Member States in the Secretariat by 30 per cent by 2010 compared with the level in 2006. 61. The number of outreach activities has markedly increased during the reporting period and includes: (a) The branding of career opportunities at the United Nations to establish key uniform messages through targeted promotional materials, including the new United Nations careers portal; (b) Increasing the number of outreach missions to unrepresented and underrepresented Member States (from 4 in 2008 to 5 in 2009 and 8 in 2010) to raise awareness about entry points for employment in the United Nations, including the national competitive recruitment examination and field mission positions, as well as to provide guidance on the application process; (c) Strengthening partnerships within the Secretariat to identify human resources needs, particularly for entities with a field presence, as well as with the separately administered funds and programmes to coordinate outreach activities; (d) Innovative steps to improve the gender balance in field operations, including outreach activities which have resulted in a measurable improvement in terms of gender in field rosters (for example, the proportion of females on the roster in the aviation occupational group has increased from 3 per cent in 2009 to 7 per cent in 2010). 62. In the period 2010 to 2012, the Secretary-General will continue to work closely with major troop- and police-contributing countries to identify candidates with the skills required by field missions and will continue to develop mechanisms to better measure the gap between demand (vacancy rates and anticipated needs and skills) and supply (capabilities and robustness of the rosters). 63. Based on these efforts, improvements are being made and will continue to be made based on lessons learned. It is anticipated that as a result of organizational outreach efforts there will be an improvement in equitable geographical representation within the staff of the Secretariat, as well as the identification of suitable candidates in certain occupational networks and, in particular, qualified women. 3. Performance management 64. In its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly expressed concern over the lack of credibility and effectiveness of the current performance appraisal system and noted the intention of the Secretary-General to begin utilizing 360-degree performance appraisals. The Assembly requested the Secretary-General to review the current performance appraisal system in consultation with staff. 65. Following the adoption of the resolution, the Staff-Management Coordination Committee, in June 2009, made the following recommendations: to consider a possible 180/360-degree feedback mechanism, including a pilot approach; to evaluate a new rating system; to finalize the design of the new talent management tool (Inspira) by November 2009; to develop a strategy for mandatory performance management training for supervisors/managers; to strengthen the role of the Management Review Committee and the Joint Monitoring Committee; and to explore creative ways to reward, recognize and motivate staff and strengthen the remedies to address underperformance. 66. The Organization utilized the recommendations of the Staff-Management Coordination Committee, which were endorsed by the Secretary-General, as a framework to address the concerns of the General Assembly and has progressively taken measures to improve compliance and accountability by issuing a new administrative instruction, replacing the electronic tool supporting performance management and implementing mandatory training for managers and supervisors on performance management. 67. The Organization has implemented several initiatives highlighted in table 4 below that will strengthen the performance appraisal system and address the organizational issues related to performance management. Table 4 Performance management issues and initiatives currently under way Issues Initiatives Knowledge gaps related to performance management Briefings sessions for all staff in 2010 and 2011 on the enhanced performance management and development system policy. Training workshops on performance management and development being offered globally. Mandatory training on performance management for managers and supervisors being developed for implementation in 2011 Inconsistent application of the rating scale Introduction of a rating scale with 4 levels and clearer behavioural descriptors. Application being strengthened through briefings and training workshops across the Organization Insufficient linkage to learning, career development and succession management Introduction of a dedicated personal development plan and an online competency development guide for use by staff and promotion of regular feedback and dialogue between staff and managers Uneven compliance Strengthened role of oversight bodies and enhanced reporting tools 68. Figure IX below provides an overview of progress made since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/250 and the next steps. The following section describes these initiatives in more detail. Figure IX Implementation of performance management reforms August 2009-March 2010 April 2010-March 2011 April 2011 Enhanced performance management and development policy 69. Starting in August 2009, a working group made up of management and staff representatives was convened under the auspices of the Staff-Management Coordination Committee to implement the recommendations of the Coordination Committee and to address the provisions of General Assembly resolution 63/250 through a consultative process. Consultations took place internally within the Secretariat, with several Member States, with United Nations organizations and with ICSC to obtain information on best practices for performance management, particularly with respect to recognizing staff and addressing underperformance. 70. A new performance management and development system (ST/AI/2010/5 and Corr.1) was promulgated in April 2010. The policy strengthens accountability and effectiveness of performance management through linking individual workplans with departmental strategic frameworks. Implementation is reinforced through learning and training sessions on performance management and promoting a culture of high performance, personal development and continuous learning. The policy focuses on all dimensions of performance management and includes the following components: (a) Focus on all dimensions of performance management and not just appraisal or compliance; (b) Stronger links between performance management and career development and learning through ongoing dialogue and feedback; (c) Simplified, more clearly defined, rating scale; (d) Improved clarity on the roles of stakeholders, including staff members, managers, heads of departments, offices and missions and the Organization as a whole, to ensure a strengthening in the link between performance and accountability; (e) Strengthened linkages between individual plans and other mechanisms in the accountability framework, including compacts, departmental workplans and budget fascicles, to more clearly understand how the individual's work contributes to the overall mandates of the Organization; (f) A shift in the roles of the oversight bodies, introduced through a new policy that strengthens their roles by shifting from compliance monitoring to advisory support on human resources strategy, with an emphasis on career and staff development. These new roles will ensure the re-establishment or establishment of these bodies at all offices and departments, which was the initial concern of the Staff-Management Coordination Committee working group; (g) A more streamlined rebuttal process, including the establishment of timelines; (h) Clearer guidance on addressing underperformance; (i) Strengthened roles, responsibility and accountability of the senior management team of each department, office or mission, including by: (i) Ensuring that linkages are established between individual workplans and departmental strategic frameworks, programme budgets and compacts of heads of department; (ii) Promoting a culture of high performance, personal development and continuous learning; (iii) Promoting mandatory performance management training for all managers and the minimum target of five days of professional development per year for all staff in accordance with the learning and development policy (ST/SGB/2009/9); (iv) Promoting a positive work environment, ensuring ongoing feedback, motivation and recognition, and implementing measures to reward and recognize staff and strengthening remedies to address underperformance. 71. As of 1 April 2010, this new policy applies to all United Nations staff members. At the same time, a new electronic tool Inspira e-performance, described in further detail below, which will be accessible to staff in all duty stations, is being piloted in six departments (including field missions) in a phased implementation. Most United Nations Secretariat staff still utilize a modified e-PAS system, with changes in the rating system (from 5 to 4 ratings) and changes in procedures until April 2011. 72. In addition, the departments piloting the e-performance system will test a multi-rater feedback mechanism, where each individual receives feedback from multiple sources. Staff members are encouraged to use this feedback from peers and supervisees for development purposes and as one of the sources of information for their personal development plan. The goal is to introduce the multi-rater system to all staff members in April 2011, based on the results of the pilot multi-rater evaluations. 73. Staff members participating in the pilot (about 5,500 staff) will be asked to provide anonymous feedback to peers and to their supervisors in one of two ways. All staff members may voluntarily provide feedback to other staff members by providing a brief comment on strengths and areas for improvement in relation to work performed and competencies demonstrated by the staff member during the performance cycle. All first reporting officers will ask their supervisees to provide feedback on work performed during the performance cycle related to the competency of managing performance. 74. In introducing the multi-rater feedback, guidelines have been issued and briefings and training sessions are being convened on a regular basis to guide those participating in the multi-rater pilot. Implementation of the Inspira e-performance tool 75. As mentioned above, a new tool "e-performance" has been introduced within the Inspira talent management system and its integrated framework to facilitate the implementation of the enhanced policy. 76. It is expected that the new tool will facilitate monitoring. Regular and continuous self-monitoring and reporting should enable departments and offices to detect possible bottlenecks in the process and take appropriate action in order to achieve 100 per cent compliance with the system. 77. Lessons learned, feedback and access to the system are being monitored periodically to ensure a seamless global implementation of e-performance and effective migration from the current e-PAS system scheduled for April 2011. Piloting the tool with about 10 per cent of the United Nations workforce has made it possible to ensure that almost all of those participating in the pilot have had the opportunity to participate in briefings in person or via e-learning tools to ensure that their concerns are addressed in a timely manner. 78. In addition to the hands-on training provided in situ to staff participating in the pilot implementation, webcast sessions are periodically conducted and all staff have been provided access to an online performance management and development elearning module. Furthermore, ongoing hands-on training sessions have been scheduled throughout 2010. A similar implementation and migration process, but on a larger scale, is expected to take place during the fourth quarter of 2010 and first quarter of 2011 to ensure global migration to e-performance by April 2011. Training of managers and supervisors and staff at large 79. To facilitate the implementation of the enhanced policy across the Secretariat, a series of training and reference materials have been developed and are being presented through formal staff briefings, as well as in hands-on training of staff on the new e-performance tool. 80. To support the increased emphasis on performance management and accountability for managers and staff, the Career Resource Centres have developed and offered a comprehensive menu of lunchtime workshops on a range of relevant topics, such as setting challenging performance goals and addressing underperformance. 81. To promote and facilitate staff development in the context of performance management, an online competency development guide has been introduced to facilitate staff self-learning and competency development. The guide will allow each staff member at different levels (staff member, manager or manager of managers) to take a more strategic approach towards his or her learning and career development through practical activities (e.g., learning by doing, reading and listening). It also serves as a tool for managers to engage in coaching and development of their team members. 82. Performance management workshops have been overhauled and updated to ensure their relevance to the new policy, addressing all aspects of the performance management and development system. Additional workshops to address, support and enhance accountability of managers are being offered on a regular basis. 83. In addition to the training mentioned above, the orientation programme for newly recruited staff members includes a session on performance management. Custom designed workshops on performance management are also being delivered to departments, offices and missions upon request. 84. The Career Resource Centres located at various duty stations continue to provide access to the performance management and development training workshop series, and one-on-one coaching sessions in some locations. 85. Global migration from e-PAS to e-performance is scheduled for April 2011, targeting approximately 40,000 users. This global roll-out will include briefings and hands-on training on the new tool and its features throughout the Organization. 86. In addition, mandatory training for managers and supervisors on performance management throughout the Secretariat (targeting approximately 8,000 individuals) will be based on a blended approach, combining online and in-class training starting in early 2011. 87. At its meeting in June 2010, the Staff-Management Coordination Committee requested its working group on performance management to continue to work closely with the Office of Human Resources Management on the following activities: (a) research and lessons learned on reward and recognition and on dealing with underperformance; (b) better definition of the functions and terms of reference of the various oversight bodies and their interactions; (c) review of the pilot exercise, particularly in relation to the multi-rater element of the new system; and (d) review of the rebuttal procedure, particularly in light of the new rating system. 88. The Organization will focus on the implementation of measures to reward and recognize staff, as well as the strengthening of remedies to address underperformance, taking into account the recommendations of the Staff-Management Coordination Committee, best practices and the framework for performance management proposed by ICSC. The Organization will also continue its work towards promoting mandatory performance management training for all managers and the minimum target of five days of professional development per year. 4. Learning and career development (a) Learning 89. As the Organization has become more integrated and field-based and takes on increasingly complex global mandates, it must be able to develop and retain leaders, managers and staff capable of a range of sophisticated tasks, with specific and transferable skills gained from both field and headquarters experience. A comprehensive career development policy that provides structured opportunities for career progression and support to staff in managing their careers can foster retention and loyalty, while also empowering individuals through continual self-assessment, learning and the setting of developmental goals. As a result, the Organization can help to develop a dynamic, adaptable and global workforce, equipped with the skills and knowledge needed to fully contribute to its complex and interrelated mandates. 90. While the vision of the Organization is to put a comprehensive career development policy in place, there are several challenges that must be considered. The size, functional diversity and complexity of the global Secretariat, dispersed over some 160 duty stations, represent major challenges to the successful provision, with equal access for all staff, of comprehensive learning programmes and structured development opportunities. 91. Progress has been made in enhancing the Organization's leadership and management capacity and work continues to achieve a strengthened, consistent and continuous approach to learning for leaders and managers throughout the Organization. 92. In the past decade, learning and development in the global Secretariat has evolved from a programme with a $4 million budget and a primary focus on language and information technology training to a significantly expanded and diversified function, encompassing leadership, management and organizational development, human and financial resources management, career support, staff well-being, substantive and technical skills upgrading, information technology, language and communications and e-learning. A biennial budget of some $20 million from the regular budget is dedicated to these training activities. This figure represents 1.06 per cent of staff costs, compared with the 2 per cent generally accepted as the minimum for best practice. The minimum target of 2 per cent was formally endorsed by the Human Resources Network on behalf of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination in 2003. 93. In addition to funding from the regular budget, the Organization draws on extrabudgetary resources to support training, particularly with regard to specific specialized needs (such as security, introduction of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards, humanitarian response, human rights, post-conflict response). While this helps to develop the necessary skills of staff, coordinating and tracking these extrabudgetary training initiatives and ensuring economies of scale and avoiding duplication remains a major challenge. 94. Though still falling short of industry standards, the Secretariat's funding over the past decade has allowed learning to become more strategic, with a clear focus on building organizational capacity, strengthening leadership and managerial ability, and supporting organizational cultural change. However, there are constraints that limit the organization's ability to fully address the extent of the need and demand for learning, structured career development and ongoing organizational development initiatives. The following sections outline the planned approach to addressing some of these constraints. 95. Figure X provides an overview of progress made since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/250 and the next steps. The following section describes these initiatives in more detail. Figure X Implementation of learning reforms 96. In its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly called upon the Secretary-General to submit proposals on a strategy to implement an efficient and effective training and professional development programme in the context of the budget submission for the biennium 2010-2011. With this request in mind, the Secretary-General promulgated a comprehensive learning and development policy (ST/SGB/2009/9), which aims to ensure that all staff have access to high-quality and consistent learning and development services in all duty stations. This policy incorporated what the Secretariat was already doing in the area of learning, introduced a five-day minimum target of learning opportunities per staff member per year, established a Learning Advisory Board (see ST/SGB/2009/8) with a senior-level composition representative of the broad range of activities of the Secretariat, and tasked the Board with providing strategic guidance on and support for learning and development throughout the Secretariat. The Board is chaired by the Assistant Secretary-General for Field Support in order to ensure a global perspective, considering the needs of both headquarters locations and the field. 97. In resolution 63/250, the General Assembly also recognized the core role played by programme managers in career development and support and requested the Secretary-General to strengthen the evaluation of their managerial skills and their performance in fostering staff career development. In response, in 2009 the Organization significantly revised and enhanced the leadership development programme for staff at the D-1 and D-2 levels and the management development programme for staff at the P-4 and P-5 levels. Improvements, based on feedback and evaluation from previous participants, included an increase in individual coaching for participants and greater emphasis on the successful application by participants of their enhanced leadership and management skills and approaches. An evaluation of this revised management development programme is being carried out. During the current biennium, the number and scope of organizational development interventions, designed to strengthen internal coordination and capacity of divisions, departments and offices, has steadily increased. 98. The Organization has developed a learning strategy and information technology platform (the learning management system) that aims to ensure that learning and development efforts from 2010 to 2012 are aligned with the challenges confronting the Organization. These challenges include, but are not limited to, the fact that the Organization manages widely dispersed staff, the need to work as one United Nations and the challenge of building managerial competence and capacity. Major elements of the strategy, as outlined below, include a comprehensive learning framework reflecting best practice, a continued focus on management and leadership development and enhanced learning programming and delivery mechanisms. 99. In addition to the roll-out of the learning management system, the activities outlined below are expected to be carried out in the next two years. Overall, it is anticipated that the number of staff members benefiting from learning and career development opportunities (formal and informal) will continue to increase, as has been the trend over the past few decades. The future increase will also be facilitated by increased access to e-learning. Learning framework 100. The Secretariat plans to establish the learning and development framework in all field missions, offices and departments so that strategic, priority learning and development needs are aligned with the appropriate resources. This aim is to create a learning programme that is fully aligned with the operational needs and priorities of the Organization to support the achievement of its mandates. The development of the learning framework will include: (a) Updating the Organization's competency framework to ensure that it better reflects the current and anticipated challenges of a field-focused workforce. The revised framework will then be fully integrated into the talent management system through the recruitment and performance management modules and in all learning and development programmes; (b) Revision and improvement of both the centralized programme approach for the development of cross-cutting competencies and the decentralized approach for building substantive and technical skills; (c) Improved and systematic widespread evaluation and impact assessment of learning and development activities using the methodology proposed and endorsed by the United Nations System Staff College; (d) Targeting a minimum of 1 per cent of funding for staff costs for learning and development for staff funded from extrabudgetary sources; (e) Successful and widespread implementation of the policy of five learning days per staff member. Management and leadership development 101. The Secretariat will institutionalize continuous learning and development for managers and leaders in order to strengthen the global Secretariat as a learning organization and strengthen the Organization's leadership and managerial competence through: (a) Introduction of a managerial assessment process for senior staff (P-5 and above) to ensure that those assuming managerial responsibilities at senior levels possess the necessary competencies and to identify specific areas where further managerial competency development is required; (b) Establishment and implementation of mandatory performance management and development training for all who supervise others, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 63/250; (c) Establishment and implementation of a mandatory senior leadership development programme for Assistant Secretaries-General and Under-Secretaries-General, to complement the existing programmes (management development programme and leadership development programme) for staff from the P-4 to the D2 levels, so as to ensure a coherent institutional approach to management and leadership. Learning programming and delivery 102. The Secretariat plans to deliver a coherent, consistent and high-quality learning and development portfolio for all staff, reducing duplication and exploiting economies of scale. The specific activities include: (a) Expanded coordination of learning among job families and job networks, including increased numbers of learning focal points in the Secretariat designated to work with learning managers; (b) Harmonized, high quality and targeted language and communication programmes accessible to staff at Headquarters, offices away from Headquarters and field missions; (c) Increased coordination of and access to learning activities in all offices and departments, between the Secretariat and the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system, with intergovernmental bodies, and through increased partnerships with academic institutions and Governments, to provide increased, cost-effective access to their learning activities. 103. Underlying the proposed strategy is the learning management system, a central tool to manage and administer learning, which is a component of the talent management framework. This tool will allow for course scheduling, attendee record-keeping and provision of online courses through an e-learning component. The system will improve the efficiency of the planning, management, tracking and reporting of learning throughout the Secretariat, and will greatly facilitate access of staff to online learning options, which is of particular importance for staff in the field. The better data management possible through the system is expected to allow for improved oversight, structured needs assessments and analysis of return on investment, which will lead to a more structured dialogue on learning between the Secretariat and the General Assembly. The establishment of a Secretariat-wide system for learning management will also greatly improve the capacity to effectively evaluate and follow up on learning, and to better assess learning impact. The system will become functional at Headquarters and offices away from Headquarters by the end of 2010 or in early 2011 and in field missions by mid-2011. The development of the expanded e-learning capacity of the learning management system will continue through 2012. Further details are provided in A/65/305, Add.3 on the Inspira talent management tool. (b) Career development 104. Career development at the United Nations is an essential pillar of the Organization's talent management framework. The Organization needs optimal deployment and retention of a dynamic, adaptable and global workforce that can help meet evolving mandates. At the same time it is recognized that in order to ensure this type of workforce is built, the Organization must strengthen staff capabilities and complement their skills with learning and developmental opportunities. Consequently, the development of each staff member is important since when staff grow and develop in their professional careers, the Organization as a whole benefits. 105. In the Secretariat, career development is founded on the basis of a partnership approach between the staff member, the manager and the Organization. The individual staff member has the primary responsibility for his or her professional and personal development and is the key driver of the career planning process. Managers provide direction, information and a work environment that supports career development and helps to identify the skills, knowledge and experience required to meet organizational needs. The Organization provides a framework of opportunities through a competency model, a diverse range of programmes and workshops to support career planning and development, and a broad range of development opportunities such as stretch assignments, job shadowing, exchanges, temporary assignments and mobility within and between departments and between duty stations and field missions, offering staff the chance to acquire diverse skills and experience. 106. Key components of the Organization's career development framework include job networks and the voluntary initiative for network exchanges programme, career support programmes and career models. Mobility 107. A cross-cutting theme of the talent management framework is staff mobility, which continues to remain an integral component of career development and offers individuals the opportunity to acquire new skills, knowledge and experience within and between departments and duty stations. 108. Initially, in May 2002, a mobility policy was established as an integral part of the staff selection system to support the development of a more flexible and experienced international civil service. However, the scope of the policy was limited; it was not applicable to staff in field operations and mobility was defined as movement within and between departments, functions, occupational groups, duty stations and organizations of the United Nations system. 109. At the same time, staff at the P-2 level have been involved in a managed reassignment programme established in 2000 (see ST/AI/2001/7). This centrally managed programme seeks to reassign P-2 staff between their second and third year in the Organization, thus allowing them to meet the requirement of serving in two different functions during the first five years of service. This programme has been quite successful, with mobility rates of between 57 per cent and 82 per cent. In 2009, of the 37 participants in the programme, 25 were successful in placement, resulting in a mobility rate of 68 per cent. In addition, 96 per cent of participants in the programme changed department, 68 per cent changed duty station and 72 per cent changed occupational group. 110. Through this experience, it has become clear that the concept of one size fits all is not practical within the Organization's context and, as such, a range of mobility options are offered. 111. Presently, staff mobility is possible through two types of modality: one within the Organization (intra-organization mobility) facilitated through the voluntary initiative for network exchanges programme or through the regular staff selection system where staff apply to vacant positions, and the other, between the organizations of the United Nations system (inter-agency mobility). Both modalities may result in changes in occupation, function and department and geographical movement. 112. Figure XI provides an overview of progress made since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/250 and the next steps. The following section describes these initiatives in more detail. Figure XI Implementation of career development reforms June 2009 Aug 2009-March 2010 July 2010-Dec 2011 113. In its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit proposals aimed at encouraging voluntary mobility of staff. This was to be carried out in the context of the review and definition of the mobility policy. 114. In this regard, the Organization is developing broad principles on mobility through staff consultations and in the light of lessons learned from pilot voluntary exercises. Although a revised policy on mobility has not yet been fully developed, consultations between staff and management on the issue are under way. At the Staff-Management Coordination Committee meetings in June 2010, the Committee agreed to reactivate the intersessional working group on career development and mobility and concluded that issues such as inter-agency mobility should be further pursued. 115. Specific efforts to encourage mobility are already in place. To foster mobility of staff, the requirement for staff to have two lateral moves (one of the staff member has served in Nairobi or a regional commission other than the Economic Commission for Europe for one year or longer, or is applying for a P-5 position in one of these duty stations) for eligibility for promotion to the P-5 level has been retained. Since April 2010, the lateral move requirement is also waived when a staff member has served in a non-family mission or non-family duty station for one year or longer. 116. Also since April 2010, staff members serving on secondment within the United Nations common system are eligible to apply for posts one level higher than their current grade in order to foster greater inter-agency mobility within the United Nations common system. 117. The Organization is also developing mobility models to address the variety of needs in this area. The voluntary initiative for network exchanges programme is one model that was based on lessons learned from previous mobility exercises. This initiative supports career development by promoting voluntary mobility and enabling staff to fulfil the requirements for lateral moves, while also serving as a tool for personal and professional development. The initiative was piloted in 2008 and 2009 within the framework of job networks and as of July 2010 it has been implemented throughout the Organization. 118. The voluntary mobility pilot exercise was implemented in four job networks (management and operations support, economic and social development, political affairs, peace and security, and communication and information technology). These job networks are flexible groupings of departments and offices whose mandates, programmes of work and interests are closely linked. The networks build on affinities between functions, break down departmental silos and encourage multidisciplinary approaches, generating significant benefits for all the parties involved. The Organization benefits from an improved workforce capacity to fulfil complex mandates. Managers benefit from a more proactive approach to staffing with access to a broader pool of skills and resources in filling vacancies. Staff benefit from establishing a broader perspective for career development. 119. The pilot attracted a total of 130 applicants from across the Organization and final selection resulted in a 20 per cent mobility rate involving 14 departments/offices and four duty stations, compared with the 9 per cent achieved through the reassignment programmes conducted in 2007 and 2008. On average it took approximately 70 days (from advertisement to final selection and offer) to administer and finalize a move, showing greater efficiencies through a standardized and simplified process. 120. Following the conclusion of the voluntary mobility pilot exercise, a survey in 2009 (72 per cent response rate) indicated that staff members recognized the mobility initiative as relevant for their career development and expressed interest in mobility across job networks and between United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. The findings of the survey also indicated the need for greater awareness and support from managers and for mobility policies that encouraged geographical mobility. 121. Given the positive experience of the pilot, starting in July 2010, the voluntary initiative for network exchanges programme is being extended to all eight job networks and all grade levels. These eight job networks include the four previously mentioned job networks and public information and external relations, conference services, legal and safety and security. The mobility initiative is also being extended to eligible staff in field missions, in an effort to integrate and promote greater exchanges of staff between the field and headquarters locations. This expansion is also in line with the global field support strategy (A/64/633), which is aimed at building the capability and adaptability of mission staff. 122. The voluntary mobility extension will introduce a simplified process based on the P-2 managed reassignment programme where the posts of interested participants are included in a compendium. A matching exercise will be conducted taking into consideration the preferences of participants and managers with the goal of having the maximum number of matches possible. Participation in the initiative remains voluntary and the resulting moves may be transfers or temporary assignments depending on the agreement of the receiving and releasing offices. 123. Further expansion of the voluntary mobility framework to staff in the General Service and related categories and within selected job networks with United Nations programmes and funds at a duty station, is also under consideration. 124. There is also an intention to expand the initiative to include the programmes and funds of the United Nations in the spirit of "Delivering as one" and of serving as one. This would enable staff to move between organizations and duty stations, within the context of the existing inter-agency mobility mechanisms. 125. Building on the concept of job networks, the Organization has also begun introducing career models as a pilot to facilitate career planning and enable exploration of possible career path options and requirements for movement to a higher level, including learning and development opportunities. Potential benefits include increased workforce agility, mobility, job satisfaction and productivity. 126. Through these career models, staff will be empowered to identify career possibilities, not only by looking for openings, but also by recognizing what skills are in demand and where new opportunities are being created in order to meet organizational goals. Career models will include career options available to staff when considering ways and means to improve their chances for a successful career. Specifically, they will help staff to identify areas in which they are interested, choose a role or function they want to perform, understand and prepare themselves to acquire the knowledge and skills necessary for advancing their career, create their own career path and prepare for the new function or assignment. 127. Career models will include key information, such as: (a) The skill sets needed at each level in various functions (or competency model by job family) so staff can determine how well they fit into and fulfil the needs of various positions, and so managers are provided with an important tool for employee selection; (b) Learning and developmental opportunities and staff development programmes offered to staff to help build new skills and/or upgrade existing ones in various areas relevant to the needs of the Organization and aspirations of staff; (c) An outline of career structures to provide information for staff who would like to remain in their chosen profession or to cross functions; (d) Avenues for different assignments through voluntary reassignment programmes and the regular staff selection system, and mechanisms that provide staff with options for internal mobility, either laterally or through promotion. 128. In addition to mobility models and career models, Career Resource Centres are an essential enabler of talent management and have been established at all headquarters locations, offices away from Headquarters and in a number of field missions to provide guidance and support to staff at various stages of their career, whether they are contemplating a change, getting ready to apply to a new position, or managing performance at work. They support managers by providing specific tools, practices and information on career and performance issues. Some of the services include: (a) Information on career, life planning and learning opportunities; (b) Mobility support, involving orientation and briefings on duty stations and planning for moves; (c) Confidential career coaching from career consultants and human resources experts; (d) Workshops to develop skills in networking, performance management and competency-based interviewing; (e) Information sessions on human resources management and development issues, such as on support for spouses and pre-retirement. 129. In addition, the Career Resource Centres offer and coordinate the mentoring programme, which is in its tenth year of operation and matches each junior professional with a more senior staff member for one year to provide career coaching, networking support and information about the Organization, and to offer support in career advancement. 130. In addition to career development and support services provided to staff, a preretirement programme is offered biannually to staff due to retire, including those from the funds and programmes in New York. A spouse support programme is also offered and provides information to spouses and partners on a variety of relevant topics in monthly information sessions. In addition, a series of workshops on work/life balance and flexible working arrangements contributing to a positive work environment is offered. 131. Moving forward and building upon the tripartite partnership of the Organization, managers and individual staff, the Organization can take advantage of the experience already gained with the job networks and other established career development enablers, previous mobility programmes and the voluntary mobility initiative to develop and enhance the careers of staff and benefit the Organization. 132. As mentioned, an extension of the voluntary mobility initiative was launched in July 2010. Going forward, it will be implemented continuously on a staggered basis across the eight job networks and extended to field staff. Each of the networks will be managed as a cluster with a dedicated compendium of encumbered posts available for staff exchanges or swaps, released on a quarterly to annual basis depending on the needs of the network. The compendium does not include vacant posts, which will continue to be advertised following the standard recruitment process. 133. The introduction of career models and options for career paths within job networks on a pilot basis in selected departments and offices with standardized templates is ongoing and will continue throughout the Organization through 2011. 134. The role of the Career Resource Centre at Headquarters will continue to be strengthened through continuous updating of the programmes on offer, ensuring that centrally coordinated programmes are relevant to the evolving needs of the Organization and its staff. Likewise, a marketing strategy for the services of the Centres is being developed to promote courses and undertake outreach to staff globally. C. Talent management tool, Inspira 135. The enhancements made within talent management are supported by a new system, Inspira, which integrates key human resources processes, including staff selection and recruitment, performance management and learning and career development and replaces current systems supporting these functions (Galaxy, Nucleus and e-PAS). This integration enables all staff of the Organization to operate on the same common platform and thereby strengthens the Organization's internal capacity to plan, execute, monitor and report on issues related to its talent on a global basis. 136. Inspira was launched in April 2010. The staffing module became operational at that time and will be rolled out to the field in early 2011. The performance management module was also launched in April 2010 on a pilot basis. It will be fully rolled out in April 2011. The learning management module will begin deployment later in 2010. 137. Inspira users are supported by a new support centre hosted by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in Bangkok that provides front-line support, addressing issues raised via the Internet or e-mail, and is responsible for the overall system operations. 138. The third addendum to the present report (A/65/305/Add.3) describes in detail progress to date and future implementation of Inspira. D. National competitive recruitment examination and United Nations young professionals programme 139. In its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit a feasibility study to determine whether the broadening of the scope of the national competitive recruitment examinations would strengthen the capacity of the Organization for programme delivery. The Secretary-General was also requested to ensure the expeditious placement of successful candidates from national competitive examinations, and to report on the implementation of the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit aimed at reducing the length of the national competitive recruitment examination process and improving the national competitive recruitment examination roster management, as well as setting time frames for completion of the process. The fourth addendum to the present report (A/65/305/Add.4) describes in detail the United Nations young professionals programme proposal, which is aimed at rejuvenating the entry of junior professionals into the Organization, responding to the request of the Assembly and addressing recurring issues related to the national competitive recruitment examination. E. Staff health and well-being 140. United Nations staff are increasingly deployed to field duty stations, including to many areas with suboptimal medical and health-care infrastructure. These deployments come with an increased risk to health and safety, as evidenced by recent attacks on United Nations premises (in Baghdad, Algiers and Afghanistan), and exposure to natural disasters (such as in Haiti). 141. Excluding facilities of troop-contributing countries in peacekeeping missions, the United Nations currently operates 121 health-care facilities in field locations (United Nations dispensaries and civilian clinics in peacekeeping operations). Some 166 doctors and 197 nurses are currently employed by the United Nations to work in these field facilities. Although medical services are generally available when needed, the capacity of the United Nations to manage, support and monitor this globally distributed health-care workforce is minimal. Progress made since the adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/250 and next steps 142. Recognizing this critical deficiency, the Medical Services Division of the Office of Human Resources Management has initiated a comprehensive review and update of the way in which health care is approached and managed in the United Nations system, with special reference to health and safety in the field. Overall, the approach is intended to promote and advance the inclusion of staff health and wellbeing as an independent management priority, alongside equally important areas such as safety and security for staff located in all duty stations. Key initiatives include the following: (a) An in-depth system-wide review of medical services throughout the United Nations by the Joint Inspection Unit in 2010. The primary focus of this review is the capacity of the United Nations to support, manage and monitor its growing global health-care staff and infrastructure. A comprehensive report and recommendations is expected to be submitted to the General Assembly in its resumed sixty-fifth session; (b) The United Nations Medical Directors Working Group (which reports to the High-level Committee on Management) submitted a proposal, endorsed by the Chief Executives Board and the High-level Committee in their Spring 2010 meeting, recommending that all United Nations organizations should develop and promulgate a formal policy regarding the health and safety of staff; (c) The Medical Services Division has taken steps to improve mass casualty incident management and emergency medical responses in field duty stations. These include: (i) Emergency medical management training with certification for United Nations field physicians at a newly implemented annual coordination and training meeting; (ii) Implementation of a programme to guide field physicians in the development of mass casualty and emergency management plans for their duty stations; (iii) Inclusion of emergency medical preparedness, response and follow-up in the mandate and activities of the new emergency preparedness and support team located within the Office of Human Resources Management; (iv) Operationalization of the United Nations medical emergency response team concept. A medical emergency response team was activated for the first time in response to the Haiti disaster (in which 101 United Nations staff members lost their lives), allowing the deployment of a senior medical team to assist the local medical responders within 48 hours of the earthquake. Further development of the concept will take place in the context of the emergency preparedness and response team. 143. The Medical Services Division is coordinating an effort to introduce a harmonized electronic medical records management system to all duty stations in the global Secretariat, including headquarters locations, regional commissions, United Nations dispensaries and peacekeeping medical clinics. Once implemented, this will allow seamless and confidential medical record-keeping, irrespective of staff mobility and field deployment, as well as improved capacity to monitor and report on trends and statistics regarding health-care issues, further integrating and ensuring access to the same information, systems and tools across the Organization. 144. A renewed emphasis on promotion of psychosocial health and well-being has been made possible by the reintegration of the Staff Counsellor's Office into the Medical Services Division, and the regular inclusion of mental health issues in the overall approach to the health of staff in the field. This reintegration has already resulted in revised and improved predeployment mission readiness training programmes for staff and managers, as well as improved coordination between the various United Nations staff counselling services and their medical counterparts. Exemplified by the disaster in Haiti, coordination between counsellors and medical services was particularly relevant with regard to standardizing an approach to management of stress and making decisions regarding return to work, recuperation requirements and, in some cases, extended sick leave. Research and published clinical evidence show that chronic long-term exposure to hardship and traumatic situations increases the risk of both medical and psychological conditions, especially post-traumatic stress disorder and depression. Attention to work/life balance and provision of adequate opportunity for rest and relaxation away from hardship areas are important preventive strategies towards healthier happier, and more productive staff. F. Human resources management scorecard 145. In its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly emphasized that robust and proactive monitoring is essential at all levels. It requested the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of Human Resources Management continues to strengthen its monitoring of delegated authority for human resources management, including compliance with geographical and gender targets and the prompt filling of vacancies. In response to this request, the Organization is strengthening monitoring with the introduction of the human resources management scorecard replacing the human resources action plans from 2011. 146. In 1999, the Office of Human Resources Management introduced human resources action plans in support of human resources management reform of the Secretary-General and in accordance with resolutions of the General Assembly. In 2005, the Secretary-General established the Management Performance Board for the purpose of strengthening accountability in the Secretariat. Among other matters, it was tasked to monitor departmental human resources management performance. The number of participating departments and offices has grown from 26 in 2001 to 31 in 2010. Furthermore, the Office of Human Resources Management, in cooperation with the Department of Field Support, has extended reporting on performance in human resources management to the Management Performance Board to 10 special political missions for the 2009 cycle. For the 2010 cycle, 25 peacekeeping and special political missions are planned to be covered. 147. The new scorecard delivers three improvements that address main weaknesses identified through internal review, dialogue with departments, offices and field operations and by the Office of Internal Oversight Services, as follows: (a) Lack of prioritization. The Management Performance Board reviews 41 individual human resources action plans containing up to 32 indicators, with a total of 1,112 scores. This volume of performance information dilutes the Board's attention from priority issues; (b) Gaps in compliance monitoring coverage. Given the labour intensive onsite monitoring visits, only a limited number of monitoring visits are feasible each year, leaving the majority of operations without adequate monitoring; (c) Lack of ownership. The performance of a number of indicators contained in the human resources action plans is to some extent outside the control of departments, offices and field operations. In addition, targets are often considered to be unrealistic and gathering performance data has been cumbersome. These factors largely contribute to a perception among departments, offices and field operations that human resources action plans do not help them in selfmonitoring their human resources management performance. 148. The scorecard improvements are: (a) a stronger focus by senior management on the major priority areas of compliance with geographical and gender targets and the prompt filling of vacancies; (b) full coverage for monitoring the effective and efficient discharge of delegated authorities in compliance with regulations, rules, polices and procedures; and (c) increased self-monitoring by departments, offices and field operations. 149. To achieve a stronger focus on priority areas, the scorecard will deliver performance monitoring information relevant to the needs of different stakeholders, namely the Management Performance Board, the Office of Human Resources Management and the departments, offices and field operations. The Office of Human Resources Management will report a limited number of indicators to the Management Performance Board. These indicators will focus the attention of the Board on organizational human resources management priorities derived from legislative mandates and continuously highlighted by the General Assembly, namely, the timely filling of vacancies, equitable geographical distribution and gender parity. 150. To expand monitoring and close the current coverage gaps, the Office of Human Resources Management and departments, offices and field operations will use an additional set of indicators to continuously monitor whether delegated authority is discharged in compliance with regulations, rules, policies and procedures. Introducing these indicators will allow the systematic monitoring of how delegated authority is exercised in a number of standard areas across all departments, offices and field operations. 151. The scorecard will contain indicators reflecting performance that is better attributable to departments, offices and field operations so as to increase ownership of the scorecard. 152. All human resources management performance indicators and data will be available in one scorecard as part of a new online dashboard in the Inspira data warehouse and reporting module, replacing the current application. In conjunction with the compacts between the Secretary-General and senior managers, the performance information will be published on the Intranet at the end of each cycle. The new scorecard will be introduced during 2011 and will, in addition to 31 departments and offices, cover a total of 25 peacekeeping and special political missions. G. Staff-management relations 153. In its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit proposals to the Assembly for reviewing the staff-management mechanism to address human resources management issues. As a first step, the Secretary-General has requested the Joint Inspection Unit to review these mechanisms in the United Nations Secretariat as part of its 2010 workplan. The Unit is undertaking this review and will present its recommendations in a forthcoming report. 154. The Secretary-General maintains an ongoing dialogue, both formally and informally, with staff representatives of all unions and with the federations of staff unions. Regarding issues of local concern, the joint negotiating committees have proved to be an effective forum for both headquarters and field duty stations. On matters of global concern to staff, the Secretary-General is highly supportive of staff-management consultations through the mechanism of the Staff-Management Coordination Committee, which has representation of all but one staff union. The Committee is a constructive forum by which staff and management have been able to come together to build consensus on human resources reform initiatives and ensure uniform support of staff and management alike. The Committee has provided recommendations to the Secretary-General, which, in turn, can be presented as proposals to the General Assembly. This year, in addition to the annual committee meeting, informal consultations were held with all staff unions in January to discuss matters of interest to staff. V. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 155. The General Assembly is requested to take note of the present report. 156. The General Assembly is also requested to approve a reduction in the period for the circulation of specific job openings from 60 days to 45 days. 157. The remaining actions to be taken by the General Assembly are reflected in the relevant sections of the addenda to the present report (A/65/305/Add.14). Summary of follow-up action taken to implement requests of the General Assembly in its resolutions 63/250 and 64/269 and requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the General Assembly A. General Assembly Reference in resolution Request to the Secretary-General Action taken to implement request Resolution 63/250, human resources management Section I Human resources management reform Paragraph 4 Requests the Secretary-General to take advantage of the existing mechanisms for conflict resolution and mediation as deemed useful and appropriate in order to facilitate renewed dialogue between staff and management Renewed dialogue has ensued with the staff union at the United Nations Office at Geneva, which now participates in the Staff-Management Coordination Committee. The New York staff union still does not participate in the Coordination Committee Paragraph 5 Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session to review the staff-management mechanism for addressing human resources management issues, in consultation with relevant bodies See paras. 153 and 154 of the main part of the present report Paragraph 7 Requests the Secretary-General, taking into account paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to ensure that measures to identify and promote future leaders have clear criteria and mechanisms for selection, and that they are implemented with the framework of the staff selection system, and to provide information on their precise financial implications The proposal of the Secretary-General to create a United Nations young professionals programme, building on the national competitive recruitment examination, provides clear criteria and mechanisms for selection of nationals from unrepresented and underrepresented Member States and promotion to the P-3 level. Nationals of all Member States have the same access to career opportunities under the current staff selection system. In addition, career models will be developed for all job networks in the Organization Section II Paragraph 3 Requests the Secretary-General not to appoint any staff to continuing contracts before 1 January 2010 pending consideration by the General Assembly of the additional information concerning the implementation of continuing contracts To date, no staff have been appointed on a continuing contract Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the issues (relating to continuing contracts) with a view to the implementation of a system for the continuing appointment regime by 1 January 2010 This was provided in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of continuing appointments (A/64/267) Paragraph 9 Requests, in this regard, the Secretary-General to provide information on the circumstances in which the renewal of a temporary appointment for up to one additional year could be granted The conditions for renewal of a temporary appointment are provided in ST/AI/2010/4 Paragraph 12 Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for consideration at the first part of its resumed sixty-third session draft regulations by which the streamlined system of contracts could be implemented Pursuant to section II, paragraph 12, of General Assembly resolution 63/250, the Secretary-General prepared proposed amendments to the Staff Regulations (A/63/694) that would allow implementation of the new contractual framework on 1 July 2009. Following review by the Assembly during the first part of its resumed sixty-third session and its decision on the proposed amendments (see resolution 63/271), the Secretary-General promulgated the amended Staff Regulations effective 1 July 2009 (ST/SGB/2009/6) Paragraph 13 Also requests the Secretary-General to evaluate the impact of the implementation of the new system of contracts, including its financial implications, and to report to the General Assembly on this matter no earlier than at its sixty-seventh session To be addressed at the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly Paragraph 14 Further requests the Secretary-General to discontinue the practice of assigning staff from Headquarters to missions on a travel status basis for a period of more than three months The practice has been discontinued (see rule 4.8 of the provisional Staff Rules) (ST/SGB/2010/6) Paragraph 21 Decides that there shall be no expectations, legal or otherwise, of renewal or conversion of a fixed-term contract, irrespective of the length of service, and requests the Secretary-General to reflect this provision in the rules and regulations as well as offers and letters of appointment This is included in the provisional Staff Rules and in letters of appointment of fixed-term staff Section III Recruitment and staffing Acknowledges the need to simplify the current reference check for speeding up the recruitment process, and requests the Secretary-General to review the procedure and take necessary actions as soon as possible Reference checking procedures have been examined in detail and process improvements have been identified with a view to incorporating the functionality into Inspira Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure equal treatment of candidates with equivalent educational backgrounds during the recruitment process, taking fully into account that Member States have different educational systems and that no education system shall be considered the standard to be applied to the Organization The Organization takes fully into account the different educational systems of Member States and does not consider any system as standard. The long-standing policy of the Organization has been to base recognition of degrees on the accreditation of the institution by the national authorities (the Ministry of Education or similar body in each country). Furthermore, the Organization takes full advantage of the resources available on the Internet to research institutions and confirm the accreditation of distance-learning programmes. Many of the degrees acquired online are accepted both by national authorities and the United Nations. Since 2008, the Office of Human Resources Management has established a database for the Secretariat of recognized institutions researched by the Organization Paragraph 11 Underlines that the upgraded electronic staff selection system of the United Nations must be clear, simplified, user-friendly and accessible to potential candidates and that regular monitoring must be in place to ensure transparency and non-discrimination, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session Document A/65/305/Add.3 on the talent management tool, Inspira, addresses this request Paragraph 16 Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all anticipated and immediate vacancies are properly advertised and filled quickly, and to report on the success of this endeavour to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session Enhanced pre-screening, screening and search functionalities offered by the new talent management information technology tool, Inspira, are expected to reduce time-consuming manual review of applications and help the Organization to cope with the overwhelming number of applications received, particularly for field missions Paragraph 17 Emphasizes the importance of the participation of staff representatives in the work of the central review bodies, and requests the Secretary-General and invites staff representatives to engage in a consultative process with a view to resuming the participation of staff representatives in the work of the central review bodies A comprehensive review of the central review body process was undertaken to ensure that the bodies remain relevant and focused on providing valuable inputs to the staffing process. The revised policies on the central review bodies have been shared with staff representatives for comments. Staff representatives have been encouraged to participate in the work of the central review bodies. At all duty stations except New York, staff representatives participate in the central review bodies Paragraph 18 Requests the Secretary-General to include analysis of the implementation of the human resources action plans in the context of the report on the composition of the Secretariat See paras. 145-152 of the main part of the present report Section IV National competitive examinations Paragraph 2 Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, for consideration at its sixty-fifth session, a feasibility study, building on audit reports, to determine whether the broadening of the scope of the national competitive examination would serve to further strengthen the capacity of the Organization for programme delivery, as recommended by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its report Document A/65/305/Add.4 (paras. 12, 13, 25 and 31) on the United Nations young professionals programme addresses this request Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the expeditious placement of successful candidates from national competitive examinations See A/65/305/Add.4 (paras. 55 and 58) Welcomes the enhanced efforts of the Secretary-General to centrally manage the placement of successful candidates from national competitive examinations, and requests him to intensify these efforts and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session See A/65/305/Add.4 (paras. 39, 40 and 58) Paragraph 6 Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the implementation of the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit aimed at reducing the length of the national competitive recruitment examination process and improving the national competitive recruitment examination roster management, as well as setting time frames for completion of the process See A/65/305/Add.4 (paras. 22, 33, 55 and 58-60) Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to further cooperate within the framework of the Human Resources Network, making better use of national competitive recruitment examinations and existing rosters, and improving inter-agency mobility With regard to inter-agency mobility, see paragraph 49 Section V Accountability Emphasizes that robust and proactive monitoring is essential at all levels, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of Human Resources Management continues to strengthen its monitoring of delegated authority for human resources management, including compliance with geographical and gender targets and the prompt filling of vacancies Section VI Performance appraisal system Notes the intention of the Secretary-General to begin utilizing 360-degree performance appraisals, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on how this can be further implemented A multi-rater system is being piloted in six departments, including two field operations, and will be implemented throughout the Organization in April 2011 (see paras. 65-68) Requests the Secretary-General to review the current performance appraisal system in consultation with staff through the appropriate channels, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session A review has been carried out resulting in the introduction of a new policy and enhancements, as reflected in the main part of the present report (sect. IV.B.3) Section VII Decides to review the regulations and rules of the Organization relating to the exercise by the Secretary-General of his authority to assign and deploy staff according to the operational needs of the Organization, and requests him to submit proposals in this regard to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session This is being addressed within the context of the review of the Organization's mobility policy. The Organization is developing broad principles and a framework for the policy in consultation with staff representatives. It is planned that a new policy framework for mobility as part of career development would be presented for consideration of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session Notes the intention of the Secretary-General as set out in his report (A/63/208) to suspend the managed mobility programmes upon completion of the D-1/D-2 exercise, in order for a review to be undertaken, including on the maximum period of occupancy of post and lessons learned, with a view to developing proposals on the mobility policy, taking into account recommendations of the Task Force on Human Resources Management, in consultation with all relevant stakeholders, including staff associations, and requests him to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session in the context of his report on human resources management, with an analysis of cost and benefits, bearing in mind paragraph 46 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/63/526 and Corr.1) This is being addressed within the context of the review of the Organization's mobility policy. At its session in June 2010, the Staff-Management Coordination Committee activated the intersessional working group on career development and mobility, which will provide inputs into the comprehensive review. See also the comment above Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals aimed at encouraging voluntary mobility of staff in the context of the review of the mobility policy, without prejudice to the different needs of duty stations and the field See paras. 107-134 of the main part of the present report Section VIII Career development and support Paragraph 1 Requests the Secretary-General, in complying with paragraph 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to make all possible efforts within existing resources A harmonization scheme for language courses in the six official languages is currently being implemented in headquarters duty stations and regional commissions. Staff serving in most headquarters duty stations and regional commissions have access to courses in local languages that are not official languages (for example Thai at the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), Swahili at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and German at the United Nations Office at Vienna and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). Courses in non-official languages are locally administered, subject to local policy, and depend on availability of local resources Requests the Secretary-General to make full use of the grade structure and to submit a concrete proposal to the General Assembly at the sixty-fifth session on how and where P-1 positions might be used more effectively See A/65/305/Add.4 (paras. 22 and 38) Also requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals on a strategy to implement an efficient and effective training and professional development programme in the context of the budget submission for the biennium 2010-2011 A draft comprehensive training strategy applicable to all staff has been developed and is currently under consultation and review. Staff continue to be informed of the availability of training programmes via updated United Nations website announcements and postings and via a network of learning focal points in offices and departments. The Office of Human Resources Management has initiated the process of expanding and enhancing its evaluation and impact assessment of learning programmes using comprehensive methodology endorsed by the United Nations System Staff College Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that each vacancy announcement identifies accurately the skills, education and experience required for the position All vacancies posted in Inspira reflect the current requirements for education, work experience and competencies appropriate for each grade level Recognizes the core role played by programme managers in career development and support, and requests the Secretary-General to strengthen the evaluation of their managerial skills and their performance in fostering staff career development See paragraph 98 of the main part of the present report In addition to the introduction of multi-rater feedback for supervisors in the performance management process, it is proposed, as outlined in section IV.B.4 of the main part of the present report, to introduce a managerial assessment process for senior managers (P-5 and above) so as to identify managerial competency development needs of programme managers and supervisors at these senior levels Section IX Measures to improve equitable geographical representation/composition of the Secretariat Requests the Secretary-General to continue his ongoing efforts to attain equitable geographical distribution in the Secretariat and to ensure as wide a geographical distribution of staff as possible in all departments, offices and levels, including the Director level and higher levels, of the Secretariat The human resources management scorecard (formerly human resources action plans) will monitor performance towards geographical and gender targets (see paras. 147-152). The Secretary-General requests that three candidates, including one female candidate, be submitted through the Senior Review Group for selection of candidates at the D-2 level. Outreach efforts have been increased, including visits to universities with a large composition of international students from unrepresented and underrepresented countries Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to ensure, at the senior and policymaking levels of the Secretariat, equitable representation of Member States, especially those with inadequate representation at those levels, and to continue to include relevant information thereon in all future reports on the composition of the Secretariat See comment above regarding selection of candidates at the D-2 level Paragraph 8 Reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General to present proposals to effectively increase the representation of developing countries in the Secretariat, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session See comment above concerning increased outreach efforts, including visits to universities Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure, through the Management Performance Board, the monitoring of the implementation of human resources action plans, including the principle of equitable geographical distribution in the Secretariat at all levels, as set out in relevant General Assembly resolutions, and the verification of the effective application of measures of transparency and accountability, including in the selection, recruitment and placement processes See paras. 147-152 of the main part of the present report Reiterates its requests as contained in section X, paragraph 8, of its resolution 61/244 Human resources action plans are posted on the United Nations Intranet Recalls paragraph 22 of its resolution 62/250, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the proper representation of troop-contributing countries in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support taking into account their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping The primary consideration for selection for positions in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support and peacekeeping missions remains that outlined in Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, stipulating the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, with due regard being paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. Both departments also continue to give due regard in selection decisions to the need to increase representation from troop-contributing countries and to increase representation of female staff, in accordance with applicable General Assembly resolutions (see also A/58/767) Paragraph 15 Recalls its request to the Secretary-General to reduce, to the extent possible, the number of unrepresented and underrepresented Member States in the Secretariat by 30 per cent by 2010, compared to the level in 2006, and requests him to report to the General Assembly thereon, as appropriate, in the context of his report on human resources management From 2006 to 2010, the number of unrepresented countries has decreased from 18 to 12; the number of underrepresented countries has increased from 11 to 31. Further details are provided in the report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat (A/65/350) Recognizes that considerable change has taken place in the composition and the number of staff of the global United Nations Secretariat in the past two decades, recalls the reports of the Secretary-General (A/58/767 and A/59/724), and requests him to submit to the General Assembly, at its sixty-fifth session, proposals for a comprehensive review of the system of desirable ranges, with a view to establishing a more effective tool to ensure equitable geographical distribution in relation to the total number of staff of the global United Nations Secretariat A/65/305/Add.2 on desirable ranges addresses this request Requests the Secretary-General to gradually incorporate within his report on the composition of the Secretariat the overall number of staff, regardless of sources of funding, on contracts of one year or more The report of the composition of the Secretariat incorporates the overall number of staff reported by the three types of appointment: temporary, fixed-term and permanent Paragraph 19 Reiterates its request as contained in section X, paragraph 15, of its resolution 61/244, and recalls section II, paragraph 2, of its resolution 42/220 A The Secretary-General has made concerted efforts to diversify the pool of candidates for senior level positions in the Organization Section X Gender representation Requests the Secretary-General to increase his efforts to attain and monitor the goal of gender parity in the Secretariat, in particular at senior levels, and in this context to ensure that women, especially those from developing countries and countries with economies in transition, are appropriately represented within the Secretariat, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session The human resources management scorecard (formerly human resources action plans) will monitor performance towards geographical and gender targets (see paras. 147-152 of the main part of the present report). The Secretary-General requests that three candidates, including one female candidate be submitted through the Senior Review Group for selection of candidates at the D-2 level Some 33 per cent of staff of the United Nations Secretariat are female (non-field: 48 per cent, field: 18 per cent), and 23 per cent of Under-Secretaries-General and 22 per cent of Assistant Secretaries-General are women Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of attaining this goal, to develop and implement recruitment targets, time frames for meeting those targets and accountability measures See para. 149 Section XI Consultants, individual contractors, gratis personnel and employment of retired staff Requests the Secretary-General to adhere to existing guidelines on the selection and recruitment of consultants and individual contractors Departments and offices provide to the Office of Human Resources Management data on the skills of candidates, prior and current engagements, type of work to be performed and proposed fees. Based on these elements, Human Resources Officers and Executive Offices ensure compliance with existing guidelines on the selection and recruitment of consultants and individual contractors Expresses concern over the increase in the use of consultants, especially in the core activities of the Organization, stresses that the use of consultants should be governed by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular resolution 53/221, section VIII, and that they should be drawn from the widest possible geographical basis, and requests the Secretary-General to make the greatest possible use of in-house capacity and to report to the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the measures taken to that effect Heads of departments and programme managers are accountable to abide by the policy on usage of consultants and individual contractors, which stipulates that the functions to be performed may not include functions that have been assigned to staff members in the recent past or are intended to be so assigned in the near future Requests the Secretary-General to include, in future reports on the employment of retirees, analysis on reasons for patterns and trends that emerge from data presented The report on the composition of the Secretariat includes information on the employment of retirees Section XIII Other matters Notes with concern that many disciplinary cases have not been completed in a reasonable time, and requests the Secretary-General to include in his annual report information on measures taken to increase the number of cases closed This information is provided in A/65/180 on the practice of the Secretary-General in disciplinary matters and possible criminal behaviour, 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the implementation of the human resources management information technology system A/65/305/Add.3 on the talent management tool, Inspira, addresses this request Also requests the Secretary-General to strengthen programmes to promote health in hardship posts, including through psychological support and disease awareness, with a view to promoting productivity and a better work environment See paras. 142-144 of the main part of the present report General Assembly resolution 64/269 on cross-cutting issues Global Field Support Strategy Paragraph 27 Requests the Secretary-General to provide an update on the implementation of the integrated human resources management framework to the General Assembly during its consideration of human resources management issues at its sixty-fifth session The present report and its addenda provide an overview of human resources management in the Organization, specifically addressing human resources management reforms implemented or in the process of implementation since the sixty-third session of the General Assembly B. Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Reference in the ACABQ Report Request/recommendation Action taken to implement request/recommendation Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions from document A/63/526 and Corr.1 Encourages the Secretary-General to expedite consultations with staff and entities and to update the General Assembly on the work of the two task forces in his next report on human resources management Most actions of the task forces that were under the purview of the Secretary-General have been implemented (28 of the 44 actions are complete and 16 are ongoing). Information on the progress on the various efforts is included in the present report, where applicable Recommends that the Secretary-General ensure that future reform proposals are accompanied by comprehensive results and impact assessment of earlier reforms and existing arrangements, as well as a cost-benefit analysis of new initiatives Where feasible, the information has been provided within the present report and its addenda Human resources planning and monitoring Urges the Secretary-General to pursue efforts to implement a medium-term integrated workforce planning system and to develop supporting tools that facilitate meeting the Organization's human resources targets at the level of individual departments and offices and the Secretariat as a whole as a matter of priority See paras. 30-36 of the main part of the present report. Paragraph 10 Requests the Secretary-General carry out analyses of the results achieved to date on the departmental human resources planning exercise, compliance with the goals and targets set out in the action plans and compacts and measures taken to deal with the inability or failure to achieve those goals and targets, and to report to the Assembly on the results On the departmental human resources planning exercise, see paras. 30-36 of the main part of the present report On the human resources management scorecard, see paras. 147-152 Recommends that the Office of Human Resources Management continue to strengthen its monitoring of delegated authority for human resources management, including compliance with geographic and gender targets and the prompt filling of vacancies Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that a consistent approach is taken to language courses in all duty stations, including those where the local language is not one of the official languages of the United Nations. Staff serving in such duty stations whose work requires knowledge of the local language or languages should have access to appropriate courses A harmonization scheme for language courses in the six official languages is currently being implemented in headquarters duty stations and the regional commissions. Staff serving in most headquarters duty stations and regional commissions have access to courses in local languages that are not official languages (for example, Thai in ESCAP, Swahili at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and German at the United Nations Office at Vienna and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). Courses in non-official languages are locally administered, subject to local policy and depend on availability of local resources Recommends that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to develop a comprehensive training strategy applicable to staff serving both at Headquarters and in the field and based on sound workforce planning techniques and organizational needs. At the implementation stage, he should ensure that training programmes are planned and managed in a transparent manner and that staff are adequately informed of the availability of the programmes. The impact of such programmes on enhancing staff members' ability to discharge their duties should subsequently be evaluated and the efficiency and effectiveness with which such programmes are conducted should be reviewed Paragraph 25 Recommends that the performance appraisal system include incentives such as accelerated promotion as a way to motivate and reward staff for excellent performance, as well as sanctions for underperformance The Organization is guided by the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC) performance management framework, which is currently being updated as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/251. The framework sets out a number of rewards and recognition for possible implementation and suggestions to address underperformance, which are currently under further review by the United Nations to determine applicability. These recommendations and suggestions will be further reviewed through the Staff-Management Coordination Committee working group on performance management between September 2010 and June 2011 for incremental implementation. Specific to managing underperformance, the Organization has issued an enhanced performance management and development policy which provides guidance on managing underperformance. In addition, a series of workshops are available on the subject of managing performance Paragraph 26 Stresses the need for appraisals to accurately capture the full range of performance, since this would enhance the usefulness of e-PAS as a tool for strengthening accountability A new policy was promulgated in April 2010 enhancing the organization's performance management and development system (ST/AI/2010/5 and Corr.1), complemented with training and briefing sessions for all staff and managers The Office of Human Resources Management, in consultation with staff through the appropriate channels, should endeavour to rectify the shortcomings of the present arrangements for performance management. Further efforts should also be made to achieve the target of 100 per cent e-PAS compliance set out in the senior managers' compacts, as well as to map out and strengthen the links between performance and future career prospects See comments above Human resources information technology Paragraph 29 Recommends that the Secretary-General provide to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session an analysis of gains in efficiency, transparency and accountability as a result of the introduction of the new systems See A/65/305/Add.3 Paragraph 33 Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to resolve the ongoing stalemate situation between staff and management expeditiously, as it has a negative impact on their relations Conclusion Paragraph 34 Recommends that, in future reports on human resources management, the Secretary-General respond more specifically to the provisions of resolution 61/244 and relevant subsequent resolutions Responses to requests of the General Assembly in resolution 63/250 are provided in the present annex Streamlining contractual arrangements and harmonizing conditions of service Paragraph 36 The Committee regrets that the Secretary-General has merely presented an outline of the procedures; further details, in particular regarding the modalities for determining whether there is a continuing need for an individual staff member's services, should be elaborated and presented to the General Assembly, together with information about the composition of the advisory body for consideration of staff members for a continuing appointment and its rules of procedure. Given the significant role played by the performance appraisal system in the proposed conversion procedure, the Committee is of the opinion that it is all the more important to take the measures necessary to strengthen that system See A/65/305/Add.1 Paragraph 37 Recommends that all staff, regardless of the mode of recruitment, be eligible for consideration for a continuing appointment after five years' continuous service on fixed-term appointments Paragraph 38 Requests information indicating how many current staff members will have reached the eligibility threshold for conversion to a continuing contract by 1 July 2009. That information should be provided to the Assembly for its consideration of the question Paragraph 40 Requests that the relevant practices concerning acquired rights (consistent efforts to ensure that any changes introducing less favourable conditions of service are applied only prospectively) be reflected in future reports Acquired rights of staff members have been protected and where changes to the conditions of service have been proposed, if any, transitional measures have been taken to protect the acquired rights of staff Paragraph 42 Recommends deferring a decision on an end-of-service grant for staff holding fixed-term appointments until ICSC has concluded its deliberations on the matter ICSC proposed an end-of-service grant in its report for 2009 (A/64/30 and Corr.2) Paragraph 44 The Committee is of the view that the impact of the proposals of the Secretary-General on staff in the Field Service category should have been presented earlier, given that they account for a large portion of the international staff population. Furthermore, the Committee believes that harmonization needs to be implemented in a manner that does not reduce the overall compensation of staff already serving Implementation of the mobility policy Paragraph 46 Requests the Secretary-General, within the framework of the review, to respond fully to the requests of the Assembly contained in resolution 61/244 and other relevant resolutions These requests have been addressed, where applicable, in the present report Paragraph 53 Urges the Secretary-General to ensure that outreach activities focus on positions both at Headquarters and in the field See paras. 61 and 62 of the main part of the present report Paragraph 56 Recommends that the Secretary-General further clarify the envisaged role of the central review bodies. In the Committee's view, the report would have benefited from the inclusion of more detailed information about the composition and functioning of the panels of experts in particular occupational groups, which would determine the suitability of both internal and external candidates for the types of occupations and levels for which they have expressed interest A comprehensive review of the central review body process was undertaken to ensure that the bodies remain relevant and focused on providing valuable inputs to the staffing process. As part of the enhancement rolled out in 2010, an instructional manual is being finalized for the central review body members. The manual will provide details on the tasks required by the members, which will ensure consistency across all duty stations. It will provide simple tools to assist the members in doing their work. Easy to use monitoring tools have been developed such as checklists verifying for example that: all candidates have been assessed by the hiring manager in an objective, fair and transparent manner against the stipulated requirements; the assessment exercise did not begin prior to the deadline date of the job opening; all candidates who merit consideration have been invited to undergo the assessment; the assessment method indicated in the evaluation criteria has been applied; the assessment panel was composed in line with the applicable provisions; and the same assessment panel considered all applicants for one particular job opening With regard to composition and functioning of the assessment panels (panels of experts) details on the roles and responsibilities of the panels and the profile of panel members have been drawn up and included in the instructional manual for hiring managers. Hiring managers are required to ensure that all assessment panels are composed of staff members holding an appointment other than a temporary appointment, serve at the same or a higher level than that of the job opening, and are normally not the current or temporary incumbent of the position. Consultants, contractors and interns may not be members of assessment panels Paragraph 57 Clarification of information on the number of consultants and individuals initially hired under general temporary assistance who are subsequently recruited as United Nations staff should be provided to the General Assembly for its consideration of recruitment and staffing issues Consultants are barred from applying for positions for six months after the end of their contract (see ST/AI/2010/3, para. 6.11, ST/AI/2010/4 and Corr.1, para. 5.3) Paragraph 58 Recommends against reducing the period for advertising individual vacancies from 60 to 30 days The current circulation period for all vacancies is 60 days. In view of the improvements to information technology systems and outreach efforts to diversify pools of candidates, the Secretary-General is resubmitting a proposal to reduce the vacancy announcement period from 60 to 45 days Paragraph 59 The Secretary-General should present more detailed proposals to the Assembly on the roster-based approach proposed, prepared on the basis of an in-depth evaluation of the current roster system, for Headquarters and the field The Office of Human Resources Management has not concluded its analysis of the roster-based recruitment approach. Once the new platform, Inspira, has been fully operational and a thorough analysis can be made of the data contained in the roster management module, a refined proposal will be developed Paragraph 61 Recommends that the shortcomings identified by the Board of Auditors, the Joint Inspection Unit and the Ombudsman be addressed. The Committee further urges the Secretary-General to take measures to accelerate the recruitment of candidates who have passed the national competitive examination See A/65/305/Add.4 (paras. 54 and 58) Paragraph 62 Recommends that the Assembly consider requesting, for consideration at its sixty-fifth session, a feasibility study, building on reports of oversight bodies, to determine whether broadening the scope of the national competitive examination would serve to further strengthen the Organization's capacity for programme delivery See A/65/305/Add.4 (paras. 12, 13, 25 and 31) Gratis personnel provided by Governments and other entities Paragraph 71 Reiterates its request that the format of the tables providing data be streamlined so as to consolidate the information for the two years of the biennium into a single table See A/65/350 Employment of retirees and retired former staff and extension of staff beyond the mandatory age of separation Paragraph 76 The Committee is of the opinion that the annual report of the Secretary-General on the employment of retirees contributes to enhancing the transparency of human resources management practices. However, the sizeable amount of data contained in the report requires further analysis. In future, the Secretary-General should focus on identifying the possible reasons for patterns and trends that emerge from the data presented, together with an indication of whether such trends are positive or negative and possible approaches to remedying negative developments Consultants and individual contractors Paragraph 83 The Committee regrets that the Secretary-General has not reported on factors contributing to the use of consultants and individual contractors. Accordingly, the Committee reiterates its previous request that the raw data contained in the report of the Secretary-General be supplemented by an analysis of those factors. Future reports should also contain definitions of the terms "consultant", "individual contractor" and "institutional contractor" used by the Secretary-General See A/65/350, which includes definitions and data on the use of consultants and individual contractors in the Secretariat Paragraph 85 The Committee reiterates its previous request that, in future reports, the Secretary-General provide detailed information on institutional contractors, including institution, duration and expenditure See comment above Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions from document A/64/660 Financial management and budgetary issues The Advisory Committee expects that the Secretary-General's report on human resources management to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session will contain an interim analysis of the financial implications of the reforms instituted in implementation of resolution 63/250, including information on expenditure thus far, as well as a projection of future costs, including associated costs, wherever possible Progress on the implementation of reforms since General Assembly resolution 63/250 and the next steps are provided in the present report and the addenda thereto, including financial implications wherever possible Staff recruitment and selection The Advisory Committee expects that the establishment of occupational rosters will begin to show results in terms of a significant lowering of vacancy rates. The Committee recommends that the Secretary-General undertake an initial assessment of the impact of the reforms associated with the implementation of resolution 63/250, including the occupational rosters, on staff recruitment and retention. That assessment should be provided to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session for its consideration of human resources management issues See paras. 53-56 of the main part of the present report Inspira The Committee looks forward to considering the progress made in the implementation of the Inspira system during its consideration of human resources management issues at the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly Information on progress on implementation of the Inspira system is provided in document A/65/305/Add.3 Designation of duty stations Paragraph 47 In the Committee's opinion, the designation of duty stations as family or non-family should be based on the security situation on the ground, as well as on other pertinent objective factors. The Committee recommends that the Secretary-General submit proposals with regard to the designation of duty stations as family and non-family to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session for its consideration of human resources management issues Integrated field human resources management framework Paragraph 151 In his report on human resources management, to be submitted for the consideration of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session, the Secretary-General would undoubtedly elaborate on the measures taken to address the issues outlined in paragraphs 84 to 86 of his report on the global field support strategy (A/64/633) Measures taken to address the issues outlined in paragraphs 84 to 86 of the report of the Secretary-General on the global field support strategy are provided in the present report and the addenda thereto, where applicable 