%%%TRUST FUNDS|PARTNERSHIP|PROJECT FINANCE|AID COORDINATION|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|ADVISORY SERVICES|CHILD HEALTH|SUSTAINABLE ENERGY|CLIMATE CHANGE|BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|WOMEN|POPULATION PROGRAMMES|DEMOCRATIZATION|

Sixty-fifth session Item 131 of the provisional agenda* Programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 United Nations Office for Partnerships * A/65/150. ** The present report is submitted late owing to preparations for events associated with the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals. Report of the Secretary-General** Summary The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly decisions 52/466 and 53/475, wherein the Secretary-General was requested to inform the Assembly, on a regular basis, about the activities of the United Nations Office for Partnerships. It supplements the information contained in the previous reports of the Secretary-General (A/53/700 and Add.1, A/54/664 and Add.1-3, A/55/763 and Corr.1, A/57/133, A/58/173, A/59/170, A/60/327, A/61/189, A/62/220, A/63/257 and A/64/91). The United Nations Office for Partnerships serves as a gateway for public-private partnerships with the United Nations system in furtherance of the Millennium Development Goals. The Office oversees the following three areas: (a) The United Nations Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP) was established by the Secretary-General in March 1998 to serve as the interface for partnership between the United Nations system and the United Nations Foundation -- the public charity responsible for administering Robert E. Turner's $1 billion contribution in support of United Nations causes. As at 31 December 2009, the Office had programmed through UNFIP a total of over $1.089 billion, of which $438.5 million represents core Turner funds, and $651.2 million (59 per cent) was generated from other partners, for 479 projects implemented by 43 United Nations entities in 124 countries. (b) The United Nations Democracy Fund, which was established by the Secretary-General in July 2005 to support democratization throughout the world, focuses on supporting democratic institutions, promoting human rights and ensuring the participation of all groups in democratic processes. Through the Fund, the Office has channelled approximately $75 million to more than 270 projects in 127 countries around the world, ranging from strengthening civil society leadership skills and promoting the participation of women and youth, to media programmes allowing civil society to project its voice. (c) Partnership Advisory Services and Outreach was established in 2006 in response to the growing demand from the United Nations system, Governments and non-State actors on how best to develop and implement public-private partnerships. In addition to its work within the United Nations system, the Office received more than 1,400 external requests for advisory services in 2009. The Office provides advice to entities, including academic institutions, companies, foundations, government agencies, media groups and civil society organizations. Investment in high-impact initiatives is encouraged by providing advice to potential partners regarding procedures and best practices; assisting in the design of programmes and projects; advising companies on the conversion of Global Compact principles into practice; helping to establish and manage global and regional networks; and promoting the Millennium Development Goals as a framework for action. Page United Nations Fund for International Partnerships Children's health Sustainable energy and climate change Biodiversity programme: World Heritage conservation Technology Partnership Women and population United Nations Democracy Fund Third and fourth rounds of projects Democracy in Action Partnership advisory services and outreach Partnership services Key innovative projects and initiatives Conclusions Annexes Selected entities that have established partnerships and/or alliances with or through the United Nations Office for Partnerships Projects funded through the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships by programme area Composition of the 2009 Advisory Board of the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships Financial contributions to the United Nations Democracy Fund, by donor as at 15 December 2009 Composition of the 2009 Advisory Board of the United Nations Democracy Fund Organizational chart of the United Nations Office for Partnerships 1. The United Nations Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP) was established in 1998 to serve as the interface between Robert E. Turner's Foundation (United Nations Foundation) and the United Nations system. In 2009, UNFIP through the United Nations Foundation focused on working in coordination with issue-based coalitions, leveraging resources from all sectors, and supporting United Nations causes through policy and advocacy. At the end of 2009, the cumulative allocations to UNFIP projects reached approximately $1.089 billion, out of which $438.5 million represents core Turner funds and $651.2 million (59 per cent) was generated from other partners. More than 479 projects have been implemented by 43 United Nations entities in 124 countries. A selection of these programmes and projects are provided below. A. Children's health 2. In 2009, for the first time in decades, childhood mortality from preventable diseases decreased from over 10 million per year to 9 million. And yet, while the international community should celebrate this modest success-owing in large part to programmes such as the Measles Initiative -- broad-based immunization and health campaigns must be prioritized in order to ensure further reductions in childhood mortality. Consistent with Millennium Development Goal 4 (to reduce by two thirds childhood mortality among children under five by 2015), the United Nations and its agencies have established targeted action plans and global blueprints for reducing childhood mortality and mitigating diseases. 3. For 10 years, the United Nations Foundation, in collaboration with UNFIP, has worked hand-in-hand with the World Health Organization (WHO), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), other United Nations leaders and the ministries of health of developing countries to develop and expand major initiatives to help children to survive and thrive. In support of world-renowned international health partnerships, the United Nations Foundation has mobilized millions of dollars, brought new private sector partners into the field, helped to strengthen the capacity of United Nations health agencies, and provided programme expertise to help save children's lives. 4. Over time, United Nations Foundation investments in children's health have proven to be one of the most promising avenues for attracting a wide variety of partner support for Foundation-led initiatives. The Foundation has worked closely with the Office of the Secretary-General and Member States to support the development of the Global Strategy for Women's and Children's Health. The Foundation has chaired an Advocacy Working Group, assisted with the development of a communications strategy and coordinated outreach to the different constituencies needed to ensure the success of the Global Strategy. 5. In 2009, the United Nations and UNFIP dispersed over $24 million in support of the children's health programme initiatives. A selection of these programmes and projects is listed below. 6. In early 2009, the United Nations Foundation's Nothing But Nets campaign set a goal to raise $8 million and increase the campaign's constituency by 40,000 donors. This two-part goal followed the launch of the partnership between the Foundation and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in alliance with UNFIP, to protect refugees in Africa from malaria, the number one cause of illness and death among refugees in Africa. On World Malaria Day (25 April 2009), the Nothing But Nets campaign had reached an initial goal of 275,100 bed nets for refugees living in 27 camps in Africa and announced that it would continue to raise an additional 346,000 nets. Altogether, this effort will protect over 1 million refugees living in 15 countries throughout Africa. Through this partnership, the United Nations Foundation and its Nothing But Nets campaign are filling a significant gap that otherwise would not have been addressed. Measles Initiative 7. In 2009, the Measles Initiative targeted 26 countries in Africa, Asia and Europe, with plans to vaccinate approximately 76 million children. The current goal of WHO and UNICEF to reduce annual global measles deaths by 90 per cent by 2010 from the 2000 estimates continues to be the target for measles campaign activities during 2009 and 2010. Preliminary numbers, released in December 2009, indicate global mortality reduction increased slightly from 74 per cent at the end of 2007 (the exact number is not yet available). The geographic expansion of the Measles Initiative continued in Asia, with particular emphasis in India for mortality reduction and in China for the elimination of measles. The Government of China announced a nationwide campaign for 2010 to enable the country to eliminate measles by the 2012 target date. India began implementation of case-based surveillance in two states and agreed to begin catch-up campaigns in these two states in 2010. By 2013, India plans to complete catch-up campaigns in eight states that account for 90 per cent of measles cases. In February 2010, an additional $4 million from the American Red Cross became available for campaigns in Bangladesh and Indonesia. Five of the six WHO regions have elimination targets by or before 2020. The African region does not yet have an elimination target, but if they achieve their pre-elimination goal by 2012, they will be on the cusp of achieving elimination years in advance of the 2020 goal. Polio eradication 8. Polio eradication was one of the first priorities identified by the Children's Health programme of the United Nations Foundation and UNFIP, and has become an integral partner in the WHO-led fund-raising team for the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. In 2009, Saudi Arabia pledged to contribute $30 million to the United Nations Foundation over the next three years to eradicate polio worldwide. In addition to the financial commitment, Saudi Arabia is requiring every pilgrim entering the country for the Hajj, the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, to receive a polio vaccination. By raising awareness about the importance of polio immunizations among Muslim pilgrims, Saudi Arabia is helping to dispel misconceptions concerning the safety of vaccines and underscoring that polio immunizations are not only appropriate, but essential. Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis 9. In 2009, the United Nations Foundation continued to play an important leadership role in the Global Fund as an alternate member of the Board of Directors (with the Gates Foundation) and supported the Friends of the Global Fund (Africa, Japan, and Europe) through a $2.7 million, two-year grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. This award has allowed the United Nations Foundation to assist the Friends Groups to become more effective advocates of the Global Fund and to provide technical assistance to countries in receipt of Global Fund grants. B. Sustainable energy and climate change 10. The United Nations Foundation provided strong support for the Secretary-General's leadership on climate change in preparing for the global climate negotiations in Copenhagen. Specifically, the Foundation provided grants through UNFIP to the Secretary-General and his climate team to assist with (a) the creation of a high-level Advisory Group on Energy and Climate Change; and (b) to provide vital financing to support the staging of the Summit on Climate Change on 22 September 2009 in support of the Secretary-General's efforts to encourage world leaders to reach a strong agreement in Copenhagen. 11. The high-level Advisory Group on Energy and Climate Change, chaired by Kandeh Yumkella, Director General of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and Chair of UN-Energy, includes global leaders from business and civil society, including Timothy Wirth, President of the United Nations Foundation. It met in June and August to develop recommendations for the Secretary-General regarding energy efficiency and access to modern energy services for the world's least developed communities. 12. The United Nations Foundation also continued its support of Mr. Yumkella's leadership of the inter-agency coordinating group UN-Energy, which encourages the United Nations system to "deliver as one" and support climate and energy solutions in the developing world at a much larger scale. The Foundation is working with UNEnergy to develop a corporate capabilities statement and strategic plan for the United Nations system. C. Biodiversity programme: World Heritage conservation 13. The United Nations Foundation and UNFIP biodiversity programme was established 10 years ago with a focus on promoting the conservation of biodiversity -- most notably for strengthening the World Heritage Convention as a tool for habitat conservation -- while providing opportunities for local communities to better steward and use natural resources sustainably. Over the life of the programme, the Foundation, through UNFIP, has awarded $100 million in grants, played an instrumental role in establishing a $15 million endowment for the control of invasive species on the Galapagos Islands, helped the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to launch the Community Management of Protected Areas for Conservation to stimulate 200 community economic development and conservation projects in eight countries, secured over 100 partners in support of World Heritage and engaged more than 100 private sector, nongovernmental and United Nations partners to establish the Partnership for Global Sustainable Tourism Criteria -- now the industry standard for sustainable tourism. 14. Over the last three years, the United Nations Foundation has consolidated much of its work around World Heritage campaigns and multipartner initiatives, moving away from a project-specific programme and instead devoting its work to advocacy, awareness-raising, and coalition-building. While the Foundation's World Heritage programme has attracted partners such as Expedia and Fairmont Hotels, it has been unable to build outside support on the scale of other Foundation programmes and campaigns, owing in large part to the economic downturn. In addition, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has not made this programme a priority in terms of investing its own core resources, which limits its potential for growth. As a result, the Foundation plans to transition out of its work in support of the World Heritage programme by the end of 2011. D. Technology Partnership 15. The United Nations Foundation and Vodafone Foundation Technology Partnership is a leader in using wireless technology to strengthen the humanitarian efforts of the United Nations. The Technology Partnership, now in its fourth year of a five-year, $30 million alliance, continues to focus on mobile health initiatives for development and emergency response communications to support disaster relief. Looking ahead, the Technology Partnership will continue to harness the ubiquity of mobile communications to address pressing challenges in the developing world. It will continue to bring together the United Nations, humanitarian agencies, industry, Government, and the donor community to inspire innovation around the potential uses of mobile technology for impact in the developing world. UNFIP is represented on the Advisory Board of this Technology Partnership. Mobile Health for Development activity 16. The Mobile Health (mHealth) for Development programme to support the collection of health data in Africa using mobile devices has been expanded to 18 countries. The second half of a two-year grant of $500,000 was issued to WHO to work with ministries of health in administering training for health workers in the use of mobile devices for health data collection. Funds have also supported DataDyne, a non-profit organization, to develop and deploy EpiSurveyor, a free, open source, software application for mobile devices. EpiSurveyor enables health workers to track diseases and monitor immunization programmes. With the support of WHO, over 1,000 health workers have been trained to utilize EpiSurveyor, which has enabled faster, more efficient, and reliable data collection. DataDyne has won a number of awards over the past 18 months, including most recently an award from The Wall Street Journal for innovative technology, and garnered international media coverage. The Partnership continued its support of the Measles Initiative in 2009 with a grant of $3 million for activities in India and Africa through the Children's Health portfolio. In this capacity, the United Nations Foundation is working with partners of the Measles Initiative to include its supported mHealth applications where applicable in the campaigns. In addition, at the Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) Mobile World Congress in February 2009, the United Nations Foundation announced a partnership with the Rockefeller Foundation to launch the mHealth Alliance. The Alliance will provide a platform to bring together mobile technology and health players, as well as public and private interests. The Technology Partnership has focused on the financial establishment and sustainability of the Alliance and engaged potential partners and donors to drive mHealth research and programmes in the developing world. The Technology Partnership continues to support the World Food Programme (WFP) in the second year of a three-year grant securing communications in humanitarian emergency situations. Funding supports the WFP communications capacity-building programme (which includes deployment of training information and communication technology experts) and building an Information Communications Technology (ICT) Humanitarian Emergency Platform that will standardize ICT response capabilities through the humanitarian community. In 2009, the Partnership supported emergency start-up operations in Gaza, Chad (affected by overflow from the crisis in Darfur (Sudan)), and Pakistan (following the emergency in the Swat Valley). E. Women and population 17. In 2009, the United Nations Foundation mobilized $535,000 through UNFIP in support of the women and population programme. The United Nations has a vast mandate when it comes to addressing gender inequality and women's empowerment. At the heart of this mandate is a web of international agreements and principles, including the Beijing Platform for Action adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women and the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, as well as the Millennium Development Goals, that commit the entire global community to address the rights and needs of women and girls. 18. The women and population programme works together with the United Nations and other partners to promote gender equality and empower women and girls, with a particular focus on reproductive and sexual health and rights. Empowering women and girls is essential to the mission of the United Nations Foundation to address the toughest global challenges today -- fighting global poverty, achieving social justice, and stabilizing the world's population. Coalition for Adolescent Girls 19. The Coalition was founded in 2005 by the United Nations Foundation and the Nike Foundation with over 30 non-governmental and United Nations partners. Following the success of the breakthrough report, Girls Count: A Global Investment & Action Agenda, and events at the 2008 World Economic Forum, the Coalition expanded the Girls Count report series to include four additional reports on girls' education, health, aspirations, and economic empowerment as well as a series of global maps on adolescent girls that was released in fall 2009 and early 2010. Support to the United Nations Population Fund 20. In 2009, the United Nations Foundation built upon its long history of partnership with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in supporting UNFPA advocacy efforts. These include an initiative to bring faith communities into the UNFPA Campaign to End Fistula, and help to foster a strong relationship between UNFPA and the new United States Administration and Congress. United Nations Adolescent Girls Task Force 21. The United Nations Foundation continues to play a critical role in fostering the work of the United Nations Adolescent Girls Task Force. A coalition of six United Nations system agencies (UNFPA, UNICEF, the International Labour Organization (ILO), UNESCO, United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and WHO) is working together on the ground through strategic investments in policies and programmes that focus on girls. In March 2009, during the Commission on the Status of Women, the Task Force released the Joint Programming Framework for Fulfilling the Rights of Marginalized Adolescent Girls, a guide for enhanced United Nations inter-agency collaboration on key strategic interventions focused on adolescent girls. The United Nations Foundation was closely involved in the development and launch of the programming framework and has been actively supporting the Task Force's planning for programme implementation, beginning with 3 countries and expanding to 20 over the next five years. II. United Nations Democracy Fund 22. The United Nations Democracy Fund (UNDEF) is a grant-making body, established during the 2005 World Summit as a Secretary-General's Trust Fund. It was launched in April 2006, with the United Nations Office for Partnerships providing management oversight and administrative support. Under the leadership of its current Executive Head, appointed in 2007, and in consultation with its major donors, UNDEF has become clearly defined as a fund for civil society organizations; the large majority of project funds go to local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) from countries in both the transition and consolidation phases of democratization. By supporting the "demand" rather than the "supply" side of democratization in these ways, UNDEF plays a new, distinct and unique role in complementing the Organization's other work with Governments to strengthen democratic governance around the world. 23. The United Nations Democracy Fund projects aim to strengthen the voice of civil society, promote human rights and encourage the participation of all groups in democratic processes. The organization also supports a number of major global and regional projects with a normative and policy focus. In its first three rounds of funding, UNDEF supported 271 projects around the world -- 207 projects in 99 countries, 47 regional projects covering a further 28 countries, and 17 global projects. They included projects to strengthen civil society leadership skills, promote the participation of women and youth and media programmes allowing civil society to project its voice. A. Third and fourth rounds of projects 24. In 2009, UNDEF began funding its third round of projects. The round opened for proposals in November 2008 through an online application system that facilitated access by civil society organizations. A record total of 2,143 applications from organizations in 138 countries were received, reflecting continued global interest and a 14 per cent increase over the number of applications from the second round. The vast majority of proposals were submitted by civil society organizations. 25. The first stage of project selection was based on scoring by expert consultants against set criteria. The high scoring proposals were then subject to rigorous quality control and due diligence by United Nations Resident Coordinators and the UNDEF Programme Consultative Group of United Nations entities. The Advisory Board of the Fund recommended a portfolio of projects which was approved by the Secretary-General. After negotiations with the short-listed applicants, 67 projects at a total cost of $18.945 million were funded. Approved projects as defined by their principal characteristic broke down as follows: (a) Community development (28 per cent); (b) Women's empowerment (21 per cent); (c) Rule of law and human rights (13 per cent); (d) Tools for democratization (12 per cent); (e) Media (11 per cent); (f) Strengthening the instrumentalities of government (9 per cent); (g) Youth (6 per cent). 26. In 2009, the Fund collected the required reports on projects funded under the first, second and third rounds, conducted closing of completed projects from the first round, reported on its achievements to the Advisory Board, and undertook a number of initiatives to strengthen its donor base. Two contributors, Australia and Sweden, signed multi-year agreements for funding -- in the case of Sweden, this marked a resumption of funding after a pause in 2007. Morocco contributed to UNDEF for the first time, expanding the group of donors to a total of 36 Member States. The total amount of contributions received as at 31 December 2009 exceeded $106 million. 27. The two governing mechanisms of the Board, the Advisory Board and the Programme Consultative Group, continued to play an active and guiding role during 2009. In addition to recommending funding proposals for the Secretary-General's approval, the Advisory Board, consisting of 19 members appointed by the Secretary-General, provided him with policy guidance on the development of programme frameworks and funding guidelines. The Advisory Board endorsed revised Terms of Reference for UNDEF, which were subsequently approved by the Secretary-General. The Fund participated in the drafting of a Guidance Note on Democracy issued by the Secretary-General across the United Nations system. 28. In addition to scheduled Advisory Board meetings in 2009, a special UNDEF event was held with the participation of Advisory Board members to mark the second International Day of Democracy on 15 September. The Programme Consultative Group provided quality control in the project selection process and implementation phase, making use of the specific expertise of each of its entities: the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Peacebuilding Support Office, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNIFEM and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. 29. The United Nations Democracy Fund launched its fourth round for project proposals in November 2009, through an online application system that further facilitated access by civil society organizations. Applications closed on 31 December 2009. A total of 1,966 applications from organizations in 137 countries were received. The vast majority of applications came from local or regional organizations in Africa, Asia, the Americas and Europe. B. Democracy in Action Democracy in Action 1: Justice and AIDS in the United Republic of Tanzania 30. In the United Republic of Tanzania, UNDEF supports the ground-breaking project Jurisprudence on the Ground -- a partnership between female judges and a women's grass-roots support network to develop the role of the judiciary in addressing HIV/AIDS. Jurisprudence on the Ground brings together the Society for Women and AIDS in Africa-Tanzania, the International Association of Women Judges and the Tanzania Women Judges Association. Judges and magistrates who have taken part in the training sessions have established a track record of striking down discriminatory laws and practices, expanding the rights of women on issues ranging from economic discrimination, property rights, custody and inheritance to sexual assault and other violence against women. Democracy in Action II: Empowering marginalized youth for change in Thailand 31. UNDEF funds an initiative in Thailand to cultivate future democratic leaders from marginalized groups that enables them to participate in political and social transformation processes. Implemented by the Asia Foundation, the project engages youths from Muslim populations in tsunami-affected regions, the conflict-affected south, the north-east areas at high risk of human trafficking and tribal minorities in the north. It supports initiatives for human rights, political and civic understanding, and democratic and non-violent approaches to problem-solving. Democracy in Action III: Developing accurate voter lists in Europe's transition democracies 32. UNDEF supports a project by the Association of European Election Officials to research and analyse voter registration systems in Central and Eastern Europe and publish the results in a form that is useful for countries considering reform. The initiative surveys the legal framework of voter registration, explores malfunctions and the reasons behind them, identifies best practices and offers recommendations. Additionally, it analyses and compares registration systems based on information, data and self-assessment by Election Management Bodies. III. Partnership advisory services and outreach 33. Throughout its history, the United Nations system has worked with the private sector and civil society. Building on the 2005 World Summit Outcome document (see resolution 60/1), Member States have recognized the importance of, and expressed strong support for, active engagement of non-State actors in promoting the development agenda of the United Nations system. The Millennium Development Goals represent a watershed in transforming this partnership, with the United Nations actively reaching out to private sector and civil society entities throughout the past decade, and both have responded with equal enthusiasm. The attractiveness of the United Nations emanates from its political legitimacy, value-based mission, knowledge and experience in the development field, historic relationship with developing countries and its global reach and voice. On the other hand, the private sector has emerged as the dominant player in promoting economic development. Private external capital flows to developing countries increased from $50 billion in 1990 to over $707 billion in 2008 -- more than a 1,300 per cent increase. At the same time, global production and trade networks have opened up access to new markets, technology and finance. 34. The United Nations Office for Partnerships has worked in close collaboration with the United Nations Foundation to further promote and implement partnership advisory services and outreach initiatives, as well as fostering innovative strategies for engaging non-State actors with the United Nations system. The Office has also brokered and coordinated strategies to strengthen its expertise and capacity to engage corporations, foundations, and individuals in United Nations causes while supporting the United Nations system in its advocacy and outreach efforts through partnership-building. A. Partnership services 35. In the last decade, the number of private sector entities who approached the United Nations seeking advice on how to engage and provide assistance has increased significantly. Companies of varying sizes producing a wide spectrum of goods and services have approached the United Nations Office for Partnerships to offer assistance and seek advice on how to join the United Nations in finding sustainable solutions to some of the world's most challenging problems. Although most of the private sector companies and foundations interested in increased engagement with the United Nations system are based in developed countries, those with origins in developing countries have been increasing steadily. The Office has received strong interest in partnering with United Nations-led programmes on poverty reduction, disaster prevention, education, health and the environment, as well as disaster relief and humanitarian assistance in the least developed countries. 36. In 2009, the Office served on 17 task forces, ranging from regionally focused groups (Caribbean Community task force), through issues-based groups (Millennium Development Goals Gap Task Force), to coordination mechanisms (Department of Economic and Social Affairs inter-agency coordination, United Nations Communications Group, United Nations Development Group). The primary role of the Office is to (a) provide partnership services and (b) encourage private sector and civil society to participate and contribute to the United Nations system. 37. On the external front, the Office received more than 1,400 requests for advisory services in 2009, from a wide range of private sector companies, foundations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and philanthropists, representing a 40 per cent increase compared to 2008. The majority of requests from non-State actors offered assistance in programmes focused on poverty reduction, education, health and disaster relief, and humanitarian assistance in the least developed countries. In 2009, various agreements and memorandums of understanding were established with external actors to formalize some of these partnerships in support of the Millennium Development Goals. 38. Partnership advisory services provided by the United Nations Office for Partnerships cover a range of areas and can be grouped into four broad categories: (a) Operational partnerships: The Office continues to encourage corporate partners to support United Nations projects. The Office facilitated Nestlé's "Creating Shared Value" initiative and co-hosted the Africa Investor Index Summit to enhance investment opportunities in Africa; (b) Policy and advocacy partnerships: The Office has seen an increased interest from the private sector and civil society to raise awareness and wider understanding of the Millennium Development Goals. In 2009, the Office continued to engage global associations including the Committee Encouraging Corporate Philanthropy, the Fortune Forum, InfoPoverty and the Global Social Compliance Programme; (c) Sharing resources and expertise: The Office continues to engage businesses and foundations not only to provide financial support, but also to share expertise and reach with stakeholders. The Office has assisted the Business Advisory Council of the Greater Tumen Region in organizing its ministerial-level meetings by bringing together high-level Government officials from North-East Asia to develop joint projects in the key sectors of economic cooperation; (d) Networks and alliances: In 2009, the Office continued to work with multiple stakeholders in support of the Millennium Development Goals. It has established the Global Partnership for Community-based Adaptation to enhance the resilience of poor communities and the ecosystems upon which they depend in the face of climate change impacts. B. Key innovative projects and initiatives 39. The following list, in alphabetical order, is divided in the following three categories reflecting the key initiating partner of the project or programme: (a) Member States, (b) the United Nations system and other international organizations, and (c) the private sector and civil society. 1. Member States Business Advisory Council of the Greater Tumen Region -- ministerial-level meetings 40. The United Nations Office for Partnerships has been a co-founder of the Business Advisory Council of the Greater Tumen Region Initiative, which includes China, the Russian Federation, Mongolia, the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Office has been actively engaged in providing expertise and advice, as well as assisting in organizing this ministerial-level meeting of the Greater Tumen Initiative. The meeting aimed to boost regional cooperation for economic growth and sustainable development in Northern Asia, creating a comprehensive public-private dialogue on the investment climate. Inaugural Millennium Development Goals Awards Ceremony 41. The Office provided strategic advice and support to the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to the United Nations, which organized the Inaugural Millennium Development Goals Awards Ceremony. The event presented the Global Humanitarian Award to Archbishop Desmond Tutu and Lifetime Achievement Award to Kevin Cahill, M.D., specialist in preventive medicine and public health. Saudi Arabian General Investment Authority 42. In 2009, the Saudi Arabian General Investment Authority organized the third Global Competitiveness Forum. Focusing on "Competitiveness as an engine for economic growth", the Forum aimed to draw attention to the macroeconomic benefit of competitiveness as well as position competitiveness as a key global challenge. The Office has worked closely with the Investment Authority, providing them with strategic guidance and advice on partnership-building between Saudi Arabia, the United Nations system and other key international actors, such as NGOs, philanthropic and private sector umbrella organizations. 2. United Nations system and other international organizations Academic Council on the United Nations System 43. The Office supported the Summer Workshop of the Academic Council on the United Nations System, hosted at the University of Alberta, by delivering a presentation to its fellows. The presentation focused on the potential of global public-private partnerships as an effective and innovative mechanism in furtherance of the United Nations agenda, including attainment of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals. The Academic Council comprises nearly 800 educational and research institutions as well as individual scholars, teachers, and practitioners who are active in the work and study of multilateral relations, global governance and international cooperation. Business and philanthropy partnerships for human capital development in the Middle East 44. On the occasion of a visit to the United Nations on 29 April 2009 by Her Royal Highness Princess Banderi Abdul Rahman Al Faisal, Director General of the King Khalid Foundation, and the Alwaleed bin Talal Foundation, and a representative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Nations Office for Partnerships -- in cooperation with the Harvard John F. Kennedy School of Government -- arranged discussions with high-level United Nations partners as well as representatives of the private sector and the philanthropic community. The delegation met with Thoraya Obaid, Executive Director of UNFPA, Inés Alberdi, Executive Director of UNIFEM, Amat Al Aleem Ali Alsoswa, Director of the UNDP Bureau for Arab States, and Cheick Diarra, Under-Secretary-General and Special Adviser on Africa. Concentrating on new models of partnership between companies and foundations to build human capital in the Middle East, participants focused on good practices and explored opportunities for future partnership in this area. The programme also included a high-level luncheon with the theme, "Business and philanthropy partnerships for human capital development in the Middle East". Representatives from NextEconomics, Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors, the William J. Clinton Foundation, Standard Chartered Bank, Coca Cola, the World Bank Institute, the Business Council for International Understanding, Synergos Institute, AccountAbility, the International Business Leaders Forum and the Saudi Mission to the United Nations discussed new forms of collaboration to address the Millennium Development Goals. Capital master plan photo project 45. The renovation of the United Nations Headquarters complex is providing an exceptional opportunity to have a fresh look at one of the strongest and most positive symbols available at the United Nations. The Office has facilitated the engagement of David Finn, co-founder and chairman of the international public relations firm Ruder Finn, and William Rivelli, a specialist in architectural, portrait and industrial photography, in a photo project to capture this historic event. Mr. Finn and Mr. Rivelli will work on the project on a pro bono basis. Committee Encouraging Corporate Philanthropy 46. The Economic and Social Council held the second Special Event on Philanthropy, organized by the United Nations Office for Partnerships and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, WHO and the Committee Encouraging Corporate Philanthropy. The participants discussed strategies to strengthen partnerships towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, especially in areas where progress has been slow and could benefit from stronger participation of multi-stakeholders. Specifically, the programme focused on two themes: "Improving the health outcomes for women and girls" and "Raising the profile of neglected tropical diseases". The outcomes of the deliberations were submitted to the WHO World Health Assembly in May 2009 and to Member States at the high-level session of the Economic and Social Council in July 2009. Digital He@lth Initiative 47. The health-related Millennium Development Goals on reducing childhood mortality, improving maternal health and combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases are among the top priorities of the Office. Together, the International Telecommunication Union, WHO and the Office launched the Digital He@lth Initiative. The Initiative is a multi-stakeholder partnership intended to create a strategic framework to accelerate the achievement of the health-related Millennium Development Goals and other priority health agendas. Under the guiding principle of "technology for equity", the Initiative aims to promote digital health-care solutions in developing countries. Global Partnership for Community-based Adaptation 48. The Office, the United Nations Foundation and the International Institute for Environment and Development are working closely with UNDP to develop a major global initiative to support community-based adaptation in the face of climate change impacts. The programme will comprise an alliance of public and private stakeholders that share a vision and commitment to building the resilience of poor communities and the ecosystems upon which they depend. InfoPoverty 49. The United Nations Global Alliance for ICT and Development co-hosted a conference with the Italian organization Observatory for Cultural and Audiovisual Communication in the Mediterranean and in the World, and the United Nations Office for Partnerships. The ninth annual InfoPoverty World Conference focused on the role of ICT in supporting the Millennium Development Goals. The Office provided key inputs on public-private partnerships in the area of ICTs and how they can leverage additional resources to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Information and Technology Corps: addressing education goals 50. The United Nations Office for Partnerships and the Information and Technology Corps signed a memorandum of understanding in which both partners will cooperate in support of Millennium Development Goal 2 on achieving universal primary education, through bridging the digital divide. The Information and Technology Corps is working closely with the United Nations Global Alliance for ICT and Development. It is designed as a comprehensive framework focused on building capacity in developing countries, particularly in the education sector, to support the Millennium Development Goals. The main goal of the initiative is to provide hundreds of thousands of new and refurbished computers for underprivileged students in developing countries. This targets the need to improve access to information communications technology in order to advance the educational opportunities of students in developing countries. Investor Summit on Climate Risk 51. Following the United Nations Climate Change Conference, held in Copenhagen in December 2009, the United Nations Office for Partnerships, the United Nations Foundation and Ceres engaged leading institutional investors, fund managers, financial advisers and others from around the globe, representing trillions of dollars in assets. The Investor Summit, held in January 2010, explored how the rapid global shift to clean technologies and energy efficiency can stimulate economic growth, and highlighted how investors can participate in the low-carbon transition. Speakers included the Secretary-General, Al Gore, former Vice-President of the United States, Todd Stern, United States Special Envoy on Climate Change, Ted Turner, media executive and philanthropist, and Amir Dossal, Executive Director of the United Nations Office for Partnerships. The Summit underscored the critical role investors will play in driving the new clean energy economy. The Summit also featured the announcement of the 2010 Investor Statement on Catalysing Investment in a Low-Carbon Economy, which advocates strong national climate policies. Third Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development World Forum 52. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) provides a setting for Governments to compare policy experiences, seek answers to common problems, identify good practice and coordinate domestic and international policies. Its third World Forum took place in Busan, Republic of Korea, from 27 to 30 October 2009. The 2009 theme, "Charting progress, building visions, improving life", provided an opportunity to examine the paradigm of "Progress". The panellists examined specific ways in which foundations can contribute towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. Forum attendees include Angel Gurría, Secretary-General of OECD and Insill Yi, Commissioner of Statistics of the Republic of Korea. Permanent memorial at the United Nations to the victims of slavery and the trans-Atlantic slave trade 53. On the request of the Secretary-General, the United Nations Office for Partnerships assisted the Permanent Memorial Committee in developing a comprehensive media and outreach strategy, as well as with planning and executing the initiative in consultation with the public relations firm, Kreab Gavin Anderson. The Permanent Memorial Committee is chaired by Ambassador Raymond Wolfe, Permanent Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations. The Office also established a Trust Fund, which will handle all aspects of the allocation, disbursement and accounting of funds; as well as facilitating an appropriate legal agreement. Additionally, Russell Simmons, the hip-hop pioneer and renowned celebrity, was confirmed as the Goodwill Ambassador for the permanent memorial at the United Nations. In its resolution on the subject, the General Assembly: (a) welcomed the appointment of the Goodwill Ambassador to assist in the reengaging international attention on the horrific nature of slavery, the transatlantic slave trade and their legacy; (b) decided to designate 25 March as the annual commemorative anniversary in honour of the victims; and (c) welcomed the initiative of the Caribbean Community to erect a permanent memorial at United Nations Headquarters following the finalization of the capital master plan. Planet UN 54. The United Nations Office for Partnerships, the Department of Public Information and the Permanent Missions of France and Switzerland to the United Nations co-hosted the world premier of Romuald Sciora's documentary film Planet UN. The documentary focuses on the United Nations at the beginning of the twenty-first century as it confronts the enormous challenges of the future. Amir Dossal, Executive Director of the United Nations Office for Partnerships, moderated the event featuring speakers, including Asha-Rose Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General, Kiyo Akasaka, Under-Secretary-General for Communication and Public Information, Peter Maurer, Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations, Jean-Maurice Ripert, Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations and Romuald Sciora. UN-Habitat -- "Harmonious cities" 55. The United Nations Office for Partnerships, in cooperation with the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) and the International Council for Caring Communities, held the high-level working session entitled "Harmonious cities: music technology, culture and health", which provided a valuable discussion platform for cross-cutting and cross-sectoral approaches to the convergence of health, music and technology for the twenty-first century. 3. Private sector and civil society Africa Investor Index Series Summit 56. The second Africa Investor Index Series Summit laid the groundwork for an annual meeting to engage business leaders, investors, and philanthropists on practical investment partnerships that support the pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals in Africa. Africa Investor is a specialist investment communications firm advising Governments, international organizations and businesses on communication strategies for capital market and foreign direct investments in Africa. Partners include the United Nations Office for Partnerships, Africa Investor, NYSE Euronext, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and the NEPAD Business Group. AllWorld Network -- Leadership Forum for Emerging Entrepreneurs 57. The United Nations Office for Partnerships collaborated with the AllWorld Network, the Business Council for International Understanding and the Institute of International Education in co-hosting a forum of leading entrepreneurs from Saudi Arabia and South Africa to share ideas and perspectives for advancing entrepreneurship and unlocking the economic growth potential of the Middle East and Africa. The forum underscored the vital role of small and medium enterprises in driving economic growth, employment and wealth creation and the essential role of a robust private sector in reducing global poverty while advancing the Millennium Development Goals. China World Peace Foundation 58. The United Nations Office for Partnerships has provided strategic advice on the initiatives of the China World Peace Foundation, and ways in which the Foundation can partner most effectively with United Nations system agencies. Areas for potential collaboration include peacebuilding, education, health, development, poverty reduction and the overall promotion of the Millennium Development Goals. Additionally, the Foundation promotes the use of sport as a dynamic platform to facilitate and enhance diplomatic ties between nations. The China World Peace Foundation is based in Beijing, and seeks to support greater international cooperation on United Nations mandates in the furtherance of world peace. Fortune Forum 59. The third Fortune Forum Summit was co-organized by the United Nations Foundation and the United Nations Office for Partnerships. Ted Turner, founder of CNN and the United Nations Foundation, was honoured at the event, which also marked the launch of the Mehta/Mirrlees Initiative, developed by Sir James Mirrlees, the Nobel Prize-winning economist and Renu Mehta. It aims to raise an additional $75 billion across the Group of Eight countries from voluntary contributions for international development projects aimed at achieving the Millennium Development Goals. The Office has provided strategic guidance and assistance to the Fortune Forum in developing this unique and innovative initiative to help the underprivileged. Global Social Compliance Programme 60. The United Nations Office for Partnerships works with the Global Social Compliance Programme to address sustainability, labour conditions and the fight against corruption around the world. The Programme was formed in December 2006 by Carrefour, Metro, Migros, Tesco and Wal-Mart. Since then, Chiquita, Hasbro, Hewlett-Packard and Ikea have joined the Executive Board, and the programme includes more than 25 other participating companies. It is a business-driven programme for companies that want to harmonize their existing efforts in order to deliver a shared, consistent and global approach for the continuous improvement of working conditions in global supply chains. Goi Peace Foundation 61. The United Nations Office for Partnerships, along with the Goi Peace Foundation and UNESCO, organized the 2009 International Essay Contest. Young people around the world were encouraged to participate by submitting their essays on the theme "The role of science in building a better world". The contest highlighted the importance of science and the vital role it can play in addressing the Millennium Development Goals. Happy Hearts Fund -- "Bring happiness back" campaign to commemorate the fifth anniversary of the Indian Ocean tsunami 62. The United Nations Office for Partnerships and the Happy Hearts Fund jointly launched the new initiative "Bring happiness back" as an awareness-raising campaign to highlight the benefits of providing access to self-sustainable education and technology to children in areas devastated by natural disasters. The Happy Hearts Fund was originally established to help rebuild the lives of children affected by the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, and later extended to other parts of the world. This campaign especially focuses on rebuilding schools, and establishing community-oriented businesses to create empowerment and independence in areas adversely affected by natural disasters. Louise T. Blouin Foundation 63. The United Nations Office for Partnerships and the Louise T. Blouin Foundation designed this platform in partnership to address the challenges and opportunities of globalization. The fourth annual Global Creative Leadership Summit brought together Heads of State and Government, Nobel Prize recipients, acclaimed artists, chief executive officers and influential international thought-leaders -- among them Ted Turner, who has done much to advance today's most important humanitarian causes through his commitment, dedication and generosity to the United Nations. The Office organized a panel discussion on the topic "Social entrepreneurs -- the next generation of smart philanthropists", highlighting the importance of social innovation and public-private partnerships in advancing social programmes. Nestlé SA -- Creating shared value 64. Nestlé, the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations, and the United Nations Office for Partnerships collaborated to host a two-day forum on the theme "Creating shared value". The forum was divided into four panels, which provided the platform for interactive dialogue on corporate strategy, water, nutrition, and rural development among Nestlé representatives, United Nations officials, the private sector, foundations, academia and NGO representatives. Novartis -- Innovating medicines to eradicate malaria 65. The United Nations Office for Partnerships and Novartis hosted the luncheon panel on the topic "Working in partnership: innovating medicines to eradicate malaria", which was organized by GMMB, UK. Malaria experts and United Nations officials discussed the progress made by public-private partnerships towards achieving the Millennium Development Goal of halting and reversing the incidence of malaria by 2015. The critical role of science, medicine and integrated strategies in the eventual eradication of malaria was discussed as well. Central to the panel discussion was the importance of public-private partnerships in the discovery, development and delivery of essential antimalarial medicines to save lives in malaria-endemic countries. Peace through sport 66. The United Nations Office for Partnerships continues its close and productive cooperation with the Office of the Special Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace. The Office provided partnership advice and assistance to Peace and Sport, an international NGO on the linkage of sport partnerships, sustainable development and peace, during the third Peace and Sport International Forum 2009. The event, established under the High Patronage of His Serene Highness Prince Albert II of Monaco, brought together world leaders and decision makers in the areas of sport, peace, and development. The United Nations Office for Partnerships, Peace and Sport, and the United Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace have signed a memorandum of understanding to establish a formal platform for collaboration to promote the role of sport in achieving sustainable peace and development, especially in countries emerging from conflicts. Philanthropy UK 67. The United Nations Office for Partnerships works closely with Philanthropy UK, the leading resource for free and impartial advice to aspiring philanthropists who want to give effectively. Philanthropy UK develops and shares current information and best practice on giving, provides accessible links to specialists and aims to inspire more people to become philanthropic and, thus, enjoy the extraordinary awards this brings. Rothman Institute -- Social Innovation and Entrepreneurship Conference 68. The United Nations Office for Partnerships supported the Rothman Institute at the 2009 Social Innovation and Entrepreneurship Conference at Fairleigh Dickinson University. This special event was organized to help executives from non-profits, social enterprises, and small and medium-sized businesses better understand important trends and key factors for success as they seek to grow their organizations in economically challenging times. Synergos Institute 69. The United Nations Office for Partnerships has collaborated with the Synergos Institute's Global Philanthropists Circle -- a dynamic network of leading philanthropic families from across the world committed to using their time, influence and resources to fight global poverty and social injustice. Founded in 2001 by Peggy Dulany, Synergos' Chair, and her father, David Rockefeller, the Global Philanthropists Circle increases the impact of members' philanthropy and allows them to become more effective social investors by offering opportunities for learning and collaboration. Currently, the Global Philanthropists Circle consists of more than 25 families, about 250 individual philanthropists, from more than 25 countries. World Childhood Foundation 70. The World Childhood Foundation USA, in collaboration with the United Nations Office for Partnerships, hosted the 2009 Childhood Anniversary Symposium on the theme "Sexual abuse and exploitation of children -- 10 years in the field", at United Nations Headquarters. The event was held under the patronage of Her Majesty Queen Silvia of Sweden, Founder of World Childhood Foundation, who provided an overview of Childhood's projects and initiatives for children at risk of sexual abuse and exploitation. This initiative supports over 110 programmes in 15 countries and focuses on prevention, intervention and education in urban, suburban and rural areas worldwide. World Congress of Muslim Philanthropists 71. The United Nations Office for Partnerships has been collaborating with the World Congress of Muslim Philanthropists to support the United Nations goals of alleviating poverty and addressing global food crises. The World Congress is a global network of donors, foundations, and socially responsive corporations established to advance effective and accountable giving. In 2009, the World Congress launched its first multi-donor giving circle -- the Hasanah Fund -- to develop and implement new, sustainable programmes in the fight against world hunger and poverty with 20 countries facing ongoing food crises. X PRIZE Foundation 72. The United Nations Office for Partnerships worked with the X PRIZE Foundation, BT Global Services and the John Templeton Foundation to stage the "Incentive 2 Innovate Conference 2009", which highlighted two essential tools with which to solve today's challenges: open collaboration and incentivized competition. The initiative brought together leaders from the private sector, foundations, NGOs, and the United Nations. The Conference encouraged discussion, developed fresh ideas and fostered new relationships and partnerships all with the aim of creating a better world for all its citizens. The Office promotes creative initiatives, such as Incentive to Innovate, which contribute to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in a way that does not simply provide temporary assistance, but supports much more long-term sustainability. IV. Conclusions 73. 2009 was another successful year for United Nations partnerships. Despite continued economic challenges, there was no decline in the number of entities from both the private sector and civil society seeking involvement with the United Nations system. The United Nations Office for Partnerships continued to facilitate innovative and rewarding partnerships and engage in valuable initiatives supporting the international development agenda. The earthquake in Haiti at the beginning of 2010 reaffirmed the vital importance of public-private partnerships in addressing such crises. That catastrophic event resulted in an extraordinary response from all sectors to lend expertise, resources and financial support for the relief effort. The Office has facilitated these commitments in support of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs -- connecting corporations, umbrella organizations, civil society, academia and many other entities with valuable outlets for humanitarian relief. 74. The United Nations Fund for International Partnerships has continued and expanded its important work. The partnership between UNFIP and the United Nations Foundation -- now in its eleventh year -- has resulted in many important models for development initiatives. They continued to fund essential projects with far-reaching impacts for the Millennium Development Goals. The United Nations Foundation has also facilitated cooperation between the Organization and the United States Government on the Millennium Development Goals and worked to build more support within the United States for the Goals in the lead-up to the 2010 High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals. The following are two significant partnership initiatives addressing the Goals to be launched in 2010: (a) Girl Up Campaign: The United Nations Foundation, supplementing the work done by UNFPA, UNIFEM, and UNICEF, has established a fund for the empowerment of adolescent girls in 20 countries, which has since grown into our rapidly developing Girl Up campaign. This campaign will raise funds for United Nations programmes supporting education, health and safety services for adolescent girls in Ethiopia, Guatemala, Liberia, Malawi and eventually other countries as well. Funds will be directed at the discretion of the United Nations Adolescent Girls Task Force; (b) Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves: The United Nations Foundation has organized a Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves. The Alliance will work to catalyse the development of sustainable markets for clean and efficient stoves and fuels at the scale needed for widespread adoption in the developing world. Founding partners of the Alliance include WHO, WFP, UN-Energy, the United States Environmental Protection Agency and Department of State, the Shell Foundation, and the Government of Germany. One of the Alliance's first activities will be working with WHO and the American National Standards Institute on guidelines and standards for clean cookstoves. 75. The work of UNFIP and the United Nations Foundation has also made it possible for the United Nations Office for Partnerships to act as a platform for new strategic alliances and collaborative efforts between the private sector, Governments and the United Nations. The relationship agreement between the United Nations Foundation and UNFIP has been under formal review to reflect current reality and a shared vision for the future, and is expected to be finalized in 2010. 76. The United Nations Democracy Fund has taken on an increasingly active role in engaging civil society in pursuit of democracy around the world. Working closely with the other arms of the United Nations Office for Partnerships, they provide an indispensable link in facilitating partnerships with civil society actors to advance the stabilizing principles of democracy and the Millennium Development Goals. 77. Looking ahead, the Office will continue to focus its work closely around the Millennium Development Goals, especially during the 2010 milestone year. With only five years remaining until the 2015 deadline, efforts to meet respective Millennium Development Goal targets are expected to increase, and the Office hopes to play an active role in facilitating new alliances and securing new commitments. In addition to its work within the United Nations system, the collaboration of the Office with the private sector and non-State actors continues to be essential in achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Outreach and advocacy -- especially to non-traditional partners -- are key components in the Office's communication strategy going forward. In particular, the Office will continue to highlight issues of sustainable development in relation to climate change and green economy, women's empowerment, maternal and child health, HIV/AIDS, access to education and innovations for greater financial inclusion. In line with its commitment to achieve the final Millennium Development Goal targets, the Office will focus on those regions most in need of support: the Middle East, South-East Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Annex I Corporations and companies Accenture Domini Investment Fund Africa Practice Dow Chemical Company Alcatel-Lucent E-CARE American Electrical Power Électricité de France American Express Eli Lilly Aveda Corporation Ericsson Aviva Expedia Bank of America FedEx BASF Fortis Bayer Fujitsu Bertelsmann General Electric Bristol-Myers Squibb Geneva Group International British Petroleum GlaxoSmithKline BT Global Services Globalegacy International Carrefour Goldman Sachs Group Cisco Systems Google Citigroup G-Star Raw Clorox Hewlett Packard The Coca-Cola Company HSBC Holdings Crescent Petroleum Company ING Group Daimler Intel De Beers International Business Machines Dell Johnson & Johnson Deutsche Bank Kraft Foods Deutsche Post Lenovo Group Marvel Entertainment Sanofi-Aventis Merck & Co Siemens Metro Skype Microsoft Société Générale Migros Standard Chartered Bank Mitsubishi Statoil Hydro Mitsubishi Electric Suez Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Sumitomo Motorola Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group MTV Swiss Reinsurance National Basketball Association Tata Steel Nestlé Telefónica Nike Tesco Nokia Time Warner Oracle Toyota Motor PepsiCo Unilever Pfizer Unisys PKN Orlen Group United Airlines Procter & Gamble United Parcel Service Rio Tinto Group Verizon Communications Roche Group VH1 Royal DSM Vodafone Royal Dutch Shell Wal-Mart Royal Philips Electronics Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Ruder Finn Foundations ABS-CBN Foundation Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation Aga Khan Foundation Blue Moon Fund BBC World Service Trust Blue Planet Run Foundation Charles Darwin Foundation Nuffield Trust Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund The Pew Charitable Trusts Fiorello La Guardia Foundation Philanthropy Australia Ford Foundation Public Benefit Foundation Global Crop Diversity Trust Qatar Foundation Global Fund for HIV/AIDS Rockefeller Brothers Fund Google.org Rockefeller Foundation Grameen Foundation Shell Foundation Green Family Foundation Soros Foundation Healing the Divide Starr Foundation Hewlett Foundation Tarek Ahmed Juffali Foundation Hilton Foundation United Nations Foundation King Baudouin Foundation Universal Education Foundation Knowledge Channel Foundation Vodafone Foundation Wellcome Trust McArthur Foundation Nike Foundation Novartis Foundation for Sustainable Development Government/Aid Agencies Canadian International Development Agency Tumen Secretariat Centers For Disease Control (United States of America) United Kingdom Department For International Development Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs European Union Government of Ecuador Italian Ministry of Environment and Territory United States Agency for International Development United States Department of State World Bank International NGOs American Red Cross International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies Peace and Sport Right to Play Rotary International The Nature Conservancy American Friends of the Phelophepa Train Arzu Ceres Citizens International Clinton Global Initiative Club of Madrid Conservation International Education Development Center, Inc. Equal Access Friends of World Heritage Global Environment Facility Hand in Hand International Happy Hearts Fund International Development Research Centre International Institute for Environment and Development World Economic Forum World Wildlife Fund Umbrella organizations and networks AllWorld Network Biomarine Biovision Commonwealth Business Council Council on Foundations European Foundation Centre Global Business Coalition on HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria Institute of Philanthropy International Committee of Food Retail Chains International Council for Caring Communities International Council of Toy Industries International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Associations Public Relations Society of America Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development United Nations Association of the United States of America United States Chamber of Commerce United Nations system partners Department for Disarmament Affairs Department of Economic and Social Affairs Department of Peacekeeping Operations Department of Political Affairs Economic Commission for Africa Economic Commission for Europe Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Executive Office of the Secretary-General Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Global Compact Office International Atomic Energy Agency International Labour Organization Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) United Nations Children's Fund United Nations Conference on Trade and Development United Nations Development Fund for Women United Nations Development Programme United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization United Nations Environment Programme United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change United Nations Industrial Development Organization United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research United Nations Institute for Training and Research United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime United Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office United Nations Population Fund World Food Programme World Health Organization Annex II (In United States dollars) As at 31 December 2008 Approvals in 2009 Total Funded by Programme area Number of projects Value Other donors Population and women Environment Peace, security and human rights Other Annex III Asha-Rose Migiro, Deputy Secretary-General (Chair) Lincoln C. Chen, M.D., President, China Medical Board of New York, Director, Global Equity Initiative Angela Kane, Under-Secretary-General for Management Sylvie Lucas, President of the Economic and Social Council (Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations) Uche Joy Ogwu, Chair of the Second Committee, General Assembly (Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations) Mary Oakes Smith, Fellow, Information Technology for Education and Health, World Bank Franklin A. Thomas, Head, The Ford Foundation Study Group Sha Zukang, Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs Amir Dossal (member, ex officio), Executive Director, United Nations Office for Partnerships Financial contributions to the United Nations Democracy Fund, by donor as at 15 December 2009 Donor Cumulative contribution Australia Bulgaria Chile Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Estonia France Georgia Germany Hungary India Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latvia Lithuania Mongolia Morocco Peru Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Romania Senegal Slovenia Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Turkey United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Composition of the 2009 Advisory Board of the Member States Botswana Lebanon Panama Trinidad and Tobago Non-governmental organizations The Asia Society Femmes Africa Solidarité Individuals Sanam Anderlini Michael Doyle Ashraf Ghani Amir A. Dossal (member, ex officio) 