%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|AFGHANISTAN|AFGHANISTAN SITUATION|

General Assembly Sixty-fifth session Agenda item 38 The situation in Afghanistan Security Council Sixty-fifth year Letter dated 26 October 2010 from the Permanent Representatives of the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General We have the honour to enclose herewith the United Kingdom-Russian Federation joint press statement on Afghanistan signed by the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation on 13 October 2010 in Moscow (see annex). We request your kind assistance in circulating the contents of this letter as well as the joint press statement as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 38, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Vitaly Churkin Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations (Signed) Mark Lyall Grant Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom [Original: English and Russian] United Kingdom-Russian Federation joint press statement on Afghanistan Moscow, 13 October 2010 The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation today discussed enhanced cooperation to support the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in its efforts to ensure security and stability in Afghanistan. The spread of narcotics, terrorism and violent extremism from Afghanistan continues to pose transboundary threats to the United Kingdom, the Russian Federation and our international partners. The Foreign Secretary and the Minister for Foreign Affairs agreed to continue to cooperate closely to tackle these shared threats. In particular they agreed: - To work together to support a coherent political strategy, led by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, aimed at a comprehensive and representative political settlement. They expressed support for the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan's Peace and Reintegration Programme, which is open to all insurgents who break ties with Al-Qaida, renounce violence and work within the framework of the Afghan Constitution. They stressed their ongoing commitment to the United Nations sanctions regime, as imposed pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999). Towards this goal they will continue to carefully review each candidate for delisting from the consolidated sanctions list in accordance with Security Council resolution 1822 (2008). The will also consider names submitted for inclusion in the consolidated list also in accordance with resolution 1822 (2008). - To work to support the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan over transition and in particular in assuming lead responsibility for security within Afghanistan by the end of 2014. - To work closely together to tackle illicit drug production, trade and trafficking in the region, which pose a threat to international peace and stability in different regions of the world, including by making continued progress on reducing and containing the growth of opium poppy in Afghanistan. Noting the United Kingdom's and Russia's plans to strengthen bilateral law enforcement cooperation, they stressed the importance of tackling narcotics along the entire chain of illegal production and distribution (including through support for Afghan-led eradication, promotion of alternative livelihoods, tackling illicit financial flows, intercepting supplies of precursors and taking measures to reduce drug use). - To support the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in achieving enhanced cooperation with international and regional partners to help ensure prosperity, peace and stability, including OSCE, IMF, World Bank and SCO. - To continue to cooperate through the NATO-Russia Council, noting the helpful role played by the transit route through the Russian Federation's territory for deliveries of property and equipment for the needs of the international forces operating in Afghanistan. They also noted the successful counter-narcotics project carried out under the auspices of the NATO-Russia Council and OSCE, aided by a substantial contribution from the All-Russian Institute for Advanced Studies for the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation, Domodedovo. 