%%%DISPUTES|COSTA RICA|NICARAGUA|

Sixty fifth session Agenda items 15, 18, 20, 24, 25, 33, 42, 70 and 74 Culture of peace Macroeconomic policy questions Sustainable development Eradication of poverty and other development issues Operational activities for development: operational activities for development of the United Nations system Prevention of armed conflict The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development Report of the International Court of Justice Oceans and the law of the sea Letter dated 22 December 2010 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Nicaragua to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit to you herewith for your information the protest note of the Republic of Nicaragua addressed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship of the Republic of Costa Rica (MRE/DM/1105/12/10) (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the above-mentioned note verbale circulated as a General Assembly document under agenda items 15, 18, 20, 24, 25, 33, 42, 70 and 74. (Signed) Danilo Rosales Díaz Deputy Permanent Representative Chargé d'affaires a.i. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Nicaragua 21 December 2010 MRE/DM/1105/12/10 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Nicaragua presents its compliments to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship of the Republic of Costa Rica and protests in the strongest possible terms the serious incidents described below. At 10.30 a.m. on 21 December 2010, vessels of the Nicaraguan Navy, which were conducting routine patrols for the protection of the country's sovereignty and for the detection and combating of drug trafficking, detected two Costa Rican-flagged vessels which were moving northwards and entering Nicaraguan jurisdictional waters two (2) nautical miles to the north-east of Punta Castilla, in the area of San Juan de Nicaragua. In response to this situation, the two (2) Nicaraguan naval vessels began moving to intercept the Costa Rican vessels, which immediately turned in the direction of their territorial waters; an additional two (2) vessels from that country were also observed, making a total of four. At 2.30 p.m. on the same day, members of the Southern Military Detachment, located at the El Delta border post on the San Juan River, observed one (1) Cessna aircraft flying from the Rio Colorado area of Costa Rica in the direction of El Delta. It violated Nicaraguan air space by flying over the El Delta border post and then returned to Costa Rican territory. Both incidents are acts of provocation and do not contribute to the search for frank and open dialogue, or to the understanding promoted by the Government of Reconciliation and National Unity. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs therefore calls upon the authorities of the Government of the Republic of Costa Rica to prevent any recurrence of incidents of this nature and gravity. 