%%%SLAVERY|TRUST FUNDS|FUND-RAISING|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|PROJECT EVALUATION|PROJECT MONITORING|PROJECT FINANCE|

Sixty-fifth session * A/65/50. Item 69 (a) of the preliminary list* Promotion and protection of human rights: implementation of human rights instruments Status of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report, which is submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/122, describes the recommendations for grants and other related decisions that were adopted by the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery at its fourteenth session held in Geneva from 14 to 18 September 2009. The recommendations for grants were approved by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the Secretary-General on 21 October 2009. The report also provides information on policy decisions adopted by the Board in implementation of the recommendations made by the Office of Internal Oversight Services with a view to further enhancing the activities of the Fund. It updates the report submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session (A/64/306 and Corr.1). Page Mandate of the Fund Administration and Board of Trustees Grant cycle and admissibility criteria Grant cycle Admissibility of new applications and selection process Monitoring and evaluation by the Board and the secretariat Financial status of the Fund Fourteenth session of the Board of Trustees Recommendations for grants Fundraising Follow-up to recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services Cooperation with United Nations agencies and developments in the United Nations system concerning relevant mandates Other recommendations International Day for the Abolition of Slavery How to contribute to the Fund Conclusions and recommendations Annexes Project grants approved by the Board of Trustees at its fourteenth session Contingency list of project grants recommended by the Board of Trustees at its fourteenth session 1. The General Assembly, in its resolution 46/122, established the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery with the purpose of extending humanitarian, legal and financial aid to individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. Funding is obtained by means of voluntary contributions from Governments, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), other private or public entities and individuals. II. Administration and Board of Trustees 2. In conformity with resolution 46/122, the Fund is administered in accordance with the relevant financial regulations and rules of the United Nations on general trust funds for humanitarian assistance, by the Secretary-General, and through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), with the advice of a Board of Trustees. 3. The Board of Trustees is composed of five United Nations experts with relevant experience in the field of human rights and, in particular, on issues of contemporary forms of slavery, serving in their personal capacities. In December 2007 the Secretary-General appointed the following five members for a three-year term ending on 31 December 2010, with due regard to equitable geographical distribution: Gulnara Shahinian (Armenia), Virginia Herrera Murillo (Costa Rica), Prateep Unsongtham Hata (Thailand), Cleophas Kwdjo Mally (Togo) and David Weissbrodt (United States of America). Ms. Shahinian resigned on 23 May 2008 because she was nominated as Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences. In March 2009, the Secretary-General appointed Klara Skrivankova (Czech Republic) to replace Ms. Shahinian. III. Grant cycle and admissibility criteria A. Grant cycle 4. The deadline for submitting applications for project grants for 2009 was 31 March 2008. Admissible applications received were examined by the Board of Trustees at its fourteenth session, which took place in Geneva from 14 to 18 September 2009. The recommendations for grants adopted by the Board of Trustees at that session were approved by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, on behalf of the Secretary-General, on 21 October 2009, and the grants approved were to be paid in December 2009. Beneficiaries of project grants will have to provide the secretariat of the Fund with mid-year narrative and financial reports on the use of their grants before 30 June 2010 and final year narrative and financial reports on the use of their grants before 28 February 2011. Until satisfactory reports on the use of previous grants are received, no new project grants can be paid to these beneficiaries. 5. The deadline for submitting applications for project grants for 2011 was 31 March 2010. Admissible applications received will be examined by the Board of Trustees at its fifteenth session, scheduled to take place in Geneva in December 2010. B. Admissibility of new applications and selection process 6. In accordance with the selection criteria adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 46/122, the beneficiaries of assistance from the Fund shall be individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. Project admissibility criteria are outlined in the Fund guidelines. 7. Admissible application forms are verified as to their conformity with approved selection criteria and additional information is requested from the organization if necessary. Reference organizations and specialized networks are also consulted if necessary. The complete application form and all required additional documents are then summarized and analysed by the Secretariat in accordance with the selection criteria, to facilitate the work of the Board of Trustees. At its annual session, the Board of Trustees reviews all applications declared admissible, including the original application form, the summary analysis prepared by the secretariat and any other relevant information. The Board of Trustees then makes recommendations to the Secretary-General in accordance with its guidelines. Following the session the secretariat reviews all the recommendations of the Board of Trustees for consistency with relevant United Nations administrative and financial rules and regulations. The High Commissioner approves, on behalf of the Secretary-General, the recommendations regarding project grants. 8. The beneficiary organizations are requested to accept all conditions attached to the grant, such as providing mid-year and final narrative and financial reports on the use of grants by a given deadline. Upon receipt of this confirmation, the secretariat of the Fund requests the financial services of the United Nations Office at Geneva to pay the project grant promptly. C. Monitoring and evaluation by the Board and the secretariat 9. The secretariat reviews all narrative and financial reports received from beneficiary organizations on the use of project grants and asks for additional information if needed. OHCHR field presences and other United Nations field offices, such as those of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), may be requested to provide the secretariat of the Fund with additional information on the organization or project. 10. In carrying out their evaluation, the Board and the secretariat implement the following activities: (a) At its annual session the Board of Trustees reviews the situation of project grants allocated in previous years. When the Board is satisfied with the reporting by a given organization, it recommends closing the file. If the report is not complete, the Board makes a recommendation requesting specific additional information. No new grants will be allocated to that organization until the Board is satisfied with its report; (b) Board members and the secretariat may visit projects financed by the Fund; (c) Board members may establish, if needed, direct contact with project leaders in the field in order to better evaluate the use of the grants. The secretariat may also meet with project leaders; (d) Reference organizations and specialized networks may be invited to the session of the Board of Trustees to provide additional information on specific organizations or projects. IV. Financial status of the Fund 11. According to information received from OHCHR at the fourteenth session, $936,536 was available from new contributions paid since the thirteenth session of the Board of Trustees (see table 1). Table 1 Contributions available at the fourteenth session of the Board of Trustees Donor Amount (in United States dollars) Date paid Cameroon July 2009 Brazil December 2008 Belgium November 2008 Finland June 2009 Germany Greece September 2008 September 2009 Israel January 2009 Japan Turkey August 2008 March 2009 South Africa April 2009 Russian Federation Spain Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) February 2009 Prateep Ungsongtham Hata Weissbrodt, David Total contribution Figure 1 Contributions received from 1998 to 2009 V. Fourteenth session of the Board of Trustees 13. The fourteenth session of the Board of Trustees of the Fund was held at OHCHR headquarters in Geneva from 14 to 18 September 2009. The session was opened by Antti Korkeakivi, Chief of the Indigenous Peoples and Minorities Unit, Rule of Law, Equality and Non-Discrimination Branch of OHCHR. Mr. Korkeakivi congratulated new member Klara Skrivankova (Czech Republic) on her appointment and expressed appreciation to Gulnara Shahinian (Armenia), who had resigned on 23 May 2008 following her nomination as Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, for her many years of expert advice and her dedication to combating contemporary forms of slavery. 14. All five members of the Board attended the session. Mr. Weissbrodt was reelected as Chair of the Board. 15. The Board held 10 meetings, during which it examined information prepared by the secretariat concerning the implementation of recommendations adopted at its thirteenth session, the financial situation of the Fund, fundraising efforts, applications for project grants, developments in the United Nations system concerning relevant mandates and cooperation with United Nations agencies and follow-up to the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS). 16. The Board met with Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and with Mona Rishmawi, Chief of the Rule of Law, Equality and Non-Discrimination Branch, to discuss, inter alia, the future work of the Fund and the staffing situation. A. Recommendations for grants 17. Based on the available funds, the Board adopted its revised cost plan for 2009-2010 of the amount $1,137,000. 18. The Board examined 289 admissible applications for project grants from 77 countries amounting to approximately US$ 3,831,322. In addition, approximately 50 applications were declared inadmissible. Applications were received from the following continents and countries: Africa (105): Benin (1), Botswana (1), Burkina Faso (4), Burundi (3), Cameroon (6), Côte d'Ivoire (4), Democratic Republic of the Congo (12), Ethiopia (1), Gabon (1), Ghana (7), Guinea-Bissau (1), Kenya (11), Liberia (1), Malawi (1), Mali (4), Mauritania (1), Niger (3), Nigeria (11), Republic of Guinea (1), Rwanda (3), Senegal (1), Sierra Leone (2), South Africa (1), Tanzania (5), Togo (6), Uganda (9), Zambia (2), Zimbabwe (2); Asia (112): Bangladesh (7), Indonesia (6), India (54), Iran (Islamic Republic of) (1), Iraq (2), Lebanon (1), Malaysia (1), Mongolia (2), Nepal (12), Pakistan (14), Philippines (2), Sri Lanka (3), Tajikistan (1), Thailand (4), Viet Nam (2); Eastern Europe (27): Albania (3), Azerbaijan (2), Bosnia and Herzegovina (1), Bulgaria (3), Georgia (3), former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (6), Kyrgyzstan (1), Lithuania (2), Moldova (Republic of) (1), Poland (1), Russian Federation (1), Serbia (1), Ukraine (1); Latin America and the Caribbean (30): Argentina (1), Bolivia (2), Brazil (2), Colombia (3), Costa Rica (2), Ecuador (2), Guatemala (2), Haiti (6), Mexico (1), Nicaragua (1), Panama (2), Peru (5), Uruguay (1); Western Europe and others (16): Australia (1), Canada (1), France (2), Ireland (1), Israel (2), Switzerland (1), Turkey (1), United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (2), United States of America (5). 19. In the light of the selection criteria, the Board of Trustees recommended 63 project grants for a total amount of $726,090, which will assist non-governmental organizations in 44 countries; in Africa (10): Benin (1), Botswana (1), Cameroon (1), Côte d'Ivoire (1), Democratic Republic of the Congo (1), Kenya (1), Rwanda (1), South Africa (1), Togo (1), Zimbabwe (1); Asia (23): Bangladesh (3), Indonesia (2), India (3), Iran (Islamic Republic of) (1), Lebanon (1), Malaysia (1), Mongolia (1), Nepal (4), Pakistan (3), Sri Lanka (1), Tajikistan (1), Thailand (2); Eastern Europe (11): Albania (2), Azerbaijan (1), Bosnia and Herzegovina (1), Bulgaria (2), former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (1), Lithuania (1), Moldova (Republic of) (1), Poland (1), Russian Federation (1); Latin America and the Caribbean (11): Brazil (1), Colombia (2), Costa Rica (1), Guatemala (1), Haiti (4), Mexico (1), Peru (1); Western Europe and others (8): Ireland (1), Israel (2), Switzerland (1), Turkey (1), United Kingdom (1), United States of America (2). (See list of project grants in annex I to the present report.) 20. The Board also recommended establishing a contingency list of 27 project grants for a total amount of $281,167 to be disbursed in case some of the nongovernmental organizations selected for grants do not comply with the conditions attached to their grants. The proposed contingency list includes 27 nongovernmental organizations in 22 countries; in Africa (12): Burkina Faso (1), Burundi (2), Congo (1), Ghana (1), Kenya (1), Liberia (1); Nigeria (1), Sierra Leone (1), Togo (1), Uganda (2); Asia (6): Bangladesh (1), Nepal (3), Thailand (1), Viet Nam (1); Eastern Europe (2): Kyrgyzstan (1), Macedonia (1); Latin America and the Caribbean (7): Argentina (1), Costa Rica (1), Ecuador (1), Haiti (2), Peru (1) and Uruguay (1) (see list of project grants in annex II to the present report). 21. The Board also recommended setting aside a budget line of $20,000 for special emergency grants. 22. The Board took into account the importance of gender representation and national and regional distribution when considering applications for travel and project grants. It appears that more than half of the individuals who benefit from project grants are women. 23. The relevant statistics since the Board started allocating grants in 1998, including the number of project applications received and the amount of money requested, as well as the number of grants approved and the amount of money allocated by the Fund, are shown in table 2 and figure 2 below. Table 2 Statistics on the allocation of travel and project grants, 1998-2009 Year Number of admissible applications Amount requested (in United States dollars) Number of grants approved Amount allocated (in United States dollars) B. Fundraising 24. The Board held its annual meeting with donor Governments, interested Governments and other donors on 17 September. The meeting was attended by representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Brazil, the Holy See, Japan and Pakistan. 25. The Board agreed to send a letter signed by the Chair to all Permanent Missions and delegations to the United Nations Office at Geneva appealing for contributions to the Fund on the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery, 2 December 2009 (see statement in sect. VI). 26. The Board recommended that the secretariat of the Human Rights Council invite a representative of the Board to introduce the report of the Secretary-General on the Fund, provide the Council with updated information on its work and on the financial situation of the Fund, and invite donors to contribute to the Fund. 27. The Board met with Charles Radcliffe, Chief of the Donor and External Relations Section of OHCHR. On the basis of that discussion, the Board recommended to the Section the dissemination of information on the Fund during meetings with regular donors of OHCHR and to increase collaboration between the Donor and External Relations Section and the secretariat of the Fund. 28. Under its agenda item on the financial status of the Fund, the Board met with Eldon Pearce, Chief of the Finance and Budget Section, to discuss the financial status of the Fund. The Board stressed the importance of prompt disbursement of payments to grantees and of updating the follow-up table of payment requests prepared by the secretariat. C. Follow-up to recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services 29. As recommended by the Board at its eleventh session, a global review of the Fund was undertaken by OIOS from November 2006 to January 2007 to review the impact of the Fund activities on the target groups and to assess the efficiency and the effectiveness of its reporting and monitoring processes. The final report, issued in June 2007 and containing 21 recommendations, assessed that the Fund is addressing its mandate and has a positive impact on victims of contemporary forms of slavery. 30. Under its agenda item on the follow-up to OIOS recommendations, the Board met with Anna Nyaoro, an auditor of OIOS, who stressed that good progress had been made by OHCHR and the Board in implementing the OIOS recommendations and that only a limited number of recommendations, including those related to the overall coordination of the three humanitarian funds managed by OHCHR, remained pending. 31. Subsequently, the Board followed up further on the following OIOS recommendations. Recommendations 1-5 32. OIOS recommended that more detailed guidelines be established for the selection process of beneficiaries. The Board adopted the final version of its guidelines and policies, including key indicators of contemporary forms of slavery and special provisions encouraging NGOs to develop sustainable projects accompanied by actions that address the root cause of modern slavery. The new guidelines and policies also include a funding policy for two-year grants, subject to the availability of funds. Special provisions were inserted to encourage applicants to use part of their grants for capacity-building. In addition, the Board decided to request NGOs to include beneficiaries in both the design and the implementation phases of the projects. The Board recommended that OHCHR translate the guidelines and policies into Spanish and French. 33. The Board also stressed that members of the Board could play a more proactive role in encouraging projects by providing training and other assistance to selected NGOs in their respective regions. Recommendations 6-7 34. OIOS recommended improving access to information available on the Fund website in order to facilitate the establishment of partnerships and the sharing of best practices among grantees, to raise awareness of the problem of slavery and to publicize the achievements of the Fund. 35. The Board welcomed the new version of the website of the Fund and recommended its translation into French and Spanish. The Board recommended that best practices and lesson learned be compiled from narrative reports at the end of each reporting year and made publicly available. 36. The Board recommended extending the directory of NGOs working on contemporary forms of slavery by including grass-roots NGOs. 37. The Board stressed the importance of the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery as an annual occasion to raise awareness of the issue, and recommended that the Chair deliver a statement on that occasion, if possible, together with other relevant United Nations organs (see Board statement in sect. VI). 38. In line with OIOS recommendation No. 7, requesting OHCHR to raise awareness of the problem of slavery, the Board recommended to explore the possibility of establishing a fellowship programme for young professionals having knowledge of and working experience on issues related to contemporary forms of slavery, nationally and internationally. The OHCHR staff and members of the Board of Trustees could provide training for these fellows on international human rights system, including the treaty body system, the Human Rights Council, the Universal periodic review and Special Procedures in relation to contemporary forms of slavery. They could then put this improved expertise to use by analysing project applications and producing research documents aimed at building capacity among grantees. The Board recommended that OHCHR follow up on that proposal and that a budget line of $63,200 be established for that purpose, which could enable four fellows to complete a five-month programme. Recommendation 9 39. OIOS recommended the establishment of a formal monitoring and evaluation mechanism. 40. The Board provisionally adopted the draft guidelines for project evaluation and recommended that OHCHR request further assistance from its field presences and from UNDP in the monitoring and evaluation of projects. 41. The Board expressed concerns about 140 financial and narrative reports from the period 2005-2008 that had not yet been evaluated owing to the limited staff resources of the secretariat. The Board recommended that these reports be analysed as a matter of priority and that all projects on which satisfactory reports had been received be closed. 42. The Board welcomed the information received on the mission to India that was undertaken by the secretariat of the Fund and Prateep Unsongtham Hata to monitor the implementation of projects supported by the Fund. In the light of their findings and concerns in terms of the effective implementation of some of the projects and taking into account the high number of applications received from India, the Board recommended that a consultant be hired to undertake a needs assessment exercise and to evaluate the effectiveness of the past activities and present programmes of the non-governmental organizations that have applied for funding. 43. The Board recommended that selected projects be visited on a regular basis. Reports of project visits should be prepared by the secretariat for consideration by the Board at its annual session. The Board recommended that up to four field missions be organized annually and that a budget line of $45,000 be established to fund these field missions. Furthermore, the Board recommended that UNDP and the International Labour Organization (ILO) field offices be informed of any planned evaluation missions, and it suggested that these visits be used also for outreach to organizations, particularly in affected areas with a low number of grant applications. Recommendation 10 44. OIOS recommended establishing a management information system to enable effective monitoring and follow-up of grants. 45. The Board expressed its appreciation for the completion of a new management information system that had been developed by the information technology section of OHCHR, and recommended that $60,000 be allocated for a temporary assistant who would enter the required data in the new grant management system. Recommendation 13 46. OIOS recommended reformulating the processing and funding cycle of the Fund. 47. The Board adopted a grant cycle for projects grants for 2011, with a deadline for the submission of project application for 2011 set at 31 March 2010. Recommendations 15 and 16 48. OIOS recommended that OHCHR establish a more comprehensive and cost effective pre-screening policy. For each new applicant applying for the first time to the Fund, the Board requested that the secretariat review all supporting documents, including the registration certificate of the organization, the statute of the organization, a copy of bank records indicating signatories for the organization, copies of bank statements, two letters of recommendation and evidence of other sources of funding. The Board requested to the secretariat to systematically contact the referees and the donors mentioned in the applications to verify statements contained in the applications. The Board further recommended sending systematic reminders in case non-governmental organizations did not produce requested additional documents. 49. The Board also recommended close cooperation between OHCHR and UNDP field presences, ILO, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations country team to verify the work undertaken by new applicants and notably the quality of the assistance provided to victims of contemporary forms of slavery at the grass-roots level. 50. The Board recommended that the secretariat continue to liaise with the Board members, the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, the Assisting Communities Together (ACT) Fund and the One Percent Fund to exchange information on applicants. 51. The Board welcomed the creation of an Intranet page for the members of the Board and requested that all applications and supporting documents be made available to the members on this platform at least one month before the session. D. Cooperation with United Nations agencies and developments in the United Nations system concerning relevant mandates 52. Under the agenda item devoted to collaboration with United Nations agencies, the Board met with Simon Steyne, head of ILO International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC) Operations. Mr. Steyne discussed the forthcoming ILO IPEC global conference on child labour that was to take place in May 2010 and presented the ILO IPEC strategies to eliminate child labour by 2016. The Board members and Mr. Steyne discussed methods of cooperation between ILO field offices and the Fund for the pre-screening of applications and the monitoring of grantees related to child labour. 53. The Board recommended that the secretariat share the list of all applications related to child labour submitted to the Fund with the head of ILO IPEC Operations so that he could liaise with ILO IPEC national offices to obtain additional information. 54. The Board recommended inviting UNDP and UNICEF to the next session of the Board to discuss means of enhancing collaboration. 55. The Board took note of the report and plan of action of the consultative coordination workshop on the work of the mandates of the Special Rapporteurs on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography; trafficking in persons, especially women and children; and contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, which was held on 25 and 26 June 2009, with the participation of the Fund secretariat. 56. The Board welcomed the launching of a world-wide mapping exercise of nongovernmental organizations and other relevant partners working on contemporary forms of slavery that will be undertaken by a number of United Nations agencies and international NGOs, and recommended that the secretariat make extensive use of that document during the pre-screening process of new applicants. 57. The Board met with Mariana Katzarova, OHCHR Adviser on Human Trafficking, to discuss OHCHR work on trafficking issues. Ms. Katzarova introduced the work of OHCHR related to the Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking developed by OHCHR in 2002 and recent developments concerning the United Nations Global Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking. The Board recommended that the secretariat continue collaborating with the OHCHR Adviser on Human Trafficking and start coordinating and sharing information as regards the United Nations Global Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking and with the United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against Women, managed by the United Nations Development Fund for Women. 58. The Board also met with Gulnara Shahinian, Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, to discuss means of collaboration. The Special Rapporteur took note of the new policies adopted by the Board members and expressed her deep appreciation for the good cooperation in the preparation of her missions to Haiti and Brazil. 59. In line with recommendations 6 and 8 of OIOS, the Board decided to recommend that a budget line of $20,000 be allocated for grants to non governmental organizations to enable them to attend regional, subregional and national meetings organized in the framework of the field missions of the Special Rapporteur and to contribute to the implementation of the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur in her reports. 60. The Board recommended organizing a joint parallel event with the Special Rapporteur in the framework of the fifteenth session of the Human Rights Council and with interested Governments and non-governmental organizations. 61. The Board recommended revising OHCHR Fact Sheet No. 14 on contemporary forms of slavery, in collaboration with the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, in order to include a reference to the activities of the Fund and to the new mandate of the Special Rapporteur. E. Other recommendations 62. The Board reviewed the implementation of its recommendations from the fourteenth session in 2009, and expressed its appreciation for the follow-up that had been achieved despite resource constraints. In the light of the continuous increases in the number of applications and in contributions, and bearing in mind the limited staff resources of the secretariat of the Fund, the Board reiterated its recommendation to find a sustainable solution to enable the Board members to fulfil its mandate. 63. The Board expressed its gratitude to the University of Minnesota for engaging a research assistant to pre-screen project proposals during the period of June-September 2009. VI. International Day for the Abolition of Slavery 64. On 2 December 2009, the Board members issued the following statement to commemorate the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery: "The International Day for the Abolition of Slavery should serve as a reminder to people everywhere that slavery is not only a thing of the past. It is an appalling reality that today millions of human beings all over the world continue to be subjected to contemporary forms of slavery. There is no country immune to its proliferation. "As pointed out by the United Nations Secretary-General in his message to mark that day: `In our globalized world, new forms of slavery have taken shape. The list of abhorrent practices, new and old, is now shockingly long, and includes debt bondage, serfdom, forced labour, child labour and servitude, trafficking of persons and human organs, sexual slavery, the use of child soldiers, the sale of children, forced marriage and the sale of wives, and the exploitation of prostitution'. "The majority of those who suffer are the poor and socially excluded groups such as minorities and migrants. The overlapping factors of poverty, class and race create structural problems and cycles of marginalization that are hard to break. Indigenous peoples are more exposed to bonded labour because in many countries they have limited access to land. Gender inequalities and discrimination, lack of education, desperation for work and demand for cheap labour also trap people. The global economic and financial crisis threatens to heighten vulnerability further. "We welcome the appointment of several relevant thematic procedures, including the new Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, its causes and consequences, as a historic step in the fight against slavery and the eradication of slavery-like practises. We also congratulate the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children; the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography; the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance; the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences; the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict; and the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, for their outstanding efforts to combat modern forms of slavery. "We urge all States to ratify and implement existing instruments in this area, including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Crime. "On this day, we pay tribute to all Governments, civil society organizations and individuals engaged in activities aimed at eradicating slavery and ensuring that all victims obtain redress, including the means for as full rehabilitation as possible. We express our profound commitment to the struggle against slavery and particularly to the victims. "We appeal to Member States to implement their obligations to abolish and eradicate slavery in all its manifestations. We express our gratitude to all donors to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Contemporary Forms of Slavery, and call upon the international community to express its solidarity with victims of slavery by contributing generously to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery to allow it to increase its assistance to victims and contribute to ending these intolerable and unacceptable practices worldwide." VII. How to contribute to the Fund 65. Governments, non-governmental organizations and other private or public entities can contribute to the Fund. Donors should indicate "For the Slavery Fund, account SH" on a payment order. For information on how to contribute, donors are kindly requested to contact the secretariat of the Fund at: Secretariat of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights United Nations CH 1211 Geneva 10 Switzerland Telephone: + (41) (22) 928 9737 or 928 9164 Fax: + (41) (22) 928 9066 VIII. Conclusions and recommendations 66. The Fund has attracted increased interests among non-governmental organizations working to assist victims of slavery. About 274 applications for grants amounting to approximately $3,831,322 were received in 2009. The Board of Trustees was able to recommend only $726,090, which represents less than 15 per cent of the total amount requested. The number of applications has increased significantly, and there has been a welcome increase in the contributions made by donors. Nevertheless, the Fund continues to fall short in terms of meeting the growing demand and need for support. The Board estimates that, in order to be able to fulfil its mandate and to respond positively to new applications to be received in 2010, the Fund would need new contributions amounting to at least $4,000,000 prior to the fifteenth session of the Board of Trustees, which will take place in December 2010. 67. Donors and potential donors are encouraged to step up further their support to the Fund to allow the Fund to expand its crucial assistance to victims of slavery. With respect to the next cycle, donors are invited to contribute to the Fund before November 2010 in order for the contributions to be duly recorded by the United Nations Treasurer in advance of the fifteenth session of the Board. Organization Country Title of project or aspect covered Amount approved (United States dollars) Conditions attached to the grants Different & Equal Organization Albania Providing sustainable reintegration assistance to former Albanian victims of trafficking Caritas Albania Empowerment of Roma young girls in facing human trafficking "Clean World" Aid to Women Social Union Azerbaijan Support and rehabilitation Center for the human trafficking victims Prova Society Bangladesh Child Labor Elimination and Prevention (CLEP) Society for Training and Rehabilitation (STAR) Human rights leadership training for women workers and self-employment of victimized domestic maidservants to liberate them from the atrocities of contemporary servitude Aid Organization (AO) Eradication of hazardous child labour in Bangladesh Enfants Solidaires d'Afrique et du Monde Benin (Republic of) Training of social actors and direct care for the protection of children who are victims of trafficking in Bopa Commune To be kept pending until receipt of satisfactory additional information. La Strada-Bosnia Bosnia and Herzegovina Prevention of trafficking in human beings -- compensation project Bana Ba Letsatsi (Sunshine Children) Botswana Setswana for "Protect the Children" (Sereletsa Bana) To be kept pending until receipt of satisfactory additional information Comissão Pastoral de Terra (CPT) [Pastoral Land Commission] Preventing enslavement in the new agribusiness frontline, in north and central Brazil GERT (Gender education, research and technologies foundation) Bulgaria Childhood free of sexual and labour exploitation: prevention of children under institutional care from the worst forms of child labour Animus Association Foundation Humanitarian aid to women survivors of trafficking to complement the minimum set of services, provided in the context of the Bulgarian National Referral Mechanism Nku'mu Fed-Fed Rehabilitation and re-insertion of ex-victims of child trafficking in the north-west region of Cameroon Confederación General del Trabajo -- CGT Colombia Colombia Assertion of human and labour rights for female service workers and domestic employees in Medellín, Colombia Fundación Esperanza por un retorno seguro Prevention of human trafficking and sex slavery through information strategies, counselling and assistance to female victims or potential victims of this crime Arche d'Alliance (ARAL) Congo (Democratic Republic of ) Backstopping for the promotion of community awareness in preventing and combating impunity for contemporary forms of slavery in South Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo Defensa de Niñas y Niños Internacional, DNI-Costa Rica Costa Rica Psychosocial and legal assistance for victims of sex slavery and trafficking Soleterre-Strategie di Pace ONLUS Côte d'Ivoire Protection against exploitation and sexual violence for girls and minor females who are prostitutes, at risk of becoming prostitutes or marginalized Asociación para la Eliminación de la Prostitutción, Pornografía, Turismo, Tráfico Sexual de Niñas, Niños y Adolescentes en Guatemala Guatemala Protection and comprehensive assistance for children and adolescents who are victims or potential victims of trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation in Guatemala Konbit Pou Lape Ak Devlopman Nan Pon-Wouj Haiti Combating the use of children for domestic work in Lasaline through education and community awareness Jean R. Cadet Restavec Foundation Hope for Haiti-Education Haiti s Most Vulnerable Children Terre des Hommes Suisse Assistance for children who perform domestic work in Port-au-Prince, Haiti Komite Paran an Difikilte nan Matisan (KOPADIM) Educational programme, psychosocial support and professional training for 100 children in domestic service in the Martissant area of Haiti Development of Underprivileged through Integrated Economical Services (DUTIES) India Debt bondage, sexual slavery, bonded labour, child labour Association for the social, educational and charitable activities for the poor communities (ASHA) Rehabilitation programme for child labourers and working children Adarsa Rural Integrated Development Society (ARIDS) Upliftment and empowerment of suppressed, agonized and bonded victims of slavery Yayasan Puri Hijau Indonesia Development of crocodile farms in Mamberamo to assist victims of slavery Center for Study and Child Protection (PKPA) The protection and recovery of child victims of exploitation and trafficking through community-based drop-in centre in North Sumatra Omid-e-Mehr Foundation (Omid) Iran (Islamic Republic of Iran) Omid halfway house shelter Ruhama Ireland Support to victims of sex trafficking in Ireland Kav LaOved -- Worker's Hotline Monitoring Israeli governmental reform aimed at eliminating the "binding" of migrant workers to their employers Hotline for Migrant Workers Combating trafficking in persons WVP Kenya Kenya Streetwise leaders Caritas Lebanon Migrant Center (CLMC) Lebanon Protection and assistance for victims of trafficking in Lebanon Missing persons' families support centre Lithuania Victims of human trafficking integration through art therapy Women's lobby and action against violence and trafficking in women -- Open Gate Macedonia (former Yugoslav Republic of) Providing case-by-case reintegration assistance to trafficked persons in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Health Equity Initiatives Malaysia Health services, legal aid and policy advocacy for survivors of trafficking, forced labour and exploitation among migrants and refugees in Malaysia Alternantiva Pacificas Mexico Prevention of human trafficking and assistance and protection for victims of human trafficking Hope and Health Moldova Specialized reintegration support for mentally challenged victims and potential victims of trafficking Center for Human Rights and Development (CHRD) Mongolia Research on current situation on labour exploitation in Mongolia CWISH Nepal Strengthening domestic workers' rights movement in Nepal Dynamism in Social Development (DIDS) Child labourers and child servitude rehabilitation programme Planete Enfants Capacity-building for a rehabilitation centre for victims of human trafficking in Kathmandu, Nepal Rural Women's Creative Forum Awareness, advocacy and support Insan Dost Association (IDA) Pakistan Struggle against slavery through education The Volunteer's Social Welfare Organization (VSWO) Back to life -- promoting and protecting rights of female brick workers Association of Network for Community Empowerment (ANCE) Elimination of slavery through education Capital Humano y Social Alternativo (CHS Alternativo) Peru Identification and monitoring of cases of trafficking in children, adolescents and women for sexual and labour exploitation in two regions of Peru (Lima and Loreto) "Immaculate Mary", Association for Helping Girls and Women Poland The Hope -- integral help for the victims of trafficking in women CAVVHT (Center for Assistance to Victims of Violence and Human Trafficking) Prevention of labour and sexual exploitation of child migrants Centre Chrétien pour le Développement des Paysans en Milieu Rural C.C.D. P.R. Rwanda Action to reduce the economic slavery of pygmies of the chiefdom of Lwindi practised by other local communities Justice Acts Traffic proof Community Concern Society Sri Lanka Shelter for survivors of slavery Vivere Protection and assistance to victims of trafficking in human beings in the United Arab Emirates The League of Women Lawyers of Tajikistan Tajikistan Support for the prevention of negative consequences of forced marriage Duang Prateep Foundation Thailand Children's rights protection Young women's development project Children of the Forest La Colombe Togo Action to prevent the exploitation of girls working as waitresses in bars and restaurants in the prefectures of Vo and Yoto Foundation for Women's Solidarity Development of the capacity of the civil society organizations in Antalya and Ankara to identify victims of human trafficking Southern Refugee Legal Aid Network (SRLAN) United Kingdom Refuge for children fleeing conscription Coalition to Abolish Slavery and Trafficking (CAST) United States of America Seeds of renewal Polaris Project Washington, D.C., trafficking intervention programme Women's Self-Promotion Movement (WSPM) Zimbabwe Addressing the human suffering of women survivors of the political-economic crises in Mbare through capacity-building and economic empowerment Defensa de Niñas y Niños Internacional -- sección Argentina Argentina Protection of the rights of children and adolescents subjected to economic exploitation and slavery. "Aurora" POWER (Platform of Women s Empowerment and Rights) Promotion of human rights of poor girl-victims of slavery and their self-employment for liberation from slavish living without dignity Keoogo Burkina Faso Support for talibé children and girls who are victims of sexual exploitation Dagropass- << AMAGARANIKINDI >> Burundi Assistance to male-dominated women in rural Burundi Association des Amis de Kirundo/Burundi pour l'Education et le Développement Backstopping of action to combat modern forms of child slavery in Burundi Solidarité pour les Initiatives des Peuples Autochtones Pygmées Awareness-raising in the campaign against forced marriages and the sale of wives in Bunyakiri Alianza por Tus Derechos Strengthening community action and strategies to combat the commercial sexual exploitation of children in Limon Province Fundación ESPERANZA Ecuador Pilot experiment to promote awareness and prevent children and adolescents of the Kichwa people in Ecuador from being trafficked Inter-African Committee on Traditional Practices (IAC) Ghana Combating sexual slavery in Ghana Centre d'Action pour le Développement Strengthening of the halfway house for girls and psychological rehabilitation of children at risk in their family environment Association Zanmi Timoun Vocational training and support for income-generating activities for 30 adolescents who are victims of child domestic labour practices in the metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince Olmaa Pastoralist Development Programme (OLPADEP) Olmaa Girl-Child and Women Rights Empowerment Project Kyrgyz Committee for Human Rights (KCHR) Kyrgyzstan Forced labour of Kyrgyz migrants in Russia Rescue Alternatives Liberia (RAL) Liberia Anti-Child Labour Campaign through Alternatives Association for support and protection of individuals and groups under risk for happy childhood Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Center for economic empowering and psychosocial support of women at risk and victims of human trafficking -- Macedonian citizens Maiti Nepal Action against trafficking of children and women (ATCW) Agroforestry Basic Health and Cooperatives (ABC) Nepal Rehabilitation, training and reintegration of the survivors of trafficking, domestic violence and other forms of violence Rural Access Development and Research (RADAR) Elimination of (bonded labour) child labour and child servitude in additionally identified former Kamaiyas families Idia Renaissance Nigeria Proposal to train in vocational skills and empower 30 victims of human trafficking in Edo State, Nigeria Ama Asociacion Indigena del Peru Erradicando el trabajo forzoso en el sector forestal War-Affected Girls and Adults (WAGA) Sierra Leone Community mobilization against sexual exploitation and slavery (CASES) Labour Rights Promotion Network (LRP) Legal aid to end human trafficking Initiatives des Jeunes pour le Développement (IJD) Reintegration into society and the workforce of girls who have been sexually abused in the workplace National Foundation for Democracy and Human Rights in Uganda (NAFODU) Uganda Campaign against child abuse in south-western Uganda Platform for Labour Action (PLA) Strengthening community initiatives to reintegrate children working and living on the street in Lira district in northern Uganda Red Uruguaya de Autonomías Uruguay Campaign to eliminate trafficking in women: tools for the early detection of cases of trafficking for exploitation, commercial sexual exploitation of children and adolescents and tourism for sexual exploitation Blue Dragon Children's Foundation Viet Nam Safe and Sound 