%%%INTERNATIONAL TRADE|CLIMATE CHANGE|

Second Committee Summary record of the 36th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 19 November 2009, at 12 noon Chairperson: Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea) Contents Agenda item 51: Macroeconomic policy questions (continued) (a) International trade and development (continued) Agenda item 53: Sustainable development (continued) (d) Protection of global climate for present and future generations (continued) Agenda item 55: Globalization and interdependence (continued) (a) Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence (continued) Agenda item 52: Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the 2002 International Conference on Financing for Development and the 2008 Review Conference (continued) Agenda item 58: Operational activities for development (continued) (b) South-South cooperation for development (continued) The meeting was called to order at 12:20 p.m. (a) International trade and development (continued) (A/C.2/64/L.40) Draft resolution on international trade and development 1. Ms. Osman (Sudan), introducing draft resolution A/C.2/64/L.40 on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said that owing to the recent financial crisis, there had been a contraction of trade flows of about 10 per cent in 2009. While trade flow was slowly getting back on track, trade finance had not fully recovered. Those developments and concerns were reflected in the draft. The issue of protectionism was also addressed, as some developed countries had recently adopted measures affecting the exports of developing countries. The draft also reflected a commitment to an ambitious and balanced outcome of the Doha Round with development placed at its core. (d) Protection of global climate for present and future generations (continued) (A/C.2/64/L.39) Draft resolution on protection of global climate for present and future generations 2. Ms. Osman (Sudan), introducing draft resolution A/C.2/64/L.39 on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, said that it would be timely and convenient for the General Assembly to make a strong call for the expeditious completion of the work ongoing under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol. Developing countries, which were most affected by and least equipped to adapt to the effects of climate change, attached the greatest priority to achieving an ambitious and equitable agreed outcome under the Convention and enhanced commitments by developed countries under the Kyoto Protocol. The resolution maintained the principles of the Convention, in particular the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, and addressed such essential aspects of global action as the adaptation needs of developing countries, technology transfer and the provision of new, predictable financial and technical resources. (a) Role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence (continued) (A/C.2/64/L.41) Draft resolution on the role of the United Nations in promoting development in the context of globalization and interdependence 3. Ms. Osman (Sudan) introduced draft resolution A/C.2/64/L.41 on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. Draft decision on the fourth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development 4. The Chairperson invited the Committee to take action on the decision on the fourth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development, which had no programme budget implications. 5. Ms. de Laurentis (Secretary of the Committee) read out the text of the draft oral decision: "The General Assembly decides to postpone the holding of its fourth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development, originally scheduled for 23 and 24 November 2009, on the understanding that the exact dates are to be determined no later than 11 December 2009." 6. The draft decision on the fourth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development was adopted. 7. Ms. Becker (Sweden), speaking on behalf of the European Union, said that it could go along with the decision just adopted, but not without regrets. A situation where a high-level event had to be postponed at such short notice, thus reflecting on the credibility of the United Nations, was highly unfortunate. The European Union looked forward to receiving a written explanation from the Secretariat of what had gone wrong in preparing for the event, so that capitals could have a better understanding of why the event had had to be postponed. Assurances that the situation would not be repeated would also be welcome. The European Union was ready to engage in consultations on new dates for the event. The decision on the new dates must be carefully prepared to ensure the high quality of the meeting and its preparations. (b) South-South cooperation for development (continued)(A/C.2/64/L.3 and L.42) Draft resolutions on South-South cooperation 8. The Chairperson invited the Committee to take action on the draft resolution on South-South cooperation contained in A/C.2/64/L.42, submitted by Mr. Mohamed Chérif Diallo, Vice-Chairperson of the Committee, on the basis of informal consultations held on document A/C.2/64/L.3. He took it that the Committee was prepared to waive the 24-hour provision under rule 120 of the rules of procedure. 9. Draft resolution A/C.2/64/L.42 was adopted. 10. Draft resolution A/C.2/64/L.3 was withdrawn. The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m. 