%%%ELECTION OF OFFICERS|RADIATION EFFECTS|

Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) Summary record of the 27th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 11 June 2010, at 11.10 a.m. Chairman: Ms. Schroderus-Fox (Vice-Chairman) (Finland) Contents Agenda item 5: Election of the officers of the Main Committees Agenda item 29: Effects of atomic radiation In the absence of Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar), Ms. Schroderus-Fox (Finland), Vice-Chairman, took the Chair. The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m. Agenda item 5: Election of the officers of the Main Committees 1. The Chairman recalled that in accordance with rule 99 (a) of the rules of procedure, as amended by General Assembly resolutions 56/509, paragraph 2 (c), and 58/126, annex B, paragraph 9, all the Main Committees were required to elect a chairman and a full bureau at least three months before the opening of the session. 2. Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe) had been nominated for election to the office of Chairman for the sixty-fifth session. In the absence of further nominations and in accordance with rule 103 of the rules of procedure, she would take it that the Committee wished to elect Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe) Chairman. 3. Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe) was elected Chairman by acclamation. 4. The Chairman said that the Group of Eastern European States and the Group of Western European and Other States had nominated, respectively, Mr. Xhoi (Albania) and Mr. Windsor (Australia) for the posts of Vice-Chairmen and the Group of Asian States had nominated Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan) for the post of Rapporteur. 5. Mr. Xhoi (Albania) and Mr. Windsor (Australia) were elected Vice-Chairmen and Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan) was elected Rapporteur by acclamation. 6. The Chairman said that the election of the remaining Vice-Chairman, to be nominated by the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, would be held at a later date. Agenda item 29: Effects of atomic radiation (A/64/796) 7. The Chairman, recalling paragraph 13 of General Assembly resolution 64/85, said that the Chair of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation had sent a letter (A/64/796) to the President of the General Assembly, informing him that the session of the Committee originally scheduled to be held from 19 to 23 April 2010 had been rescheduled to be held from 16 to 20 August 2010 as a result of flight disruptions following the volcanic eruptions in Iceland. In view of the late date of the submission of the report on the fifty-seventh session of the Committee, she suggested that consideration of that report should be deferred until the main part of the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly, on the understanding that the question of revised membership would be considered through the Fourth Committee resolution on the relevant agenda item. 8. It was so decided. 9. Mr. Andrabi (Pakistan) said it was regrettable that the necessary postponement of the fifty-seventh session of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation would inevitably result in the Fourth Committee's inability to meet the deadline specified in paragraph 14 of General Assembly resolution 64/85 regarding the question of the former Committee's membership, including the potential new membership of Pakistan and five other observer States. Moreover, he did not agree with the point raised in the letter from the Chair of the Committee to the President of the General Assembly relating to the Committee's wish for its membership to remain at the present size. That view, which he understood had been echoed by the Chairman of the Fourth Committee recently in Vienna, was contrary to resolution 64/85: a decision on the number of members could be taken only by the General Assembly on the basis of criteria that were applicable to both present and future members. He supported the Chairman's suggestion to defer consideration of the report on the fifty-seventh session of the Scientific Committee until the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly, on the understanding that the issue of revised membership, including that of the six observer States referred to in resolution 64/85, would be considered through the Fourth Committee resolution on agenda item 29, during the main part of the General Assembly. 10. The Chairman said that the Committee took note of the statement made by the representative of Pakistan. The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m. 