%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|SUPPORT ACCOUNTS|

Sixty-fourth session Fifth Committee Agenda item 146 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Proposed budgetary levels for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 Note by the Secretary-General 1. The budgetary information contained in the annex to the present note is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 49/233 A, section I, paragraph 8, in which the Secretary-General was requested to submit twice a year to the Assembly for information purposes a table summarizing the proposed budgetary requirements of each peacekeeping operation for the period from 1 July to 30 June, by category and with the aggregate total resource requirement. 2. The annex to the present note reflects the proposed budget levels for peacekeeping operations, the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011, with the exception of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The estimates for those two missions will be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session, owing to special circumstances. Proposed budgets for peacekeeping operations, the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 Category MINURCATa MINURSO MINUSTAHb MONUC UNAMID UNDOF UNFICYP 1. Military and police personnel costs 2. Civilian personnel costs 3. Operational requirements Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Ground transportation Air transportation Naval transportation Communications Information technology Medical Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment Quick-impact projects Gross requirements 4. Staff assessment income Net requirements 5. Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total requirements Abbreviations: MINURCAT: United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad; MINURSO: United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara; MINUSTAH: United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti; MONUC: United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; UNAMID: African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; UNDOF: United Nations Disengagement Observer Force; UNFICYP: United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus; UNIFIL: United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon; UNMIK: United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo; UNMIL: United Nations Mission in Liberia; UNMIS: United Nations Mission in the Sudan; UNMIT: United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste; UNOCI: United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire; AMISOM: African Union Mission in Somalia; UNLB: United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy. a The commitment authority proposal for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2010 will be submitted to the General Assembly, subject to any decision the Security Council may take in May 2010. Budget estimates for 2010/11 will be submitted to the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session. b Due to force majeure circumstances on the ground, budget estimates for 2010/11 will be submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session. A commitment authority proposal for the period 1 July to 31 December 2010 will be submitted to the Assembly at the second part of its resumed sixty-fourth session. UNIFIL UNMIK UNMIL UNMIS UNMIT UNOCI Support of AMISOM Subtotal UNLB Support account Total 