%%%PROGRAMME BUDGETING|FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS|STAFFING|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|CONSTRUCTION|OFFICE BUILDINGS|PROJECT MANAGEMENT|LIABILITY|HEALTH INSURANCE|GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE|WOMEN IN ARMED CONFLICTS|GENDER EQUALITY|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|HUMAN RIGHTS ADVANCEMENT|HUMAN RIGHTS MONITORING|TORTURE AND OTHER CRUEL TREATMENT|CRIMINAL COURTS|SIERRA LEONE|GOOD OFFICES|SPECIAL MISSIONS|STAFF SECURITY|ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE|INTERNATIONAL CIVIL SERVICE|INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY|COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY|BUDGET PERFORMANCE|PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES|CONTINGENCY FUNDS|

Sixty-fifth session Agenda item 129 Programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 Draft report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Ms. Nicole Ann Mannion (Ireland) I. Introduction 1. The previous recommendation made by the Fifth Committee to the General Assembly under agenda item 129 appears in the report of the Committee contained in document A/65/646. In the report, the Committee provided its recommendation on the conditions of service and compensation for members of the International Court of Justice and judges and ad litem judges of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The present document provides the recommendations of the Committee on other questions relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011. 2. The Fifth Committee considered the item at its 6th to 8th, 12th, 13th, 17th to 20th, 22nd, 23rd and 25th to 27th meetings, on 12, 15, 20 and 29 October, 4, 19 and 29 November and 2, 6, 13, 15 to 17 and 23 December 2010. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.5/65/SR.6-8, 12, 13, 17-20, 22, 23 and 25-27). 3. Section II of the present report contains a summary of the recommendations made by the Fifth Committee during the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly on the revised estimates submitted by the Secretary-General and on the programme budget implications of resolutions adopted by the Assembly, either on the recommendation of its Main Committees or in respect of items considered in plenary meeting. 4. Section III contains a summary of the questions, in particular those relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, considered by the Fifth Committee that led to the adoption of specific decisions to be recommended for adoption by the General Assembly. 5. Section IV contains the recommendations of the Fifth Committee. II. Programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 6. In its resolutions 64/244 A-C, the General Assembly approved budget appropriations for the biennium 2010-2011 in the amount of $5,156,029,100 and income estimates in the amount of $554,171,800. By its resolutions 64/260 and 64/288, further appropriations were approved in the amount of $2,932,100 and additional income estimates, in the amount of $263,700. 7. Recommendations of the Fifth Committee during the current session of the General Assembly on revised estimates submitted by the Secretary-General, as well as on the programme budget implications of resolutions adopted by the Assembly under items considered by other Main Committees or in respect of items considered in plenary meeting, have resulted in a net increase in the approved level of appropriations in the amount of $208,273,500 and a net increase in the approved income estimates in the amount of $38,536,300. 8. The revised estimates of expenditure and income approved by the Fifth Committee and the financial implications of resolutions recommended by other Main Committees and subsequently by the General Assembly are indicated, by expenditure and income section, in the following table: (United States dollars) Section Amount approved in resolutions 64/244 A-C, 64/260 and 64/288 Increase (decrease) Revised appropriation A. Expenditure sections Overall policymaking, direction and coordination (a) First performance report (A/65/589, A/65/604, A/C.5/65/SR.22) (b) Revised estimates for the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict (A/64/763, A/64/7/Add.23, A/C.5/65/SR.7) (c) Administration of justice at the United Nations (A/65/373 and Corr.1, A/C.5/65/SR.15) Total General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council at its twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth sessions (A/65/333 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1, A/65/548 and Add.1, A/C.5/65/SR.19) (d) PBI: Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action (A/C.5/65/12, A/65/627, A/C.5/65/SR.25) (e) PBI: Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases (A/C.5/65/13, A/C.5/65/SR.26) Political affairs Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council, and strengthening the Department of Political Affairs (A/65/328 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and 2, Add.2 and Corr.1, Add.3 and Corr.1 and Add.4 and 5, A/65/161 and Corr.1, A/65/602, A/C.5/65/SR.23)a Disarmament Peacekeeping operations Revised security management framework and revised estimates relating to a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations (A/65/320 and Corr.1, A/65/575, A/C.5/65/SR.23) Peaceful uses of outer space International Court of Justice Legal affairs Economic and social affairs Revised proposal for the use of regular budget resources for the normative support functions of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women (A/65/531, A/65/593, A/C.5/65/SR.20) Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development Trade and development International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO Environment Human settlements International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice Economic and social development in Africa Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific Economic development in Europe Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean Economic and social development in Western Asia Regular programme of technical cooperation Human rights Revised estimates resulting from the increase in the membership of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (A/65/400, A/65/506, A/C.5/65/SR.8) Revised estimates resulting from the increase in the number of members of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment pursuant to article 5 of the Optional Protocol (A/65/500, A/65/574, A/C.5/65/SR.17) International protection, durable solutions and assistance to refugees Palestine refugees Humanitarian assistance Public information PBI: Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade (A/C.5/65/11 and Corr.1, A/65/626, A/C.5/65/SR.25) 28A. Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management 28B. Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts 28C. Office of Human Resources Management 28D. Office of Central Support Services Status of implementation of the information and communications technology strategy for the United Nations Secretariat (A/65/491, A/65/576, A/C.5/65/SR.18) 28E. Administration, Geneva 28F. Administration, Vienna 28G. Administration, Nairobi Office of Information and Communications Technology Internal oversight Jointly financed administrative activities Special expenses Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance Security and safety Development Account Staff assessment (f) Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council, and strengthening the Department of Political Affairs (A/65/161 and Corr.1, A/65/602, A/C.5/65/SR.23) (g) Revised security management framework and revised estimates relating to a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations (A/65/320 and Corr.1, A/65/575, A/C.5/65/SR.23) (h) (i) United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) Revised proposal for the use of regular budget resources for the normative support functions of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) (A/65/531, A/65/593, A/C.5/65/SR.20) Grand total, expenditure estimates B. Income sections Income from staff assessment Total, income section 1 General income Services to the public Total, income sections 2 and 3 Grand total, income sections Abbreviation: PBI, statement submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly on programme budget implications. a See paragraph 35 of the present report for details on the distribution of the amounts approved by the General Assembly for 2011 in respect of special political missions. 9. At its 27th meeting, on 23 December 2010, the Committee considered the revised estimates of expenditure and income to be recommended for approval by the General Assembly for the biennium 2010-2011, as well as the financing of the appropriations for the year 2011. The Committee took the following action in that regard: (a) It approved the revised budget appropriations for the biennium 2010-2011 (see para. 66, draft resolution IIA); (b) It approved the revised income estimates for the biennium 2010-2011 (see para. 66, draft resolution IIB); (c) It approved the draft resolution on the financing of the appropriations for the year 2011 (see para. 66, draft resolution IIC). III. Consideration of questions relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 Administrative and financial implications arising from the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board 10. The Committee considered this question at its 16th meeting, on 16 November. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General (A/C.5/65/3) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/567). 11. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Administrative and financial implications arising from the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. I), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. I). The enterprise resource planning project (Umoja), and International Public Sector Accounting Standards 12. The Committee considered this question at its 18th meeting, on 29 November. It had before it the second progress report of the Secretary-General on the enterprise resource planning project, which includes revised estimates under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 and under the support account for peacekeeping operations (A/65/389), the third progress report of the Secretary-General on the adoption of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards by the United Nations (A/65/308) and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/576 and A/65/577). 13. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "The enterprise resource planning project (Umoja), and International Public Sector Accounting Standards" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. II), following consultations coordinated by the representative of Singapore. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. II). Overseas property management and construction projects in progress, and revised estimates under section 20, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 relating to the relocation of the subregional headquarters in Mexico 14. The Committee considered this question at its 8th meeting, on 20 October. It had before it the reports of the Secretary-General on overseas property management and construction projects in progress (A/65/351) and the revised estimates under section 20, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, relating to the relocation of the subregional headquarters in Mexico (A/65/385) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/518). 15. At its 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Overseas property management and construction projects in progress and revised estimates under section 20, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 relating to the relocation of the subregional headquarters in Mexico" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. III), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Romania, Vice-Chair of the Committee. At the same meeting the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. III). After-service health insurance: medical and dental reserve funds 16. The Committee considered this question at its 8th meeting, on 20 October. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General entitled "After-service health insurance: medical and dental reserve funds" (A/65/342) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/507). 17. At its 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "After-service health insurance; medical and dental reserve funds" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. IV), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Kenya. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. IV). Revised estimates under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 relating to the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict 18. The Committee considered this question at its 7th meeting, on 15 October. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 relating to the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict (A/64/763) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/64/7/Add.23). 19. At its 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revised estimates under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 relating to the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. V), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Costa Rica. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. V). Revised proposal for the use of regular budget resources for the normative support functions of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 20. The Committee considered this question at its 20th meeting, on 6 December. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the revised proposal for the use of regular budget resources for the normative support functions of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (A/65/531) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/593). 21. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revised proposal for the use of regular budget resources for the normative support functions of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. VI), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. VI). Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 2010 22. The Committee considered this question at its 8th meeting, on 20 October. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 2010 (A/65/319) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/505). 23. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 2010" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. VII), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Pakistan, Vice-Chair of the Committee. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. VII). Revised estimates arising from the expansion of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families 24. The Committee considered this question at its 13th meeting, on 4 November. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates arising from the expansion of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (A/65/85) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/541). 25. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revised estimates arising from the expansion of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. VIII), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Pakistan, Vice-Chair of the Committee. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. VIII). Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council at its twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth sessions 26. The Committee considered this question at its 19th meeting, on 2 December. It had before it the reports of the Secretary-General (A/65/333 and Corr.1 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1) and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/548 and Add.1). 27. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council at its twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth sessions" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. IX), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Pakistan, Vice-Chair of the Committee. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. IX). Revised estimates under section 23, Human rights, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 resulting from the increase in the membership of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 28. The Committee considered this question at its 8th meeting, on 20 October. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates under section 23, Human rights, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 resulting from the increase in the membership of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (A/65/400) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/506). 29. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revised estimates under section 23, Human rights, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 resulting from the increase in the membership of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. X), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Pakistan, Vice-Chair of the Committee. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. X). Revised estimates resulting from the increase in the number of members of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment pursuant to article 5 of the Optional Protocol 30. The Committee considered this question at its 17th meeting, on 19 November. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates resulting from the increase in the number of members of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment pursuant to article 5 of the Optional Protocol (A/65/500) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/574). 31. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revised estimates resulting from the increase in the number of members of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment pursuant to article 5 of the Optional Protocol" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. XI), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Pakistan and Vice-Chair of the Committee. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. XI). Request for a subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone 32. The Committee considered this question at its 22nd meeting, on 13 December. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on the request for a subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone (A/65/570) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/603). 33. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Request for a subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. XII), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Romania, Vice-Chair of the Committee. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. XII). Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council, and strengthening the Department of Political Affairs 34. The Committee considered this question at its 23rd meeting, on 15 December. It had before it the reports of the Secretary-General on strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs (A/65/161 and Corr.1) and on the estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council (A/65/328 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and 2, Add.2 and Corr.1, Add.3 and Corr.1 and Add.4 and 5) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/602). 35. The table below reflects amounts approved by the General Assembly for 2011 in respect of special political missions. (Thousands of United States dollars) Cluster/Mission Amount I. Thematic cluster I: special and personal envoys, special advisers and personal representatives of the Secretary-General Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Myanmar Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Cyprus Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) United Nations Representative on the International Advisory and Monitoring Board of the Development Fund for Iraq Subtotal I II. Thematic cluster II: sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels Monitoring Group on Somalia Panel of Experts on Liberia Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo Panel of Experts on the Sudan Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities Support to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate Subtotal II III. Thematic cluster III: political offices, peacebuilding support offices and integrated offices United Nations Office for West Africa United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau United Nations Political Office for Somalia United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone United Nations support to the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi United Nations Mission in Nepal Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon United Nations Office for Central Africa Subtotal III United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq Subtotal IV Total (net of staff assessment) Less: Balance from undistributed special political missions provision Net additional appropriation required 36. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council, and strengthening the Department of Political Affairs" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. XIII), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of the Dominican Republic. 37. At the same meeting, the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran orally proposed an amendment to the draft resolution by which a new paragraph would be inserted after operative paragraph 2, to read: "Decides not to approve the requested posts and financial resources for the Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran". 38. Also at the same meeting, the representatives of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and France requested a recorded vote on the proposed amendment and the representative of Cuba made a statement supporting the amendment proposed by the Islamic Republic of Iran. 39. At the same meeting, the Committee rejected, by a recorded vote of 79 to 11, with 36 abstentions, the proposed amendment to section XIII of draft resolution A/C.5/65/L.22. The voting was as follows: In favour: Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Myanmar, Nicaragua, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe. Against: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay. Abstaining: Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea, Gabon, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Senegal, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia. 40. The representative of Belgium, speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union, made a statement in explanation of vote after the vote. 41. At the same meeting, the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela also orally proposed an amendment to section XIII of the draft resolution concerning the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, by which a new paragraph would be inserted, to read: "Requests the Secretary-General to review the logical framework of the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, taking into account the concerns expressed on the variation of the narratives as contained in paragraphs 44, 46, 50, 52, 53, 56-59, 61 and 63 of the report of the Secretary-General (A/65/328/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2) from the strategic framework of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide in the report of the Secretary-General A/64/349/Add.1, in order to ensure that its programmatic aspects and resource requirements are consistent with the legislative mandates of relevant intergovernmental bodies, and to issue a technical review and report thereon to the General Assembly no later than the early part of its first resumed part of its sixty-fifth session, based on the logical framework approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/245 as contained in the report of the Secretary-General A/64/349/Add.1;". 42. Also at the same meeting, the representatives of Canada and the Netherlands requested a recorded vote on the amendment proposed by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. 43. The representatives of Cuba, Nicaragua and Belgium (speaking on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the European Union) made a statement in explanation of vote before the vote. 44. At the same meeting, the Committee also rejected, by a recorded vote of 68 to 17, with 51 abstentions, the proposed amendment to section XIII of draft resolution A/C.5/65/L.22. The voting was as follows: Algeria, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Lao People's Democratic Republic, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritania, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Qatar, Solomon Islands, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe. Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay. Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, China, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Malaysia, Mali, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Oman, Philippines, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa, Suriname, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia. 45. At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba requested that a recorded vote be taken on section XIII as a whole. 46. The representatives of Brazil, Nicaragua and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela made statements in explanation of vote before the vote. 47. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted section XIII as a whole, by a recorded vote of 130 to 9, with 4 abstentions. The voting was as follows: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam. Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Myanmar, Nicaragua, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe. Solomon Islands, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen. Revised security management framework and revised estimates under section 5, Peacekeeping operations, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 relating to a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations 48. The Committee considered this question at its 23rd meeting, on 15 December. It had before it the reports of the Secretary-General on revised security management framework and revised estimates under Section 5, Peacekeeping operations, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 relating to a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations (A/65/320 and Corr.1) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/575). 49. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revised security management framework and revised estimates under section 5, Peacekeeping operations, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 relating to a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. XIV), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of the Dominican Republic. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. XIV). Financial implications relating to the administration of justice at the United Nations 50. The Committee considered this question at its 15th meeting, on 10 November. 51. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Financial implications relating to the administration of justice at the United Nations" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. XV), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Mexico. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. XV). Administrative and financial implications of the decisions and recommendations contained in the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 2010 52. The Committee considered this question at its 10th meeting, on 26 October. It had before it the statement submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly (A/65/493) on the administrative and financial implications of the decisions and recommendations contained in the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 2010 (A/65/30) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/532). 53. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Administrative and financial implications of the decisions and recommendations contained in the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 2010" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. XVI), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Argentina. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. XVI). Information and communications technology 54. The Committee considered this question at its 18th meeting, on 29 November. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General on status of implementation of the information and communications technology strategy for the United Nations Secretariat (A/65/491) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/576). 55. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "Information and communications technology" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. XVII), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Singapore. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. XVII). First performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 56. The Committee considered this question at its 22nd meeting, on 13 December. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General (A/65/589) and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/65/604). 57. At the 27th meeting, on 23 December, the Chair of the Committee introduced a draft resolution entitled "First performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011" (A/C.5/65/L.22, sect. XVIII), following informal consultations coordinated by the representative of Ghana. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. XVIII). Contingency fund 58. The Committee considered this question at its 27th meeting, on 23 December. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General (A/C.5/65/14). At the same meeting the Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that it note that a balance of $22,408,100 remained in the contingency fund (see para. 66, draft resolution I, sect. XIX). 59. At the same meeting, the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran requested that a recorded vote be taken on draft resolution A/C.5/65/L.22 as a whole. 60. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted, by a recorded vote of 144 to 1, with 3 abstentions, draft resolution A/C.5/65/L.22 as a whole. The voting was as follows: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Iran (Islamic Republic of). Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Myanmar, Syrian Arab Republic. 61. The representatives of Israel and Cuba made statements in explanation of vote after the vote. United Nations Fund for International Partnerships 62. The Committee considered this question at its 6th meeting, on 12 October. It had before it the report of the Secretary-General (A/65/347). 63. At the 6th meeting, on 12 October, the Chair of the Committee orally introduced a draft decision entitled "United Nations Fund for International Partnerships" (see A/C.5/65/SR.6). At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote (see para. 67, draft decision I). Capital master plan 64. The Committee considered this question at its 27th meeting, on 23 December. It had before it a draft decision entitled "Capital master plan" (A/C.5/65/L.10). 65. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote (see para. 67, draft decision II). Recommendations of the Fifth Committee 66. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolutions: Draft resolution I Questions relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 The General Assembly, I Administrative and financial implications arising from the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the administrative and financial implications arising from the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; II Revised estimates under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, and under the support account for peacekeeping operations (enterprise resource planning project (Umoja) and International Public Sector Accounting Standards) Recalling section II of its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006, sections II and V of its resolution 63/262 of 24 December 2008, and its resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009, Having considered the second progress report of the Secretary-General on the enterprise resource planning project and revised estimates under section 28A, Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, and under the support account for peacekeeping operations, and the third progress report of the Secretary-General on the adoption of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards by the United Nations, as well as the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;, 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, subject to the provisions of the present resolution; A. Enterprise resource planning project 3. Recalls paragraph 113 of its resolution 64/243, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to make efforts to deploy the enterprise resource planning project, Umoja, on the basis of lower-cost options, while also looking for opportunities to reduce cost projections, without altering the approach approved by the Assembly; 4. Urges the Secretary-General to make every effort to fill the vacancies in the enterprise resource planning project team as a matter of priority and to explore all possibilities for expediting the process, so as to minimize any adverse impact on project implementation; 5. Stresses that the temporary posts related to the implementation of Umoja are limited to the duration of that project; 6. Decides not to appropriate the amount of 12,416,300 United States dollars, in the light of the subsequent proposal of the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 18 of his first performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011; B. International Public Sector Accounting Standards 7. Notes the continued dependency between the timeline for International Public Sector Accounting Standards implementation and the enterprise resource planning project, Umoja; 8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards at the United Nations is completed no later than 2014; III Overseas property management and construction projects in progress, and revised estimates relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 under section 20, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, related to the relocation of the subregional headquarters in Mexico Recalling its resolution 56/270 of 27 March 2002, section IV of its resolution 58/272 of 23 December 2003, sections IX and X of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007, section I of its resolution 63/263 of 24 December 2008, and its resolution 64/243 of 24 December 2009, Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on overseas property management and construction projects in progress and on revised estimates relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 under section 20, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, related to the relocation of the subregional headquarters in Mexico, as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;7,8 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 3. Requests the Secretary-General to expeditiously assess the status of conference facilities at the Economic Commission for Africa, in particular Africa Hall and Conference Room 1, to ensure that they are in strict compliance with the highest international standards for conference facilities, and to report thereon in the context of his next annual progress report on the construction of additional conference facilities at the Commission; 4. Welcomes the recent efforts of the Secretary-General to utilize additional funding arrangements to ensure that the project for the construction of additional office facilities at the Commission proceeds as originally designed, and requests the Secretary-General to provide regular briefings to Member States on the implementation of the project; 5. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount up to 1,758,800 United States dollars under section 20, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 and to report, in the context of his second performance report for the biennium 2010-2011, on actual expenditure incurred; IV Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled "After-service health insurance: medical and dental reserve funds" 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 3. Notes the significant variation in the levels of reserve balances maintained for the United Nations medical and dental reserve funds mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General, and therefore requests the Secretary-General to establish guidelines to ensure greater consistency in future in this regard; 4. Takes note of the information provided by the Secretariat that it will continue to use premium holidays to distribute surpluses in excess of six to seven months of costs in the CIGNA Dental, Aetna and Van Breda reserve funds and that, in relation to the Medical Insurance Plan reserve fund, this and/or other methods will be used to distribute surpluses, given the high number of surpluses available; 5. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in future performance reports on the budget, information regarding the medical and dental reserve funds, the number of months that premium holidays have been applied during the budgetary period, other surplus fund distribution methods used, and the financial impact on the budgets; 6. Recalls paragraph 3 of its resolution 64/241 of 24 December 2009, and requests the Secretary-General to include, in his report to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, an analysis of options for the judicious use of reserves in excess of reasonable industry and United Nations standards, in the context of the forthcoming analysis of pay-as-you-go and long-term financing strategies for after-service health insurance liabilities; V Revised estimates relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 for the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 for the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict 2. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters, and reaffirms the role of the Committee in carrying out a thorough analysis of and approving human and financial resources and policies, with a view to ensuring the full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of policies in this regard; 3. Also reaffirms its role with regard to the structure of the Secretariat, and stresses that proposals to amend the overall departmental structure, as well as the format of the programme budget and the biennial programme plan, are subject to its review and prior approval; 4. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 5. Recalls paragraph 7 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and expresses concern about the apparent failure of the Secretary-General to follow the procedure for establishing posts funded through extrabudgetary resources, as set forth in General Assembly resolution 35/217; 6. Recognizes the strategic role played by senior-level staff in the work of the Organization, and in this regard recalls paragraph 33 of its resolution 64/243 and requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Assembly with comprehensive information on all decisions involving established and temporary high-level posts, including equivalent positions financed from the regular budget and from extrabudgetary resources; 7. Expresses its concern over the lack of detailed analysis presented by the Secretary-General with regard to costing the establishment of a website for the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict; 8. Requests the Secretary-General to take all steps necessary to ensure the maximum level of cooperation, coordination and integration of efforts in order to avoid duplication and overlaps between the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict and other relevant entities, including the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, and also requests the Secretary-General to report on his efforts in this regard in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013; 9. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide detailed information for the team of experts on the functions and specific types of funding of the posts and positions used, and to report thereon in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013; 10. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the most cost-effective, timely and secure services, as well as support-related issues, are considered in the creation of a website for the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict; 11. Recalls paragraph 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the Secretary-General to consider, as appropriate, through the relevant offices, including the Department of Public Information and the Office of Information and Communications Technology, the cost-effective and timely provision of such services in-house; 12. Decides to establish one Under-Secretary-General post and one D-1, one P-5, one P-4, two P-3 and three General Service (Other level) posts for the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, effective 1 January 2011, under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011; 13. Also decides to appropriate a total amount of 1,724,900 United States dollars, at 2010-2011 initial rates, under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, comprising 1,127,000 dollars under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, 462,900 dollars under section 28D, Office of Central Support Services, and 135,000 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment; VI Recalling its resolution 64/289 of 21 July 2010, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the revised proposal for the use of regular budget resources for the normative support functions of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWomen), 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15 subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 3. Welcomes the establishment of UN-Women as an important ongoing effort by the Organization to strengthen its system-wide capacity to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of women and to lead, coordinate and promote the accountability of the United Nations system in its work; 4. Stresses the importance of the fundamental principles of universality and national ownership for the work of UN-Women; 5. Requests the Secretary-General to take all steps necessary to ensure the maximum level of cooperation, coordination and integration of efforts in order to avoid duplication and overlaps between UN-Women and other relevant entities, including the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, and also requests the Secretary-General to report on his efforts in this regard in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013; 6. Recalls paragraph 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and encourages UN-Women to make the best possible use of human and financial resources at its disposal, without undermining the implementation of mandated programmes and activities; 7. Notes that, for the biennium 2010-2011, 1.4 per cent of the total estimated budget for UN-Women is proposed to be financed from the regular budget, and that most of the senior management posts, at the Assistant Secretary-General and Director levels included in the organizational chart were proposed to be funded through voluntary contributions; 8. Requests the Secretary-General to further elaborate, in the proposed programme budget for 2012-2013, the normative intergovernmental processes undertaken by UN-Women to implement its mandate, as referred to in paragraph 75 of its resolution 64/289, in order to specify whether the activities of UN-Women, including administrative, evaluation, coordination, research and analytical policy functions, would support or be considered normative intergovernmental processes, operational intergovernmental processes and operational activities, or a combination thereof; 9. Also requests the Secretary-General to reflect, in the proposed programme budget for 2012-2013, the necessary budget allocation resulting from the information requested in paragraph 8 above so as to ensure an appropriate source of funding of the financial resources required, including the funding of senior-level posts; 10. Recalls its resolution 58/269 of 23 December 2003, and requests the Secretary-General to submit a revised strategic framework for the bienniums 2010-2011 and 2012-2013 reflecting the revision of the programmatic aspects arising from the creation of UN-Women through the Committee for Programme and Coordination, for consideration by the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session; 11. Emphasizes the importance of adequate and transparent financing for UN-Women for the effective discharge of its mandate; 12. Approves the use of a grant arrangement pertaining to the regular budget portion of UN-Women, as proposed in paragraphs 19 to 21 of the report of the Secretary-General, and decides that posts financed by the grant from the regular budget shall be requested on a post-by-post basis in future regular budget proposals; 13. Stresses that the use of the grant modality should not lessen in any way the requirement for detailed reporting to the Assembly on the utilization of regular budget resources; 14. Reiterates its decision that the composition and selection of staff of the Entity shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, with due regard to geographical representation and gender balance; 15. Decides to establish three new posts, one Under-Secretary-General, one D-2 and one General Service (Other level), under section 37, UN-Women, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011; 16. Also decides to approve an additional amount of 430,100 United States dollars, at 2010-2011 initial rates, for the biennium 2010-2011 under section 37, UN-Women (367,800 dollars), and section 36, Staff assessment (62,300 dollars), to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011; 17. Further decides that the additional amount of 430,100 dollars would represent a charge against the contingency fund for the biennium 2010-2011; VII Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session of 2010 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;16 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;17 3. Approves the redeployment of one P-5 post of Chief, Strategic Planning Unit, from subprogramme 2, Policy and trend analysis, to executive direction and management, as Chief, Independent Evaluation Unit, under section 16, International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice; VIII Revised estimates arising in relation to the expansion of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates arising in relation to the expansion of the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;18 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;19 IX Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council at its twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth sessions and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;20 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,21 subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 3. Takes note of paragraph 7 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on revised estimates resulting from resolutions and decisions adopted by the Human Rights Council at its fifteenth session and decides to provide, under general temporary assistance, one P-4, one P-3, one P-2 and one General Service (Other level) posts, as well as to provide for consultant services for the duration of nine months in connection with the adoption of Council resolution 15/23 on the elimination of discrimination against women; 4. Also takes note of paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;22 X Revised estimates under section 23, Human rights, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, resulting from the increase in the membership of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates under section 23, Human rights, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, resulting from the increase in the membership of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;23 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;24 3. Decides to establish one P-3 Human Rights Officer post, effective 1 January 2011, to assist the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities with the examination of reports of States parties under section 23, Human rights; 4. Also decides to approve the amount of 309,100 United States dollars, at 2010-2011 initial rates, under section 23, Human rights, and the amount of 10,600 dollars, at 2010-2011 initial rates, under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, as a charge against the contingency fund for the biennium 2010-2011; XI Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates resulting from the increase in the number of members of the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment pursuant to article 5 of the Optional Protocol 3. Decides to establish six temporary posts for the year 2011, within existing resources, as follows: (a) two P-5 and two P-4 posts, under section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management, and (b) one P-3 and one General Service (Other level) posts, under section 23, Human rights, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the expenditures incurred, in the context of his second performance report; 4. Also decides to approve an amount of 791,800 United States dollars, at 2010-2011 initial rates, for non-post resources, under section 28E, Administration, Geneva (36,600 dollars), and section 23, Human rights (755,200 dollars), as a charge against the contingency fund for the biennium 2010-2011; XII Recalling its resolution 58/284 of 8 April 2004, section VII of its resolution 59/276 of 23 December 2004, and section II of its resolution 59/294 of 22 June 2005, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the request for a subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone 3. Takes note of paragraphs 15 and 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee; 4. Notes, as an exceptional measure, the funding requirement for the Special Court for Sierra Leone of up to 12,239,344 United States dollars, covering the periods from 1 January to 31 December 2011 and from 1 January to 29 February 2012, to supplement the voluntary financial resources of the Court; 5. Authorizes the Secretary-General, as an exceptional measure, to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed 9,882,594 dollars to supplement the voluntary financial resources of the Special Court, for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2011; 6. Decides that the amount referred to in paragraph 5 above is authorized on the understanding that: (a) Any regular budget funds appropriated for the Special Court will be refunded to the United Nations at the time of the liquidation of the Court, should sufficient voluntary contributions be received; (b) The United Nations Secretariat and the Management Committee, the Registrar and other senior officials of the Special Court will intensify their efforts to fund the activities of the Court through voluntary contributions; 7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution; XIII Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council, and the implementation of Assembly resolution 63/261 on the strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs Recalling its resolution 64/244 A and section VI of its resolution 64/245 of 24 December 2009, and section IV of its resolution 64/260 of 29 March 2010, Recalling also its resolution 63/261 of 24 December 2008 on the strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs, Recalling further the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation, and the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, Reaffirming the role of the Assembly and its relevant intergovernmental and expert bodies, within their respective mandates, in planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation, Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council and on the implementation of Assembly resolution 63/261 on the strengthening of the Department of Political Affairs, as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 3. Welcomes the continuing efforts by the Department of Political Affairs to fulfil the requirements of resolution 63/261, and in this regard requests that further efforts be made to ensure the full implementation thereof; 4. Regrets the recurrent late introduction of the reports on the matter under consideration, which hinders their proper examination by the Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to submit their reports in a timely manner; 5. Reaffirms paragraphs 38, 39, 40 and 41 of resolution 64/243 and recalls paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to provide the information referred to therein for inclusion in future proposed budgets for special political missions; 6. Stresses that budget presentations for special political missions should consistently include information on actual and budgeted vacancy rates, and resource requirement changes, a clear description of the functions of new positions proposed, and organization charts, including current and proposed posts and grade levels, and should indicate whether a position proposed reflects the resubmission of a previous request; 7. Recalls its resolution 61/279 of 29 June 2007, its resolution 62/250 of 20 June 2008 and section VI of its resolution 64/245, as well as paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the Secretary-General to conduct a thorough review of the current funding and backstopping arrangements for the special political missions with a view to identifying possible alternatives, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session; 8. Stresses the need for greater transparency in the presentation of resources for travel and consultancies under cluster II so that the Assembly may make well-informed decisions regarding the resource requirements for special political missions; 9. Takes note of paragraph 26 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals for more cost-effective support arrangements for all special political missions in the context of his next report on those missions; 10. Encourages increased cooperation between and among missions operating in the same geographic location with a view to achieving efficiency and cost-effectiveness; 11. Takes note of paragraph 43 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and decides to approve the three positions for the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, as proposed by the Secretary-General; 12. Requests the Secretary-General to make additional efforts to ensure that support sought in the form of consultancies is not already available in-house or in situ; 13. Notes the intention of the Secretary-General to establish a support office in Kuwait for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, and requests the Secretary-General to explore possibilities for cost-sharing between the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and to report to the General Assembly in the context of his proposed budget for the biennium 2012-2013; 14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit resource requirements for 2011 for the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi or its successor for consideration by the Assembly at the first part of its resumed sixty-fifth session; 15. Notes that the interim funding provided for the United Nations Integrated Office should not affect the contractual conditions of the staff; 16. Approves budgets totalling 643,094,800 United States dollars gross (631,162,600 dollars net) for the twenty-nine special political missions authorized by the Assembly and/or the Security Council, as listed in table 1 of the report of the Secretary-General; 17. Decides to appropriate, under the procedures provided for in paragraph 11 of annex I to resolution 41/213 of 19 December 1986, an amount of 200,689,200 dollars under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011; 18. Also decides to appropriate an amount of 11,932,100 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011; XIV Revised security management framework and revised estimates relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 under section 5, Peacekeeping operations, related to a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations Recalling its resolutions 64/243, 64/244 and 64/245 of 24 December 2009, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the revised security management framework and revised estimates relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 under section 5, Peacekeeping operations, related to a strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations, 3. Reaffirms that the Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members, and notes with concern that, during the general debate of the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session, the movement of some heads of delegation on the United Nations premises was restricted, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that due protocol and equal treatment are uniformly accorded to all heads of delegation; 4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that access for heads of delegation and their respective vehicles to the United Nations premises is not unduly restricted, in particular during the general debate; 5. Takes note of the revised framework for accountability for the United Nations security management system; 6. Reaffirms the importance of ensuring the safety and security of United Nations staff, operations and premises; 7. Also reaffirms that the primary responsibility for ensuring the safety and security of the United Nations staff and premises rests with the host country, and emphasizes the role of the relevant host country agreements in defining this responsibility; 8. Stresses the importance of close coordination and consultation with host Governments in operationalizing the new security level system from 1 January 2011; 9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Assembly at its sixty-seventh session detailed information and analysis on the effectiveness of the new security level system within the context of the report on a comprehensive safety and security policy framework at the United Nations, which provides the basis for threat and risk assessment, cooperation with the host countries, cost-sharing arrangements and operations of the Department of Safety and Security; 10. Recalls paragraph 16 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, notes that the Operational Working Group of the Steering Committee on Safety and Security of the High-level Committee on Management is examining the question of programme criticality with a view to establishing clear definitions and a clear framework for decision-making, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the conclusions of the high-level working group on programme criticality for consideration by the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session; 11. Decides not to approve one armoured truck for Srinagar; 12. Also decides to approve the establishment, effective 1 January 2011, of one Chief Security Officer post at the P-4 level and one Security Information Assistant post at the Local level for the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011; 13. Further decides to appropriate a total amount of 3,041,100 United States dollars, at 2010-2011 initial rates, under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, comprising increases under section 5 (3,018,700 dollars) and section 36, Staff assessment (22,400 dollars), to be offset by a corresponding amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment; XV Financial implications relating to the administration of justice at the United Nations Recalling its resolution 65/251 of 24 December 2010 on the administration of justice at the United Nations, 1. Decides to approve a total amount of 1,148,000 United States dollars, at 2010-2011 initial rates, under the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011, reflecting an increase comprising 109,900 dollars under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, 1 million dollars under section 2, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management, and 38,100 dollars under section 28D, Office of Central Support Services; 2. Also decides that the additional amount of 1,148,000 dollars would represent a charge against the contingency fund; 3. Further decides to establish one temporary P-3 position in Nairobi, effective 1 January 2011, to be funded from the budget of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly on the related costs in the context of the performance report on the support account for the period; XVI Recalling its resolution 65/248 of 24 December 2010, entitled "United Nations common system: report of the International Civil Service Commission", 1. Takes note of the statement submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly on the administrative and financial implications of the decisions and recommendations contained in the report of the International Civil Service Commission for 2010 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 2. Recalls paragraph 1 of section A.1, paragraph 1 of section B.1 and paragraph 1 of section B.3 of its resolution 65/248; 3. Requests the Secretary-General to report, in the context of the performance reports for the biennium 2010-2011, on any requirements arising from the implementation of paragraph 2 above; XVII Recalling section II of its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006, and its resolutions 62/250 of 20 June 2008, 63/262 of 24 December 2008, 63/269 of 7 April 2009 and 64/243 of 24 December 2009, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the status of implementation of the information and communications technology strategy for the United Nations Secretariat 3. Underlines the importance of information and communications technology in meeting the growing demands of the Organization as it becomes increasingly reliant on its information and communications technology infrastructure; 4. Also underlines the importance of information and communications technology in strengthening oversight and accountability and in increasing the availability of accurate and timely information to support decision-making; 5. Re-emphasizes the importance of strong central leadership for the establishment and implementation of Organization-wide information and communications technology standards and activities in order to ensure the efficient utilization of resources, the modernization of information systems and improvement in the information and communications technology services available to the United Nations; 6. Recalls the mandate of the Office of Information and Communications Technology, as approved in resolution 63/262; 7. Welcomes the comprehensive structural review and the presentation of an Organization-wide perspective on information and communications technology resources and the information and communications technology environment; 8. Requests the Secretary-General to review its proposals contained in the report on the status of implementation of the information and communications technology strategy for the United Nations Secretariat and to present new and/or revised proposals to the Assembly in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013; 9. Also requests the Secretary-General to report on the progress made in the establishment of a secondary data centre as described in paragraph 71 of his report, including, as appropriate, financial resources proposed for its implementation, in the context of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013; 10. Further requests the Secretary-General to present to the General Assembly more than one option for locating any other future facilities related to the information and communications technology strategy; 11. Recalls paragraph 10 (c) of its resolution 63/262, and regrets that the report of the Secretary-General did not contain an in-depth assessment of the organizational arrangement of the Office of Information and Communications Technology; 12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, for consideration by the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, a comprehensive report on the most appropriate organizational arrangements for the Office of Information and Communications Technology, including the possibility of changing the placement of the Office within the structure of the Organization; 13. Decides not to approve any funding related to projects 1 or 2; 14. Authorizes the Secretary-General to proceed with the implementation of project 3 (rationalize information and communications technology organization), and decides that funding in the amount of 1.5 million United States dollars will be provided from within the resources approved for the biennium 2010-2011 and that actual expenditure will be reported in the context of the second performance report; 15. Recalls paragraph 101 (c) of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and decides to approve general temporary assistance equivalent to seven P-4 positions for 2011, of which five positions are to be met from within existing resources, and that actual expenditure will be reported in the context of the second performance report; 16. Decides to approve additional resources amounting to 254,166 dollars, to be appropriated as follows: (a) Regular budget: (i) An amount of 140,190 dollars, at 2010-2011 initial rates, for the biennium 2010-2011, under section 29, Information and communications technology (63,390 dollars), and section 28D, Office of Central Support Services (76,800 dollars), representing a charge against the contingency fund; (ii) An amount of 7,770 dollars under section 36, Staff assessment, to be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment; (b) Support account for peacekeeping operations: An amount of 106,206 dollars under the support account for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011; (c) Extrabudgetary resources: An amount of 78,798 dollars; XVIII Having considered the first performance report of the Secretary-General on the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 Recalling its resolutions 64/244 A and B of 24 December 2009, 64/260 of 29 March 2010 and 64/288 of 24 June 2010, 1. Reaffirms the budgetary process as approved in its resolutions 41/213 and 42/211 and reaffirmed in subsequent resolutions; 2. Takes note of the first performance report of the Secretary-General; 3. Endorses the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, subject to the provisions of the present resolution; 4. Recalls section III of its resolution 60/283 as well as section III of its resolution 64/260, and requests the Secretary-General to implement their provisions and to report thereon in the context of his second performance report for the biennium 2010-2011; 5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that, whenever new proposals lead to requests for additional resources, including when activities are taken forward with commitment authority, sufficient efforts are made to meet the new requirements using existing resources without undermining the implementation of mandated programmes and activities; 6. Takes note of paragraph 21 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and stresses that the United Nations is a non-profit organization; 7. Approves a net decrease of 15.3 million United States dollars in the appropriation approved for the biennium 2010-2011 and a net increase of 26.2 million dollars in the estimates of income for the biennium, to be apportioned among expenditure and income sections as indicated in the first performance report of the Secretary-General; XIX Notes that a balance of 22,408,100 United States dollars remains in the contingency fund. Draft resolutions II A-C A Revised budget appropriations for the biennium 2010-2011 Resolves that, for the biennium 2010-2011, the amount of 5,158,961,200 United States dollars appropriated by it in its resolutions 64/244 A of 24 December 2009, 64/260 of 29 March 2010 and 64/288 of 24 June 2010 shall be adjusted by 208,273,500 dollars, as follows: Amount approved in resolutions 64/244 A, 64/260 and 64/288 Increase/ (decrease) Revised appropriations Part I. Overall policymaking, direction and coordination 1. Overall policymaking, direction and coordination 2. General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference management Total, part I Part II. Political affairs 3. Political affairs 4. Disarmament 5. Peacekeeping operations 6. Peaceful uses of outer space Total, part II Part III. International justice and law 7. International Court of Justice 8. Legal affairs Total, part III Part IV. International cooperation for development 9. Economic and social affairs 10. Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States 11. United Nations support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development 12. Trade and development 13. International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO 14. Environment 15. Human settlements 16. International drug control, crime and terrorism prevention and criminal justice Total, part IV Part V. Regional cooperation for development 17. Economic and social development in Africa 18. Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific 19. Economic development in Europe 20. Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean 21. Economic and social development in Western Asia 22. Regular programme of technical cooperation 37. United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) Total, part V Part VI. Human rights and humanitarian affairs 23. Human rights 24. International protection, durable solutions and assistance to refugees 25. Palestine refugees 26. Humanitarian assistance Total, part VI Part VII. Public information 27. Public information Total, part VII Part VIII. Common support services 28A. Office of the Under-Secretary-General for Management 28B. Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts 28C. Office of Human Resources Management 28D. Office of Central Support Services 28E. Administration, Geneva 28F. Administration, Vienna 28G. Administration, Nairobi 29. Office of Information and Communications Technology Total, part VIII Part IX. Internal oversight 30. Internal oversight Total, part IX Part X. Jointly financed administrative activities and special expenses 31. Jointly financed administrative activities 32. Special expenses Total, part X Part XI. Capital expenditures 33. Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance Total, part XI Part XII. Safety and security 34. Safety and security Total, part XII Part XIII. Development Account 35. Development Account Total, part XIII Part XIV. Staff assessment 36. Staff assessment Total, part XIV Grand total B Revised income estimates for the biennium 2010-2011 Resolves that, for the biennium 2010-2011, the estimates of income of 554,435,500 United States dollars approved by it in its resolutions 64/244 B of 24 December 2009, 64/260 of 29 March 2010 and 64/288 of 24 June 2010 shall be increased by $38,536,300 dollars, as follows: Amount approved in resolutions 64/244 B, 64/260 and 64/288 Revised estimates Income section 1. Income from staff assessment 2. General income 3. Services to the public C Financing of the appropriations for the year 2011 Resolves that, for the year 2011: 1. Budget appropriations totalling 2,789,220,150 United States dollars and consisting of 2,578,014,550 dollars, being half of the appropriation initially approved for the biennium 2010-2011 in its resolution 64/244 A of 24 December 2009, 2,932,100 dollars, being the additional appropriation approved for the biennium in its resolutions 64/260 of 29 March 2010 and 64/288 of 24 June 2010 and 208,273,500 dollars, being the increase approved in resolution A above, shall be financed in accordance with regulations 3.1 and 3.2 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, as follows: (a) 140,681,450 dollars, consisting of: (i) 16,494,050 dollars, being half of the estimated income other than staff assessment income approved for the biennium in its resolution 64/244 B of 24 December 2009; (ii) 4,942,700 dollars, being the increase in income other than staff assessment income approved for the biennium in resolution B above; (iii) 119,244,700 dollars, being the balance in the surplus account as at 31 December 2009 of $121,824,000 dollars, offset by the amount of 2,579,300 dollars relating to staff assessment for the biennium 2008-2009 as approved in resolutions 63/268 of 7 April 2009 and 63/283 of 30 June 2009, which was not assessed in 2010; (b) 2,648,538,700 dollars, being the assessment on Member States in accordance with its resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009; 2. There shall be set off against the assessment on Member States, in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the total amount of 299,848,350 dollars, consisting of: (a) 260,591,850 dollars, being half of the estimated staff assessment income approved by the Assembly in its resolution 64/244 B; (b) 263,700 dollars, being the estimated increase in income from staff assessment approved by the Assembly in its resolutions 64/260 and 64/288; (c) 33,593,600 dollars, being the estimated increase in income from staff assessment approved by the Assembly in resolution B above; (d) 5,399,200 dollars, being the increase in income from staff assessment for the biennium 2008-2009, compared with the revised estimates approved by the Assembly in its resolution 64/242 B of 24 December 2009. 67. The Fifth Committee also recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft decisions: Draft decision I The General Assembly takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office for Partnerships. Draft decision II The General Assembly authorizes the rollover into 2011 of the unspent balance of the funding for associated costs approved in 2010 to allow the Secretary-General to continue the activities and projects in 2011 that had been deferred and to avoid interruption of or negative impact to the ongoing capital master plan project, and decides to consider at the first part of its resumed sixty-fifth session the report of the Secretary-General on proposals for financing the associated costs required for 2011 from within the approved budget of the capital master plan. 