%%%EXTRADITION|PROSECUTION|INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS|INTERNATIONAL LAW|TREATIES|

International Law Commission Sixty-second session Geneva, 3 May-4 June and 5 July-6 August 2010 Survey of multilateral conventions which may be of relevance for the work of the International Law Commission on the topic "The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)" Study by the Secretariat Contents Page Introduction Typology and comparative analysis of multilateral conventions which may be of relevance for the Commission's work on the topic The 1929 International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency and other conventions following the same model International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency Relevant provisions Preparatory works Reservations Other conventions The 1949 Geneva Conventions and the 1977 Additional Protocol I The 1949 Geneva Conventions Additional Protocol I Regional conventions on extradition Inter-American conventions on extradition European Convention on Extradition Other regional conventions on extradition The Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft (1970 Hague Convention) and other conventions following the same model Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft Conclusions Relationship between extradition and prosecution in the relevant clauses Clauses imposing an obligation to prosecute ipso facto, with the possible alternative of extradition Clauses imposing an obligation to prosecute only when extradition has been requested and not granted Conditions applicable to extradition Conditions applicable to prosecution Final remarks Annex Multilateral conventions included in the survey, in chronological order, with the text of the relevant provisions 1. The International Law Commission identified the topic "The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)" for inclusion in its long-term programme of work at its fifty-sixth session, in 2004. A brief syllabus describing the possible overall approach to the topic was annexed to that year's report of the Commission. The General Assembly, in resolution 59/41 of 2 December 2004, took note of the Commission's report concerning its long-term programme of work. At its fifty-seventh session (2005), the Commission decided to include the topic "The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)" in its current programme of work and to appoint Zdzislaw Galicki as Special Rapporteur for the topic. The General Assembly, in paragraph 5 of its resolution 60/22 of 23 November 2005, endorsed the decision of the Commission to include the topic in its programme of work. 2. From its fifty-eighth session (2006) to its sixty-first session (2009), the Commission received and considered three reports by the Special Rapporteur. It also received comments and information from Governments. At its sixtieth session, the Commission decided to establish a working group on the topic under the chairmanship of Alain Pellet, the mandate and membership of which would be determined at the sixty-first session. Pursuant to that decision, at its sixty-first session, the Commission established an open-ended working group which held three meetings. The Working Group agreed that its mandate would be to draw up a general framework for consideration of the topic, with the aim of specifying the issues to be addressed and establishing an order of priority. At the same session, the Commission took note of the oral report presented by the Chairman of the Working Group and reproduced the proposed general framework for the consideration of the topic, prepared by the Working Group, in its annual report. 3. The present study, prepared by the Secretariat, aims at assisting the Commission by providing information on multilateral conventions which may be of relevance to its future work on the present topic. It should be recalled, in this respect, that the Working Group highlighted this issue in section (a) (ii) of the proposed general framework, which refers to "The obligation to extradite or prosecute in existing treaties". 4. The Secretariat has conducted an extensive survey of multilateral conventions, both at the universal and regional levels, which has resulted in the identification of 61 multilateral instruments that contain provisions combining extradition and prosecution as alternative courses of action for the punishment of offenders. Section II of the present study proposes a description and typology of the relevant instruments in light of these provisions, and examines the preparatory works of certain key conventions that have served as models in the field, as well as the reservations made to the relevant provisions. It also points out the differences and similarities between the reviewed provisions in different conventions and their evolution. 5. Section III proposes some overall conclusions, on the basis of the survey contained in section II, as regards (a) the relationship between extradition and prosecution in the relevant provisions; (b) the conditions applicable to extradition under the various conventions; and (c) the conditions applicable to prosecution under the various conventions. 6. The annex contains a chronological list of the conventions found by the Secretariat to contain provisions combining extradition and prosecution, as described in the present study, and reproduces the text of those provisions. II. Typology and comparative analysis of multilateral conventions which may be of relevance for the Commission's work on the topic 7. The present section proposes a description and typology of provisions contained in multilateral instruments which may be of relevance for the Commission's work on the topic "The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)", with a view to providing a comparative overview of the content and evolution of such provisions in conventional practice. For this purpose, conventions including such provisions have been classified into the following four categories: (a) The 1929 International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency and other conventions following the same model; (b) The 1949 Geneva Conventions and the 1977 Additional Protocol I; (c) Regional conventions on extradition; (d) The Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft and other conventions following the same model. 8. This classification combines chronological and substantive criteria. First of all, it roughly reflects an evolution in the drafting of provisions combining the options of extradition and prosecution, which is useful for understanding the influence that certain conventions (such as the 1929 Counterfeiting Convention or the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft) have exercised over conventional practice and how such provisions have changed over time. Secondly, the classification highlights some fundamental similarities in the content of provisions pertaining to the same category, thus facilitating a better understanding of their precise scope and of the main issues that have been discussed in the field. However, it must be pointed out at the outset that this classification, while revealing some general tendencies in the field, should not be understood as reflecting a separation of the relevant provisions into rigid categories: conventions pertaining to the same category are often very different in their content, and drafting techniques adopted by certain conventions have sometimes been followed by conventions belonging to a different category. 9. Each subsection below identifies one or more key conventions that have served as models in the field and provides a description of the mechanism for the punishment of offenders provided therein, the relevant preparatory works and reservations affecting the legal effect of the provisions that combine the options of extradition and prosecution. Each subsection further lists other conventions that belong to the same category and describes how these conventions have followed, or have departed from, the original model, with information about the relevant aspects of preparatory works and reservations. A. The 1929 International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency and other conventions following the same model 1. International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency (a) Relevant provisions 10. The International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency contains two provisions combining extradition and prosecution which have served as a prototype for a group of subsequently concluded treaties relating to the suppression of international offences. The mechanism adopted in the Counterfeiting Convention was considered to be an indispensable application of the underlying principle "that the counterfeiting of currency should nowhere go unpunished". The same notion is also reflected in the first article of the Convention, in which the parties recognize the rules laid down in part I of the Convention "as the most effective means in present circumstances for ensuring the prevention and punishment of the offence of counterfeiting currency". Under article 3, the parties undertake to make the offences concerned punishable as ordinary crimes. 11. The mechanism in the Counterfeiting Convention makes a distinction between nationals and non-nationals of the State concerned. It further recognizes that States employ different practices with regard to the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction and therefore does not oblige States to assert jurisdiction in every case in which extradition is refused. 12. Article 8 of the Convention deals with the issue of nationals who have committed an offence abroad: "In countries where the principle of the extradition of nationals is not recognized, nationals who have returned to the territory of their own country after the commission abroad of an offence referred to in Article 3 should be punishable in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in their own territory, even in a case where the offender has acquired his nationality after the commission of the offence. This provision does not apply if, in a similar case, the extradition of a foreigner could not be granted." It is understood that extradition would be applied in all cases by those States which allow their nationals to be extradited. 13. Article 9 regulates the situation of foreigners who are in the territory of a third State: "Foreigners who have committed abroad any offence referred to in Article 3, and who are in the territory of a country whose internal legislation recognizes as a general rule the principle of the prosecution of offences committed abroad, should be punishable in the same way as if the offence had been committed in the territory of that country. "The obligation to take proceedings is subject to the condition that extradition has been requested and that the country to which application is made cannot hand over the person accused for some reason which has no connection with the offence." 14. Article 10 provides for the extradition regime applicable to the offences referred to in article 3. A distinction is made between those States that make extradition conditional upon a treaty and those that do not. The first paragraph deals with the former category of States and stipulates that the relevant offences "shall be deemed to be included as extradition crimes in any extradition treaty which has been or may hereafter be concluded between any of the High Contracting Parties". Pursuant to the second paragraph, those States that do not make extradition conditional on a treaty or reciprocity undertake to recognize the offences as cases of extradition between themselves. The third paragraph specifies that "[e]xtradition shall be granted in conformity with the law of the country to which application is made". 15. The Counterfeiting Convention also contains two provisions that safeguard the participating States' internal criminal legislation and administration in the context of its application. Article 17 provides that a State's attitude on the general issue of criminal jurisdiction as a question of international law is not affected by its participation in the Convention. Article 18 specifies that, without allowing impunity, the Convention does not affect the principle that the offences should in each country be "defined, prosecuted and punished in conformity with the general rules of its domestic law". (b) Preparatory works 16. The Counterfeiting Convention was adopted at an international conference held in Geneva from 9 to 20 April 1929 under the auspices of the League of Nations. The Conference worked on the basis of a text of a draft convention prepared by a Mixed Committee that had been established by the Council of the League of Nations. The Conference also had before it observations on the report of the Mixed Committee by Governments. The draft text proposed by the Mixed Committee was reviewed by a Legal Committee of the Conference, which presented an amended draft convention to the plenary. 17. In the explanatory part of its report, the Mixed Committee emphasized that, in preparing the draft convention, it had sought to propose the most effective rules for dealing with the offence of counterfeiting, while avoiding infringing on fundamental principles of the States' internal legal systems. It had thus recognized the different practices among States with regard to the extradition of nationals and extraterritorial jurisdiction. The draft convention provided that those States that allowed their own nationals to be extradited would surrender the offenders in all cases, and that the obligation to prosecute would only apply to other States (and for these, the obligation would not be absolute, since prosecution would not be compulsory when the extradition request had been refused for reasons directly connected with the charge (e.g., period of limitation)). 18. In the same spirit, in the Mixed Committee's draft text, the obligation of a third State to prosecute an offender would depend on whether or not that State's criminal system was based on the principle of territoriality. If the State did not apply extraterritorial jurisdiction, it would extradite. This non-encroachment upon States' criminal jurisdiction was further reinforced by a draft provision (which later became article 17) reserving the "principle of the territorial character of criminal law". 19. Besides the jurisdictional aspect, the obligation of a third State to prosecute was made subject to the condition that extradition had not been made, or could not be granted, and to a complaint made, or notice given, by the injured party. This latter condition had been added in view of the fact that it was the injured State or the State loci delicti that were deemed to be in the best position to judge on the advisability to prosecute. 20. The Legal Committee maintained, with some amendments, the main thrust of the proposed text of the Mixed Committee, and in particular the underlying principle of not prejudicing States' criminal legislation and administration. 21. Nevertheless, during the debate of the Legal Committee, an attempt was made to fill a lacuna in the Mixed Committee's text through a proposed provision that would render the extradition of nationals obligatory for those countries that allowed it in principle, whether or not applicable extradition treaties contained a reservation to that effect. While acknowledging the lacuna, countries to which this provision would have applied strongly objected to the idea of making the extradition of their nationals an absolute obligation, and the proposed provision was eventually not included in the final text of the convention. 22. The issue of the scope of the obligation to prosecute was also raised in conjunction with the debate on the words "as a general rule" in article 9. In response to a concern expressed by some delegations, the Rapporteur of the Legal Committee clarified that, under the said provision, only those States that applied the territoriality principle were exempted from the obligation to prosecute. He explained that the provision (which he qualified as "a first step towards admitting in the future, without reservations, the principle of universality of justice in the pursuit of criminals") was to be applied by those countries that allowed proceedings for offences committed abroad, "such proceedings being justified either by the nature of the offence or the interest injured, or on account of the offender's nationality etc". 23. Still in the context of article 9, the Legal Committee decided to subject the obligation to take proceedings against an alleged offender to the condition that extradition had been requested, but could not be granted for reasons not connected to the offence. It was considered that the country directly affected by the offence would be in a better position to institute proceedings and that the country of refuge would only prosecute when extradition could not be granted, to ensure that the underlying principle of the Convention was upheld, namely "that no counterfeiter should go unpunished". The Legal Committee, however, decided against making the obligation to take proceedings subject to a complaint or official notice by a foreign authority requesting such proceedings. 24. The preparatory works also evidence a substantial debate with regard to the impact that the relevant provisions would have on certain principles of international penal law or on States' internal criminal law systems. In that context, with regard to article 8, it was clarified that the wording "in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in their own territory" did not affect the application of certain principles, such as non bis in idem or lex mitior, and that prosecution and punishment would be carried out in accordance with the principles contained in the penal codes of each State. Similarly, referring to article 9, it was explained that the principle of discretionary powers of the prosecutor would not be affected by the Convention, as long as it was executed in good faith. Furthermore, in order to make it perfectly clear that "nothing was being done to prejudice the general criminal legislation and administration of each country within its domestic sphere", the Legal Committee added the text of article 18. 25. The draft text of the Mixed Committee also proposed an extradition regime to the effect that the offences referred to in the Convention would be recognized as "extradition crimes" and that extradition would be granted in conformity with the internal law of the requested State. While the Legal Committee maintained the underlying logic of this provision, it was observed that "the new Convention should not upset the whole system of extradition": the provision (which then became article 10) was thus amended to submit the offences to the existing extradition procedures applicable among States, whether or not based on extradition treaties or reciprocity. 26. The text of the draft convention proposed by the Mixed Committee further contained an article which stipulated that the crime of counterfeiting was generally not to be considered a political offence. While this issue was extensively discussed during the Conference, it was finally decided to omit any language regarding political offences, leaving every country free to decide its own position in this respect. The issue of political offence was also raised in the context of article 3 of the Convention and resulted in the inclusion therein of a reference to "ordinary crimes", to avoid the establishment of any favourable treatment for the crime of counterfeiting. In addition, an Optional Protocol Regarding the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency was prepared, whereby the High Contracting Partiesundertook "in their mutual relations, to consider, as regards extradition, the acts referred to in Article 3 of the said Convention as ordinary offences." (c) Reservations 27. Upon becoming parties to the Counterfeiting Convention, some States made reservations relating to the provisions concerning prosecution and extradition. Referring to their respective internal criminal law and legislation regarding extradition, Andorra and Norway made reservations with regard to the implementation of article 10. 2. Other conventions 28. The conventions listed below (in chronological order) contain a mechanism for the punishment of offenders for which the Counterfeiting Convention seems to have served as a prototype: (a) The Convention for the Suppression of the Illicit Traffic in Dangerous Drugs; (b) The Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism; (c) The Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others; (d) The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs; (e) The Convention on Psychotropic Substances. 29. The constitutive elements of the mechanism adopted in these conventions are the following: (a) the criminalization of the relevant offence, which the States parties undertake to make punishable under their domestic laws; (b) provisions on prosecution and extradition which take into account the divergent views of States with regard to the extradition of nationals and the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction, the latter being permissive rather than compulsory; (c) precedence for extradition over prosecution; (d) an extradition regime under which States undertake, under certain conditions, to consider the offence as an extraditable one; (e) a provision limiting the infringement of the convention upon the States' approach to the question of criminal jurisdiction as a question of international law; and (f) a non-prejudice clause with regard to each State's criminal legislation and administration. 30. While some of these conventions follow the Counterfeiting Convention's provisions very closely, they all contain some terminological differences, some appearing to be more of an editorial nature and others modifying the substance of the obligations undertaken by States parties. The most significant aspects of their mechanisms are described hereinafter. 31. All of the above conventions oblige States parties to make the various offences punishable under their domestic legislation. Most of the conventions further contain explicit provisions concerning the requirement of States parties to ensure that their legislation and administration are in conformity with the obligations stipulated in the respective conventions or that such obligations can be carried out. 32. All of the conventions make the relevant provisions subject to the different practices of States with regard to the extradition of nationals and to the application of extraterritorial jurisdiction, with the result that the obligation to prosecute if extradition is not granted is not absolute. They are also based on the understanding that the obligation to institute proceedings against an offender occurs if extradition is not possible. 33. The three earlier conventions follow closely the model of the Counterfeiting Convention in respect of the various provisions related to extradition or prosecution. Nevertheless, there are some differences. In particular, the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons does not contain any provision for the prosecution of foreigners. 34. The provisions concerning nationals in these three conventions mirror article 8 of the Counterfeiting Convention and only minor changes have been introduced. It should be noted, however, that in respect of the Convention for the Suppression of the Illicit Traffic in Dangerous Drugs, yet another attempt was made to fill the lacuna that exists when a State, albeit recognizing the principle of extradition of nationals, does not extradite the individual and apply the territoriality principle in criminal law, thus being unable to institute proceedings against the alleged offender. As a compromise solution, the Conference recommended, in the Final Act, that countries recognizing the principle of extradition of nationals grant the extradition of their nationals who are guilty of committing an offence abroad, even if the applicable extradition treaty contains a reservation thereto. 35. Furthermore, the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons contains an additional provision specifying that the article dealing with the prosecution and extradition of nationals is not applicable "when the person charged with the offence has been tried in a foreign State and, if convicted, has served his sentence or had it remitted or reduced in conformity with the laws of that foreign State" (article 10). 36. Regarding the provisions on foreigners who have committed an offence in a third State, both the Convention for the Suppression of the Illicit Traffic in Dangerous Drugs and the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism have adopted very similar language to that found in article 9 of the Counterfeiting Convention. However, the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism has introduced yet another condition which significantly limits its application, namely an element of jurisdictional reciprocity. 37. Turning to the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances, these two conventions set forth all provisions relating to extradition and prosecution in a sole article. In addition, these provisions conflate the treatment of nationals and foreigners into a single paragraph and limit the obligation to institute proceedings to serious offences. They specify that serious offences "shall be prosecuted by the Party in whose territory the offence was committed, or by the Party in whose territory the offender is found, if extradition is not acceptable in conformity with the law of the Party to which application is made". However, both conventions adhere to the underlying principle established in the Counterfeiting Convention regarding jurisdictional limitations, by subjecting the application of the article "to the constitutional limitations of a Party, its legal system and domestic law", as well as to a State's criminal law on questions of jurisdiction. 38. Furthermore, similarly to the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons, both conventions specifically subject the institution of proceedings to the condition that the offender "has not already been prosecuted and judgement given". 39. All of the five conventions mentioned above contain an extradition mechanism similar to the one set forth in the Counterfeiting Convention. The main differences can be summarized as follows: (a) The Convention for the Suppression of the Illicit Traffic in Dangerous Drugs, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances contain a provision allowing the requested party to refuse to effect the arrest of an offender or grant extradition in cases where the competent authorities consider that the offence is not sufficiently serious; (b) Whereas all these conventions adopt the same approach as the Counterfeiting Convention by specifying that extradition shall be granted in conformity with the law of the requested State, the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances seem to widen the discretion of the requested States to refuse extradition. The Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism subjects the obligation to grant extradition to "any conditions and limitations recognized by the law or practice of the country to which the application is made". The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances subject the relevant provision to the "constitutional limitations of a Party, its legal system and domestic law". In addition, the two conventions last mentioned have adopted a more permissive approach to the extradition mechanism and provide that "[i]t is desirable that the offences [...] be included as extradition crimes ...". Nevertheless, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs was subsequently amended to substitute this permissive approach for the formula "shall be deemed to be included" used in the earlier conventions; (c) The Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism and the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons have omitted a reference to States making extradition conditional on "reciprocity", but refer to those States that condition extradition on the existence of a treaty; (d) The Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism contains an additional paragraph extending the extradition regime to include any offence committed in the territory of the party against whom it is directed. 40. In conjunction with the adoption of the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism, it was envisaged that an international criminal court be established for the purpose of trying persons accused of offences under the Convention. Consequently, a Convention for the Creation of an International Criminal Court was concluded together with the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism and thus provided States parties with a so-called "third option" in relation to its mechanism for the punishment of offenders. Pursuant to this third option, States parties had the alternative of committing a person (national or foreigner) accused of an offence under the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism for trial to the Court instead of prosecuting before its own courts. Similarly, in situations where a requested State was able to grant extradition, it was entitled to commit the accused for trial to the Court if the requesting State was also a party to the Convention. The Convention further specified that States parties to the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism that took advantage of this option were deemed to have discharged their obligations thereunder. 41. As mentioned above, during the debate on the Counterfeiting Convention, the question of extraterritorial jurisdiction was subject to lengthy debates and resulted in the adoption of article 17 (which provides that participation in the Convention "shall not be interpreted as affecting that Party's attitude on the general question of criminal jurisdiction as a question of international law"). The Convention for the Suppression of the Illicit Traffic in Dangerous Drugs, the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism and the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons contain articles that closely follow the terms of this provision. The two later conventions, namely the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, contain provisions that, while using a somewhat different wording, are intended to have the same effect. 42. Another topic that was widely discussed during the negotiations of the Counterfeiting Convention concerned the safeguarding of participating States' internal criminal legislation and administration in the context of its implementation (article 18). All subsequent conventions have adopted provisions similar to article 18 of the Counterfeiting Convention, which provide that they do not prejudice States' discretion to define, prosecute and punish the relevant offences in conformity with domestic law. (b) Reservations 43. Upon becoming party to the conventions mentioned above, some States made declarations and reservations relating to the provisions on the punishment of offenders. Most of these declarations and reservations concern the non-extradition of nationals and the provisions regarding the extradition regime, in particular the recognition of the various offences as extradition crimes. In one instance, it has also been clarified that extradition is conditional on the existence of bilateral treaties. In addition, a reservation has been made ensuring the State's discretion as to whether or not its citizens will be prosecuted for crimes committed abroad. B. The 1949 Geneva Conventions and the 1977 Additional Protocol I 1. The 1949 Geneva Conventions 44. The four Geneva Conventions of 1949 contain in a common article an identical mechanism for the prosecution of persons accused of having committed grave breaches of the Conventions. The underlying principle for this mechanism is the establishment of universal jurisdiction over grave breaches of the Conventions: thus, the obligation to undertake measures against an alleged offender is not conditioned by any jurisdictional considerations of States. Another feature is that the mechanism provides an obligation of prosecution, with the possibility to extradite an accused person as an alternative. The obligation to search for and prosecute an alleged offender seems to exist irrespective of any request for extradition by another party. 45. Pursuant to the first paragraph of the common article, the parties "undertake to enact any legislation necessary to provide effective penal sanctions for persons committing, or ordering to be committed, any of the grave breaches" of the Conventions. 46. In its second paragraph, the common article specifies that: "Each High Contracting Party shall be under the obligation to search for persons alleged to have committed, or to have ordered to be committed, such grave breaches, and shall bring such persons, regardless of their nationality, before its own courts. It may also, if it prefers, and in accordance with the provisions of its own legislation, hand such persons over for trial to another High Contracting Party concerned, provided such High Contracting Party has made out a prima facie case." 47. While the obligation described above is limited to grave breaches, the common article further provides, in its third paragraph, that the High Contracting Parties shall take measures to suppress all acts contrary to the Conventions other than the grave breaches. 48. Finally, under its fourth paragraph, the common article stipulates that the accused "shall benefit by safeguards of proper trial and defence" in all circumstances, and that those safeguards "shall not be less favourable than those provided by Article 105 and those following" of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War. 49. The four Geneva Conventions were adopted at the Diplomatic Conference for the Establishment of International Conventions for the Protection of War Victims, held in Geneva from 21 April to 12 August 1949 and convened by the Swiss Federal Council. The Diplomatic Conference worked on the basis of draft texts adopted by the Seventeenth International Red Cross Conference, in Stockholm. To deal with the articles common to all four Conventions, the Conference established a Joint Committee, which assigned the task of preparing the texts to a Special Committee. 50. At the outset of the deliberations on the common article in the Joint Committee, discussions centred mainly on the text adopted by the Seventeenth International Red Cross Conference and a text prepared by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). 51. The regime contained in the text of the International Red Cross Conference was quite modest compared to that prepared by ICRC. It provided that the parties to the Conventions should, in case existing laws were inadequate, propose to their legislatures the necessary measures to repress during wartime any act contrary to the provisions of the Conventions. This provision was based on the 1906 Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Sick and Wounded of Armies in the Field and the 1929 Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armies in the Field. Nevertheless, the proposed text also introduced some novel clauses aimed at strengthening the provisions concerning the repression of breaches, namely, an active obligation for the parties to search for alleged offenders of breaches of the Conventions, irrespective of their nationality, and to indict such persons or, if they preferred, to hand them over to another party for judgement. 52. The ICRC text set forth, in the first article, a firm obligation for States parties to incorporate the Conventions into national law and to enact provisions necessary for the repression and prosecution of any breaches of the Conventions. States parties further had to communicate to the Swiss Federal Council measures adopted to give effect to the article within a period of two years after ratification. A second article detailed the grave breaches of the Conventions and provided that they should be punished "as crimes against the law of nations", either by the tribunals of any State party or by any international jurisdiction which competence had been recognized; thus incorporating the principle of universal jurisdiction. The second paragraph provided an obligation for States parties to enact "suitable provisions for the extradition" of alleged offenders of grave breaches "whom the said [Party] does not bring before its own tribunals". 53. During the deliberations in the Special Committee, it became clear that the ICRC text was considered to contain somewhat "far-reaching innovations, which impinged on the domain of international penal law". A more cautious approach was thus advocated. A joint amendment was introduced with the aim of bridging the two texts, which became the basis for the Committee's negotiations. This amendment followed the structure of the ICRC text in that it devoted a special article to grave breaches, but omitted any reference to an international jurisdiction. Instead, the joint amendment imposed a firm obligation on the parties to enact legislation providing effective penalties, which was based on article V of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. The amendment further provided for criminal responsibility not only of the offender but also of whoever ordered the breach to be committed, thus addressing the question of command. In order to avoid resistance from legislators, the obligation to enact legislation was limited to grave breaches, which was intended to guarantee a certain amount of uniformity in national legislations. This was especially desirable since the tribunals were also supposed to hear charges against alleged offenders of other nationalities. Furthermore, the question of handing over the accused person to another party for trial was made subject to the establishment of a prima facie case by such party. It was further explained that if the requested party decided not to hand over an alleged offender, it would be obliged to "bring him to trial before its own courts". 54. During the discussions on the joint amendment, it was proposed to reintroduce the time limit of two years within which the parties to the Conventions were obliged to enact the necessary penal legislation. Referring to the different national legislative procedures, the proposal was rejected. A proposal to limit the obligation to search for and bring to trial an accused person to the parties of the conflict was withdrawn after it was explained that the principle of universality applied and that such an obligation did not violate a State's neutrality. It was further suggested to use the term "extradition" instead of "handing over". Nevertheless, the term "extradition" was considered less practicable in view of the wide range of extradition laws and treaties that existed. It was also observed that "`handing over' was a notion of customary international law in so far as it was extensively practiced by States after the last war in connection with the activities of the United Nations War Crimes Commission". Furthermore, a proposal to subject the duty of the handing over of an accused person to another party to States' national legislation was accepted. Consequently, the phrase "and in accordance with the provisions of its own legislation" was inserted after the words "if it prefers". 55. Throughout the negotiations on these provisions, a proposal was made to replace the words "grave breaches" with "crimes". Nevertheless, the proposed amendment was consistently rejected with the rationale that it was the prerogative of each State to classify the breaches detailed in the Conventions and that it would be inappropriate to attempt to create new penal codes in the relevant provisions. 56. During the debate of the Conference, the question of the establishment of jurisdiction was raised in the context of a proposed amendment to the second paragraph of the relevant provision. It was suggested to insert the words "in conformity with its own laws or with the Conventions prohibiting acts that may be defined as breaches" in connection with the obligation to bring an accused person to trial before its own courts. The aim was to specify the obligation of parties to establish jurisdiction over the breaches enumerated in the Conventions. The proposed amendment was rejected both in the Joint Committee and in plenary as being unnecessary, with the justification that jurisdiction would follow from the obligation to enact the necessary legislation to provide penal sanctions. It was explained that if a particular act was a penal offence under the law of a State -- which it would be if that State had implemented its obligation specified in the first paragraph of the provision -- it was clear that its courts would have jurisdiction to try a person committing the offence. 57. Whereas the joint amendment had omitted any language regarding judicial guarantees for accused persons, the question was again raised during the deliberations on the amendment. Accordingly, a proposal was made to add a fourth paragraph on this subject, which provided for the safeguards of a proper trial and defence. The proposed amendment was subsequently adopted without any modification. 58. No relevant reservations have been made with regard to this provision. 2. Additional Protocol I 59. The provision concerning the punishment of offenders contained in the common article to the Geneva Conventions seems to be unique and no other international instruments have been found containing a similar clause, with the exception of the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I). In this case, however, the common article has been made applicable to Protocol I by renvoi. Article 85, paragraph 1, of the Protocol specifies that "[t]he provisions of the Conventions relating to the repression of breaches and grave breaches, supplemented by this Section, shall apply to the repression of breaches and grave breaches of this Protocol". 60. Article 85, paragraph 1, has been supplemented by other provisions relating to the repression of breaches which are not found in the Geneva Conventions. Paragraph 3 of article 85 explicitly provides that the grave breaches enumerated in the Conventions and the Additional Protocol shall be considered war crimes. Also of interest in this context is article 88 on mutual assistance in criminal matters in connection with proceedings brought in respect of grave breaches. Paragraph 2 of article 88 specifies that the parties to Additional Protocol I shall, when the circumstances allow, cooperate in extradition matters. In this regard, due consideration shall be offered to the request of the State in whose territory the offence has occurred. Nevertheless, this duty is subject to the rights and obligations established in the Conventions and in article 85, paragraph 1, of the Additional Protocol. Yet another qualification is introduced in the third paragraph, which provides that the law of the requested party shall apply in all cases and that the paragraphs shall not "affect the obligations arising from the provisions of any other treaty of a bilateral or multilateral nature which governs or will govern the whole or part of the subject of mutual assistance in criminal matters". C. Regional conventions on extradition 61. Several regional conventions on extradition contain provisions that combine the options of extradition and prosecution. While conventions concluded in the inter-American and European contexts appear to be the most influential, provisions of this kind may also be found in other regional conventions. 1. Inter-American conventions on extradition 62. Conventions relating to extradition concluded in the inter-American context appear to be the first ones to have contained provisions combining the options of extradition and prosecution. The Convention on Private International Law, also known as the "Bustamante Code", under Book IV (International Law of Procedure), Title III (Extradition), contains two provisions which read as follows: "Article 344 In order to render effective the international judicial competence in penal matters, each of the contracting States shall accede to the request of any of the others for the delivery of persons convicted or accused of crime, if in conformity with the provisions of this title, subject to the dispositions of the international treaties and conventions containing a list of penal infractions which authorize the extradition. Article 345 The contracting States are not obliged to hand over their own nationals. The nation which refuses to give up one of its citizens shall try him." 63. Similarly, under the 1933 Convention on Extradition adopted by the Seventh International Conference of American States, States parties undertook the obligation, under certain conditions, of surrendering to any of the States which may make the requisition the persons who may be in their territory and who are accused or under sentence (article 1). Pursuant to article 2, "When the person whose extradition is sought is a citizen of the country to which the requisition is addressed, his delivery may or may not be made, as the legislation or circumstances of the case may, in the judgment of the surrendering State, determine. If the accused is not surrendered, the latter State is obliged to bring action against him for the crime with which he is accused, if such crime meets the conditions established in subarticle (b) of the previous article [i.e., if the act for which extradition was sought constitutes a crime and is punishable under the laws of the demanding and surrendering States with a minimum penalty of imprisonment for one year]. The sentence pronounced shall be communicated to the demanding State." In this respect, it should be noted that States signing an "optional clause" accompanying the Convention, "notwithstanding Article 2 ..., agree[d] among themselves that in no case [would] the nationality of the criminal be permitted to impede his extradition". The Convention further contained provisions relating to cases in which extradition will not be granted (including when the accused must appear before an extraordinary tribunal or court, or when the offence is of a political nature (article 3)), requirements for the request for extradition (article 5) and other substantive and procedural questions relating to extradition proceedings. 64. Similarly, the 1981 Inter-American Convention on Extradition imposes the obligation on States parties "to surrender to other States Parties that request their extradition persons who are judicially required for prosecution, are being tried, have been convicted or have been sentenced to a penalty involving deprivation of liberty" (article 1). Article 2 indicates that, for extradition to be granted, the relevant offence must have been committed in the territory of the requesting State and that, when committed elsewhere, extradition shall be granted provided the requesting State has jurisdiction to try the offence. Paragraph 3 of that provision further specifies: "The requested State may deny extradition when it is competent, according to its own legislation, to prosecute the person whose extradition is sought for the offence on which the request is based. If it denies extradition for this reason, the requested State shall submit the case to its competent authorities and inform the requesting State of the result." 65. The subsequent articles contain provisions relating to extraditable offences (article 3), grounds for denying extradition (article 4, which refers, inter alia, to cases in which the person is to be tried before an extraordinary or ad hoc tribunal of the requesting State, when the relevant offence is a political offence or when it can be inferred that persecution for reasons of race, religion or nationality is involved or that the position of the person sought may be prejudiced for any of these reasons), and the preservation of the right of asylum (article 6). Pursuant to article 7, paragraph 1, "[t]he nationality of the person sought may not be invoked as a ground for denying extradition, except when the law of the requested State otherwise provides". Under the title "Prosecution by the Requested State", article 8 reads as follows: "If, when extradition is applicable, a State does not deliver the person sought, the requested State shall, when its laws or other treaties so permit, be obligated to prosecute him for the offense with which he is charged, just as if it had been committed within its territory, and shall inform the requesting State of the judgment handed down." 66. Article 9 specifies that States parties shall not grant extradition when the offence in question is punishable in the requesting State by the death penalty, by life imprisonment, or by degrading punishment, unless the requesting State gives sufficient assurances that these penalties will not be imposed. Further articles of the Convention relate to the substantive and procedural conditions relating to extradition proceedings. 67. The Bustamante Code was adopted at the 1928 Sixth International Conference of American States, from a draft prepared by the Rio de Janeiro International Commission of Jurists in 1927, which itself relied on the preparatory work conducted by Antonio Snchez de Bustamante y Sirven. 68. Already in 1912, the International Commission of Jurists had adopted a draft convention on extradition, which aimed at making extradition binding for States parties, except in the case of individuals who were under trial or had already been prosecuted or convicted and in the case of political offences. The draft further provided that the nationality of the individual should not be a bar to extradition, but also that a State would not be under an obligation to surrender its nationals. If they decided not to grant extradition of one of their nationals, States parties would be obliged to prosecute and try the individual in their territory, in conformity with their own laws and with the evidence submitted by the requesting State. 69. The 1927 draft Code was based on the principle of territoriality in the exercise of criminal jurisdiction. Extradition was conceived as a means to ensure the effectiveness of criminal jurisdiction and the draft Code therefore imposed upon States parties a general duty to grant it. However, the drafters took note of the "duties of protection" that a State had with regard to its own nationals, and recognized that a State might hesitate to grant their extradition because of the possible irregularity of the proceedings undertaken against them in the requesting State or of the risk of the individuals being submitted to inhumane or cruel treatment abroad. For this reason, under the draft Code, States parties remained free to decide whether to grant extradition of their nationals, but, if they chose not to extradite, they were under an obligation to prosecute and try the individual in their territory, according to their laws and on the basis of the evidence submitted by the requesting State. Although this implied the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction, which the drafters considered as posing certain problems (notably with respect to the availability of evidence to conduct the trial), the provision was introduced to reflect the fact that some national constitutions forbade the surrender of nationals and could not be modified by an international treaty. The draft Code further contained provisions relating, inter alia, to the order of priorities in case of multiple requests for extradition and the prohibition of extradition for political offences. These provisions of the draft Code were adopted without substantive amendment by the International Conference in 1928. 70. The 1933 Inter-American Convention on Extradition was adopted at the Seventh International Conference of American States. The Conference worked on the basis of a draft convention prepared by the Fourth Sub-Commission of its Commission II. As explained in the report to the plenary, the extradition of nationals was considered as one of the most delicate issues regarding extradition and the SubCommission had decided not to attempt to resolve the matter. The draft convention therefore imposed upon States a general obligation to grant extradition, but contained a provision whereby the requested State could choose not to extradite one of its nationals, as provided for under its legislation, but would in that case have the obligation to try him and communicate the results of the prosecution to the requesting State. The draft convention further allowed States that had already accepted to surrender their nationals in their reciprocal relations under the 1889 Treaty of Montevideo to continue to do so, and left this option open for other States parties wishing to follow such practice. The relevant provision was accepted by the Conference and included in the final text of the Convention. 71. At the time of signing the 1933 Convention, the delegation of the United States of America reserved, inter alia, article 2 (second sentence), declaring that that article "shall not be binding upon the United States of America, unless and until subsequently ratified in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the United States of America". With respect to article 18 of the Convention (on transit through the territory of the State of extradited persons), El Salvador made a reservation to the effect that it could not cooperate in the surrender of its own nationals, prohibited by its Political Constitution, by permitting the transit through its territory of said nationals when one foreign State surrenders them to another. 72. In a declaration made at the time of signature, Guatemala stated that it had signed the 1981 Inter-American Convention on Extradition "with the understanding that the interpretation of articles 7 and 8 when applicable will be subject to the provisions of article 61 of our Constitution, particularly in that `no Guatemalan shall be handed over to a foreign government for trial or punishment except for crimes covered by international treaties in force in Guatemala'". 2. European Convention on Extradition 73. The European Convention on Extradition, adopted in the context of the Council of Europe, contains a provision combining the options of extradition and prosecution which, as described below, partially served as a model for the corresponding provision included in the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft. 74. Under article 1 of the European Convention, entitled "Obligation to extradite", "The Contracting Parties undertake to surrender to each other, subject to the provisions and conditions laid down in this Convention, all persons against whom the competent authorities of the requesting Party are proceeding for an offence or who are wanted by the said authorities for the carrying out of a sentence or detention order." 75. Under article 2, paragraph 1, "[e]xtradition shall be granted in respect of offences punishable under the laws of the requesting Party and of the requested Party by deprivation of liberty or under a detention order for a maximum period of at least one year or by a more severe penalty". The subsequent provisions of the European Convention spell out exceptions to these rules, as well as the conditions for extradition. These include the non-granting of extradition for political offences or when the request for extradition is made for the purpose of prosecuting or punishing a person on account of his race, religion, nationality or political opinion or when the person's position may be prejudiced for any of these reasons (article 3), the possibility of refusing extradition when the offence was committed in whole or in part in the territory of the requested State (article 7) or when the competent authorities of such State are proceeding against the person or a final judgment has been passed for the offence for which extradition is requested (articles 8 and 9), the possibility to refuse extradition when the relevant offence is punishable by death under the law of the requesting party and the death penalty is not provided for in respect of such offence by the law of the requested party or is not normally carried out, unless the requesting party gives sufficient assurance that the death penalty will not be carried out (article 11), etc. 76. Under article 6, paragraph 1(a), a Contracting Party shall have the right to refuse extradition of its nationals. Subparagraph (b) specifies that each Contracting Party may, by a declaration made at the time of signature or of deposit of its instrument of ratification or accession, define as far as it is concerned the term "nationals" within the meaning of the Convention. Paragraph 2 of the same article reads as follows: "If the requested Party does not extradite its national, it shall at the request of the requesting Party submit the case to its competent authorities in order that proceedings may be taken if they are considered appropriate. For this purpose, the files, information and exhibits relating to the offence shall be transmitted without charge by the means provided for in Article 12, paragraph 1. The requesting Party shall be informed of the result of its request." 77. The Convention further contains provisions relating to other aspects of the extradition proceedings, including conditions for the request and supporting documents (article 12), provisional arrest (article 16), surrender of the person to be extradited (article 18), etc. 78. The European Convention on Extradition is the result of a draft prepared by a Committee of Governmental Experts on Extradition, convened by the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe on the instructions of the Committee of Ministers, following a recommendation by the Consultative Assembly. 79. During the proceedings of the Committee of Governmental Experts, delegations discussed at length whether they preferred a model bilateral convention or a multilateral European convention on extradition. As pointed out in the explanatory report on the European Convention, it then became apparent that "two different attitudes were being taken to certain principles which should govern extradition", which "it proved impossible to reconcile", namely one following the traditional view that the chief aim is to repress crime and that therefore extradition should be facilitated, and the other introducing humanitarian considerations and so tending to restrict the application of extradition laws. An expert from the Scandinavian countries, in particular, explained that the current attitude of countries in his region, which resulted from the preparatory works on new extradition regulations among them, was that, "while they agree on certain general regulations governing extradition procedure, the requested State should retain the right in the last resort to decide, according to the circumstances, whether extradition should be granted or whether, on the other hand, the person claimed should be proceeded against in its own territory". As a consequence, the orthodox extradition convention between these countries would be replaced by "a uniform law in each of them defining the conditions in which extradition would normally occur and giving special consideration to the need to protect the rights of the individual". His proposal that the Council of Europe introduce a similar system, however, did not receive the approval of the majority of experts and the Scandinavian experts thus expressed their willingness to consider the conclusion of extradition conventions of the traditional type (i.e. those entailing an obligation to extradite in specific cases) on condition that such conventions allow certain exceptional circumstances to be taken into consideration, so that in a given case extradition might be refused for imperative reasons of a humanitarian nature. 80. Article 1 of the European Convention was inspired by the Bilateral Convention concluded between France and the Federal Republic of Germany on 23 November 1951. The explanatory report emphasizes that the term "competent authorities" in the English text corresponds to "autorits judiciaires" in the French text and covers the judiciary and the Office of the Public Prosecutor, but excludes the police authorities. 81. Article 2, paragraph 1, is described in the explanatory report as laying down the principle of compulsory extradition, since "[t]he requested Party has no discretionary power to grant or refuse extradition", except in certain cases spelled out in subsequent provisions. As regards article 3 on political offences, the report further explains that this provision allows the requested party to decide whether the offence is political or not: as the provision was not accepted by all the delegations, owing to its mandatory character, the Committee decided that reservations could be made to it. 82. With respect to article 6, it appears that the Committee of Experts found inspiration in the corresponding provisions of the 1933 Inter-American Convention on Extradition. The majority of experts had considered it desirable, in view of the close links between the member States, to modify to some extent the established principle of non-extradition of nationals, on which legislation on extradition in many member States was still based. The Committee therefore recommended that the rule of non-extradition of nationals should in future be considered optional rather than compulsory and that the provision be drafted following the model of the Inter-American Convention. 83. The explanatory report indicates that article 6, paragraph 1, allows the extradition of nationals if this is not contrary to the laws of the requested State, but that even in this case the requested country is not obliged to extradite its nationals, thus having the option of granting or refusing their extradition. As for paragraph 2, the report specifies that this provision imposes an obligation for the requested State, at the demand of the requesting party, to submit the matter to the competent authority, "in order that the person concerned may not go unpunished". The report points out, however, that legal proceedings need not necessarily be taken, unless the competent authorities consider that they are appropriate. Taking into account the desirability in the interests of justice of proceeding against unextradited nationals, an expert had proposed an alternative drafting for this paragraph, which would have read as follows: "If the extradition of those persons is so refused, the requested Party shall proceed against them in accordance with the procedure which would be followed if the offence had been committed on its own territory." This proposal was supported by two other experts, but was not adopted by the Committee. It was also suggested in the Committee that the principle laid down in paragraph 2 should be extended to cover other cases in which extradition was not granted. The report states, however, that "... several experts thought this unnecessary because if one State informs another State that a person on its territory has committed certain offences, the latter State will ipso facto make enquiries to discover whether there are grounds for proceeding against that person". Finally, a proposal was made to include a provision that would allow the requested State to refuse extradition "if the arrest and surrender of the person claimed are likely to cause him consequences of an exceptional gravity and thereby cause concern on humanitarian grounds particularly by reason of his age or state of health". This proposal was not adopted by the Committee, on the understanding that a reservation to article 1 of the Convention could be made on this subject. 84. In the preparatory works, the question was also raised whether extradition should be refused (a) if an amnesty had been declared in the requesting country; or (b) if an amnesty had been declared in the requested country for offences of the type of that for which extradition is requested. The experts were of the opinion that the first possibility did not need to be considered as it seemed very unlikely. With regard to the second possibility, the experts thought that an amnesty generally took local or national considerations into account and should not be extended to persons whom it was not originally intended to cover, and that extradition should therefore be granted. It should be noted, however, that under article 4 of its Second Additional Protocol, the European Convention was supplemented by a provision ("Amnesty") whereby "Extradition shall not be granted for an offence in respect of which an amnesty has been declared in the requested State and which that State had competence to prosecute under its own criminal law." 85. Numerous declarations and reservations have been made in respect of the European Convention, which specify the scope of the obligations accepted by each Contracting Party with regard to extradition. Thus, for example, reservations have been made to article 1 to the effect that extradition may be refused on humanitarian grounds (e.g., by reason of the person's health, age or other personal circumstances, or if the person could be subjected to torture in the requesting State) or when the person will be tried in the requesting State by a special court or a tribunal that does not assure fundamental procedural guarantees. Some States have also indicated that they would refuse extradition on the grounds of public morality, public order, State security or other essential interests. States have also reserved their right to decide in each particular case whether acts for which extradition is requested are to be regarded as political offences or to refuse extradition when the person could be subject to the death penalty in the requesting State, unless sufficient assurance is given that it will not be executed. Some States have also reserved their right to refuse extradition of persons to whom they have granted political asylum. 86. As regards article 6, various States have made a declaration defining how they interpret the term "nationals" within the meaning of the Convention, sometimes also clarifying that, under their domestic legislation, they will refuse extradition of nationals so defined. Some of these States have explicitly specified that domestic authorities would proceed to prosecution of their own nationals, even for crimes committed abroad. 3. Other regional conventions on extradition 87. The General Convention on Judicial Cooperation (Convention gnrale de coopration en matire de justice), signed in the context of the Afro-Malagasy Common Organization (Organisation Commune Africaine et Malgache), provides that the States parties shall surrender to each other, following the rules and conditions under the Convention, individuals who are in their territory and are prosecuted or have been condemned by the judicial authorities of another party (article 41). Article 42 of the Convention reads as follows: "The High Contracting Parties shall not extradite their respective nationals; the status of national shall be determined at the time of the offence in respect of which extradition is requested. Nevertheless, the requested State undertakes to initiate proceedings against its own nationals who have committed infractions in the territory of another State which are punishable as crimes or offences under its own legislation, insofar as it is competent to try such persons, if the other State transmits a request for prosecution along with files, documents, objects and information in its possession. The requesting State shall be kept informed of the action taken on its request." 88. Under the London Scheme for Extradition within the Commonwealth, extradition is granted among Commonwealth countries for extradition offences and subject to the dual criminality rule (section 2). The Scheme provides that extradition will be precluded by law if the competent authority is satisfied that the offence is of a political character (section 12) and foresees discretionary grounds of refusal (section 15). Under the title "Alternative Measures in the Case of Refusal", section 16 further provides that "[f]or the purpose of ensuring that a Commonwealth country cannot be used as a haven from justice", each country which reserves the right to refuse to extradite nationals or permanent residents "will take, subject to its constitution, such legislative action and other steps as may be necessary or expedient in the circumstances to facilitate the trial or punishment of a person whose extradition is refused on that ground" (paragraph 1), which may include the submission of the case to the competent authorities of the requested State for prosecution (paragraph 2 (a)). 89. Under the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Convention on Extradition, States parties undertake to surrender to each other, subject to the provisions and conditions laid down in the Convention, all persons within their territory who are wanted for prosecution for an offence or who are wanted by the legal authorities of the requesting State for the carrying out of a sentence (article 2, paragraph 1). Pursuant to the Convention, extradition shall not be granted for political offences (article 3), if the person may be submitted to torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (article 4), when extradition would be incompatible with humanitarian considerations in view of age or health (article 5) or when an amnesty was granted (article 16). It may also be refused if the person has been sentenced or would be tried by an extraordinary or ad hoc tribunal (article 8), when the offence is regarded by the law of the requested State as having been committed in whole or in part in its territory or in a place treated as its territory (article 11) or when the offence is punishable by the death penalty in the requesting State and is not provided for by the law of the requested State (article 17). Under article 10, extradition of a national shall be a matter of discretion of the requested State; however: "The Requested State which does not extradite its nationals shall at the request of the Requesting State submit the case to its competent authorities in order that proceedings may be taken if they are considered appropriate. For this purpose, the files, information and exhibits related to the offence shall be transmitted, without charge, through the diplomatic channel or by such other means as shall be agreed upon by the States concerned. The requesting State shall be informed of the result of its request." (paragraph 2) D. The Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft (1970 Hague Convention) and other conventions following the same model 90. The particular kind of provision known as the "Hague formula" appears to be the most common contemporary version of conventional provisions that combine the options of extradition and prosecution. This type of clause is present in conventions aimed at the suppression of specific offences, principally in the field of the fight against terrorism, but also in many other areas (including torture, mercenaries, safety of United Nations personnel, transnational crime, corruption, forced disappearance, etc.). 1. Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft 91. The mechanism for the punishment of offenders provided for by the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft is unanimously acknowledged as having served as a model for most of the contemporary conventions for the suppression of specific offences. Its relevant provisions and corresponding preparatory works will therefore be studied in some detail. 92. The provision in the Convention that combines extradition and prosecution (article 7) is part of an articulated mechanism for the punishment of offenders, the main elements of which are the following. 93. Article 1 defines the relevant offence under the Convention. Under article 2, each Contracting State further undertakes to make the offence punishable by severe penalties. 94. Article 4 specifies the obligations incumbent upon Contracting States with regard to the establishment of their jurisdiction over the offence. Under paragraph 1, each Contracting State "shall take such measures as may be necessary to establish its jurisdiction" in three cases in which it has a special link with the offence. Paragraph 2 provides that each Contracting State "shall likewise take such measures as may be necessary to establish its jurisdiction over the offence in the case where the alleged offender is present in its territory and it does not extradite him pursuant to article 8 to any of the States mentioned in paragraph 1". This provision therefore establishes a case of universal jurisdiction with regard to the relevant offences. Paragraph 3 of this article indicates that the Convention "does not exclude any criminal jurisdiction exercised in accordance with national law". 95. Article 6 imposes upon the Contracting State in whose territory the alleged offender is present, upon being satisfied that the circumstances so warrant, to take him into custody or take other measures to ensure his presence and to proceed immediately to a preliminary inquiry into the facts. It further details the conditions applicable to such custody and the obligations of notification to other interested States. 96. Under article 7, "The Contracting State in the territory of which the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not extradite him, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any ordinary offence of a serious nature under the law of that State." 97. Article 8 spells out the regime of extradition of the relevant offence. Under paragraph 1, the offence shall be deemed to be included as an extraditable offence in any extradition treaty existing between Contracting States, and Contracting States undertake to include it as an extraditable offence in every extradition treaty to be concluded between them. Pursuant to paragraph 2, if a Contracting State which makes extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty receives a request for extradition from another Contracting State with which it has no extradition treaty, it may at its option consider the Convention as the legal basis for extradition in respect of the offence, subject to the other conditions provided by its law. Contracting States which do not make extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty shall recognize the offence as an extraditable offence between themselves subject to the conditions provided by the law of the requested State (paragraph 3). Under paragraph 4, the offence shall be treated, for the purpose of extradition, as if it had been committed not only in the place in which it occurred but also in the territories of the States required to establish their jurisdiction in accordance with article 4, paragraph 1. 98. The Convention was adopted at the International Conference on Air Law, held in The Hague from 1 to 16 December 1970 under the auspices of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). The Conference worked on the basis of a draft convention submitted by the Legal Committee of ICAO, which was itself based on a draft prepared by a subcommittee on the subject matter. 99. In his description of the subcommittee's draft during the proceedings of the Legal Committee, the Chairman of the subcommittee explained that that draft, which aimed at making it obligatory to prosecute acts of unlawful seizure of aircraft, was based on a system of multiple jurisdictions. Accordingly, the obligation to prosecute was placed on the State of registration of the aircraft and the State of landing if the alleged offender left the aircraft in the latter State. The draft provided that the offence would be an extraditable one, but did not impose an obligation of extradition. Moreover, the subcommittee had reckoned that it would not be possible to oblige the State of landing, which did not extradite the alleged offender, to prosecute him because, in many States, it was for the public prosecutor to decide whether or not to prosecute. It had thus adopted "a formula from the European Convention on Extradition whereby, if there was no extradition, the State which had arrested the alleged offender must submit the case to its competent authorities for their decision as to whether legal proceedings should be taken against the alleged offender". The Chairman of the subcommittee therefore summed up the system of the draft convention as containing "the obligation of apprehension of the alleged offender, a possibility of extradition, the obligation of reference to the competent authority and the possibility of prosecution". 100. The overall logic of this system was maintained, with minor amendments, by the Legal Committee, which explained in its report that "for the purpose of deterring acts of unlawful seizure of aircraft there is an urgent need to make them punishable as an offence and to provide appropriate measures to facilitate prosecution and extradition of the offenders". With regard to extradition, it was agreed that, under the draft convention, the Contracting States would accept an obligation to include the offence of unlawful seizure of aircraft in their future extradition treaties. However, it was also pointed out that the draft should safeguard the conditions imposed on extradition by domestic laws. 101. The draft submitted to the Conference by the Legal Committee thus contained the main elements of the mechanism that was later to be enshrined in the Convention, including a provision that imposed upon States parties, if they did not extradite, an obligation to submit the case to their competent authorities for prosecution. 102. In the general debate at the Conference, several delegations pointed out that the unlawful seizure of aircraft was a matter of international concern, and welcomed the negotiation of a convention that would avoid impunity of those responsible of such acts. Some delegations called for a further strengthening of the mechanism to ensure that offenders be brought to justice. 103. As mentioned above, the Legal Committee's draft, under article 4, imposed an obligation to establish jurisdiction over the offence only on the State of registration and the State of landing of the aircraft. The insertion of paragraph 2 was the result of an amendment justified as follows: "The reason behind [this] proposal was that Article 7, which obliged States that did not concede extradition to submit the case to their competent authorities for their decision whether to prosecute, would be a dead letter provision if the States did not have jurisdiction under Article 4, paragraphs 1 or 2. Since no mandatory extradition existed under the Convention, it was essential in its absence for the offender to be punished by the courts of the State in which he was held." 104. This proposal was criticized by some delegations, who considered that the original text was designed to provide for jurisdiction in those States most vitally connected with the offence and that the new paragraph would artificially bind together the establishment of jurisdiction and the machinery of extradition. Nevertheless, the amendment was supported by a majority of delegations, who were of the view that it filled a loophole in the convention, and was adopted by the Conference. 105. The text of article 7, as finally adopted, finds its origin in a joint amendment to the Legal Committee's draft that was also proposed at the Conference. The original proposed amendment suggested, in particular, the inclusion of the phrase "whatever the motive for the offence and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory" and the provision by which the competent authorities should take their decision whether to prosecute "in the same manner as in the case of any other ordinary offence [in French: "infraction de droit commun"] of a serious nature under the law of that State". While some delegations supported the proposal on the basis that it ensured that prosecution of hijackers would not be inhibited by any political aspects of their offence, other delegations expressed their strong opposition to the revised text. At the consideration of the final draft in plenary, a compromise text was submitted which replaced the phrase "whatever the motive for the offence" with "without exception whatsoever", and this amendment was adopted by the Conference. 106. In the course of the debate on article 8, it was clarified that this provision obliged Contracting States to include the offence as an extraditable one in extradition treaties, but did not make extradition itself mandatory or automatic. Paragraph 2 was added following a proposal whereby, inter alia, "the Contracting States which make extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty shall recognize the present Convention as the legal basis for extradition" (emphasis added). While this proposal was justified as filling a loophole in the Legal Committee's draft with respect to States which make extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty, and thus received some support, it was opposed by several delegations who did not want the Convention to constitute the basis for extradition. Such concerns were repeated in plenary in the final debate on the draft convention and, following a heated discussion, the proposal was amended to provide that the State concerned "may at its option consider this Convention as the legal basis for extradition in respect of the offence" (emphasis added). Two further amendments, aimed at giving priority to a request for extradition submitted by the State of registration of the aircraft and at making the offenders subject to extradition to the State of registration regardless of any specific agreement between the States concerned, posed difficulties for several delegations and were set aside. While some delegations also proposed that the Convention contain a provision prohibiting the granting of political asylum to the offender or the refusal of extradition on the ground that the offence was a political act, no corresponding amendment was adopted by the Conference. 107. No reservations have been made which affect the relevant provisions of the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft. 108. The following conventions, listed in chronological order, contain a provision employing the so-called "Hague formula": the Organization of American States (OAS) Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes Against Persons and Related Extortion that are of International Significance; the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation; the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents; the European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism; the International Convention against the Taking of Hostages; the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material; the Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture; the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism; the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation, Supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation; the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation; the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances; the International Convention Against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries; the Inter-American Convention on the Forced Disappearance of Persons; the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel; the Inter-American Convention against Corruption; the Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials; the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions; the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings; the Convention on the Protection of the Environment through Criminal Law; the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption; the Second Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict; the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism; the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography; the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols; the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime; the African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption; the United Nations Convention against Corruption; the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism; the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism; the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel; the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Convention on Counter-Terrorism. 109. Most of the conventions listed above also contain a mechanism for the punishment of offenders which appears to be based on that of the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, the constitutive elements of which are (a) the criminalization of the relevant offence, which the States parties undertake to make punishable under their domestic laws; (b) a provision by which States parties undertake to take such measures as may be necessary to establish their jurisdiction over the offence when they have a particular link with it, as well as when the alleged offender is present in their territory and they do not extradite him; (c) provisions regarding measures to take the offender into custody and to proceed to a preliminary inquiry into the facts; (d) a provision under which the State party in whose territory the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not extradite him, submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution; and (d) provisions under which States undertake, under certain conditions, to consider the offence as an extraditable one. 110. While in most of the cases it is apparent that the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft has served as a model for the drafting of the relevant provisions, many of these conventions have modified the original terminology, thus sometimes affecting the substance of the obligations undertaken by States parties. In addition, some conventions have provided for a different, or sometimes more detailed, regime for the various elements of this mechanism. The most significant variations to the mechanism are described below. 111. All the conventions listed above contain provisions by which the relevant acts are qualified as criminal offences and States undertake to make them punishable under their domestic laws. Most of these conventions further establish that the relevant penalties should take into account the grave nature of the offence concerned. Some conventions explicitly provide that the relevant offence should not be justifiable by considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or other similar nature. 112. Nearly all of the above-mentioned conventions provide that States parties "shall take such measures as may be necessary to establish their jurisdiction" over the offence when they have a special link with that offence (e.g., when the offence was committed in their territory or against one of their nationals): these obligatory bases of jurisdiction vary depending on the characteristics of the offence concerned. In addition, some conventions indicate that States parties "may also" establish their jurisdiction over the offence in other cases, thus providing for further voluntary bases of jurisdiction. 113. A widespread feature is the additional obligation, based on the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, by which States parties shall take such measures as may be necessary to establish their jurisdiction over the offence in the case where the alleged offender is in their territory and they do not extradite him. There are several variants to the latter provision, which in some cases appear to be purely terminological and in others seem to affect the content of the obligation. In particular, some conventions impose such an obligation to establish jurisdiction only when extradition is denied on the ground that the offender is one of the nationals of the State concerned; some conventions combine a regime of obligatory jurisdiction in some cases of refusal to extradite (particularly in the case of non-extradition of nationals) and of voluntary jurisdiction in others. On one occasion, the "third alternative" is contemplated in this context, by it being provided that this basis of universal jurisdiction shall apply unless the State "extradites or surrenders [the alleged offender] to another State in accordance with its international obligations or surrenders him or her to an international criminal tribunal whose jurisdiction it has recognized" (emphasis added). In addition, some conventions contain a provision calling on States parties to coordinate their actions whenever more than one of them claims jurisdiction over the relevant offences. 114. Almost all the conventions concerned further clarify, in a similar manner to that of the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, that they do not exclude any criminal jurisdiction exercised in accordance with national law. 115. Most of the conventions listed above contain provisions relating to the taking into custody of the offender for the purposes of extradition or prosecution, preliminary inquiry into the facts and other mechanisms of cooperation in criminal matters 116. While many conventions have followed the formulation of the provision contained in the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft whereby the State shall, if it does not extradite the alleged offender, submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, several variants have appeared over time. In some cases, the alterations to the original model seem to be of a purely terminological nature. In other instances, they either affect the scope of the obligation or provide more details on the applicable regime. The main variants are the following: (a) Preliminarily, it should be noted that not all the conventions place the said provision in the same position in the overall structure of the treaty and that, when the relevant provisions include a title, this title varies; (b) As regards the State subject to the obligation, some conventions provide that the provision shall apply to States "in the territory under whose jurisdiction" the alleged offender is found; (c) With regard to the triggering of the obligation, all the relevant conventions refer to the hypothesis of a State that "does not extradite" the alleged offender. Some conventions specify that a prior request for extradition is needed; other conventions provide that the obligation is only applicable when extradition is refused for specific reasons (notably, the nationality of the offender); in one instance, explicit reference is additionally made to the refusal of the State to surrender the alleged offender to an international criminal tribunal (the so-called "third alternative"); (d) With regard to the submission of the case to competent authorities, some conventions require that a request to this effect be made by the State seeking extradition. While the condition that such a submission be made "without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory" has been included in some conventions, it has sometimes been omitted, modified or supplemented with the further condition that the submission shall be made "without undue delay"; (e) Most conventions provide, as does the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, that the submission to the competent authorities shall be made "for the purpose of prosecution". Some conventions also mention the conditions that such submission be made "through proceedings in accordance with the laws of" the State concerned and/or "as if the offense had been committed within its jurisdiction"; (f) With respect to the proceedings initiated against the alleged offender, almost all the conventions examined contain a provision, similar to the one in the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, by which the competent authorities shall take their decision on whether to prosecute as in the case of any ordinary offence of a grave nature under domestic law. Certain conventions spell out conditions that shall be respected during the proceedings, for instance as regards the standards of evidence required for prosecution, cooperation among States on evidentiary and procedural matters, or guarantees of fair treatment of the alleged offender at all stages of the proceedings. Some conventions provide for general conditions for the prosecution of the relevant offences (e.g., nonapplicability of, or conditions on, statutes of limitations, inadmissibility of the defence of superior orders, exclusion of trial by special jurisdictions), which would also apply in the case of prosecution under the provision which imposes the obligation to prosecute, unless extradition occurs; (g) Some conventions indicate that an extradition granted upon the condition that the person be returned to the State to serve the sentence is sufficient to discharge the obligations under the convention; (h) Some conventions provide that prosecution under this provision is subject to the possibility for the State requesting extradition and the requested State to agree otherwise; (i) Finally, some conventions impose upon the requested State the obligation to report the final outcome of the proceedings to the requesting State. 117. Most of the above-mentioned conventions contain a provision on extradition modelled on the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft and including the same constitutive elements of the regime of extradition spelled out therein. Some conventions, however, adopt a different approach, in which the various provisions on extradition are spread out in the text of the treaty. The main variants of the regime of extradition are the following: (a) Some conventions determine that their rules on extradition apply provided that the relevant offence is punishable in both the requesting and the requested States; (b) Most conventions specify, as does the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, that the relevant offence shall be deemed to be included as an extraditable offence in any extradition treaty existing between States parties and that such States undertake to include the offence as an extraditable offence in every extradition treaty to be concluded among them; (c) Similarly to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, many conventions contain distinct provisions by which (a) States parties which make extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty, if they receive a request for extradition, may consider the convention as the legal basis for extradition in respect of the offence; and (b) States parties which do not make extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty shall recognize the offence as an extraditable offence between themselves. The relevant conventions further specify, as does the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, that these provisions remain subject to the conditions provided by the law of the requested State; (d) Most conventions also provide, as does the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, that the relevant offence shall be treated, for the purpose of extradition, as if it had been committed not only in the place in which it occurred but also in the territories of the States required to establish their jurisdiction over the offence in accordance with the relevant convention; (e) Some conventions provide that, for the purpose of extradition, the relevant offences shall not be regarded as political offences; some conventions further add that, accordingly, a request for extradition may not be refused on the sole ground that it concerns a political offence or an offence connected with a political offence or an offence inspired by political motives Under certain conventions, States parties may not refuse a request for extradition on the sole ground that the offence is also considered to involve fiscal matters. Certain conventions specify that their provisions shall not be interpreted so as to impair the right of asylum; (f) Some conventions provide that a request for extradition shall not be granted in certain circumstances, which include: (i) if the requested State Party has substantial grounds for believing that the request is made for the purpose of prosecuting or punishing a person on discriminatory grounds and/or that the person's position may be prejudiced for that reason; (ii) where there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture; (iii) if the requested Party has substantial grounds for believing that the person's position may be prejudiced because communication with the appropriate authorities of the State entitled to exercise rights of protection cannot be effected; or (iv) if it appears to the requested State that it is unjust or inexpedient to surrender or return the fugitive offender by reason of the trivial nature of the case, by reason of the request for the surrender or return of a fugitive offender not being made in good faith or in the interests of justice, or for any other reason. Some other conventions require the requested State, in considering a request for extradition, to pay due regard to whether the alleged offender's rights (including that of communication with representatives of his State of nationality) can be effected in the requesting State (g) Three conventions impose further obligations enhancing cooperation and effectiveness in extradition proceedings. Under these conventions: (i) the States parties, subject to their domestic law, shall endeavour to expedite the relevant extradition procedures and to simplify evidentiary requirements relating thereto; (ii) before refusing extradition, the requested party shall, where appropriate, consult with the requesting State party to provide it with ample opportunity to present its opinions and to provide information relevant to its allegation; and/or (iii) States parties shall seek to conclude bilateral and multilateral agreements or arrangements to carry out or to enhance the effectiveness of extradition; (h) Some conventions specify that, with respect to the relevant offences, the provisions of all extradition treaties and arrangements applicable between States parties are modified as between States parties to the extent that they are incompatible with the convention. 118. A separate mention should be made of certain regional conventions against crimes of international concern, particularly terrorism. In the African region, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Convention for the elimination of mercenarism in Africa uses a wording similar to the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, whereby "[e]ach contracting State shall undertake such measures as may be necessary to punish ... any person who commits an offence ... and who is found on its territory if it does not extradite him to the State against which the offence has been committed" (article 8); it then provides that "[a] request for extradition shall not be refused unless the requested State undertakes to exercise jurisdiction over the offender" in accordance with that article (article 9, paragraph 2) and that "[w]here a national is involved in the request for extradition, the requested State shall take proceedings against him for the offence committed if extradition is refused" (article 9, paragraph 2). The OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, while adopting a general mechanism for the punishment of offenders similar to that of the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, appears to impose an obligation on States parties to extradite any alleged offender whose extradition is requested by one of the States parties. This obligation, however, is subject to various conditions and is complemented by the provision that, if it does not extradite the person, the State is obliged to submit the case to its competent authorities. 119. Conventions adopted in the Arab world and in the context of the Organization of the Islamic Conference appear to follow a very different model. Under their provisions, Contracting States "shall undertake to extradite" persons accused or convicted of terrorist offences in a Contracting State and whose extradition is sought by that State in accordance with the provisions of the convention. These conventions, however, establish a list of circumstances in which extradition "shall not be permissible", including a provision whereby, if the legal system of the requested State does not allow it to extradite its nationals, the requested State shall prosecute any such persons who commit in any of the other Contracting States a terrorist offence that is punishable in both States by deprivation of liberty for a period of at least one year or more. 120. Several States have made reservations or interpretative declarations in respect of the above-mentioned conventions, which sometimes affect the legal effect of the provisions for the punishment of offenders. 121. Some reservations or declarations specify, in general terms, the scope of the relevant provisions. Thus, for example, it has been declared that the provisions on the punishment of offenders under a certain convention should not be interpreted in such a way that the said offenders are neither tried nor prosecuted, and that mutual legal assistance and extradition are two different concepts and that the conditions for rejecting a request for extradition should not be valid for mutual legal assistance. Similarly, in certain conventions, declarations have been made to the effect that, in the application of the provision requiring States, if they do not extradite, to submit the case for prosecution, any person committing the relevant offence shall be either prosecuted or extradited without any exception whatsoever. Certain States have further pointed out that the wording "alleged offender", used in some conventions, was in contradiction with the presumption of innocence, which was considered a fundamental principle under their domestic criminal law, and therefore stated that these terms should be interpreted as referring to the "accused". It has also been clarified that the condition "through proceedings in accordance with the laws of the State" shall be considered as referring to the provision on extradition and prosecution as a whole. 122. Reservations have been made stating that the provisions imposing upon States parties, if they do not extradite, an obligation to submit the case to their competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution should be understood to include "the right of the competent authorities to decide not to submit any particular case for prosecution before the judicial authorities if the alleged offender is dealt with under national security and preventive detention laws". Such reservations have been objected to as being "general and indefinite" and therefore contrary to the object and purpose of the relevant conventions, given that they made it impossible to identify in which way the reserving Government intended to change the obligations arising from those conventions. According to another reservation to provisions of this kind, some States have accepted the obligation to prosecute subject to the condition that they have received and rejected a request for extradition from another State party to the relevant convention. Yet another reservation contains the understanding that the relevant clause includes the right of the competent judicial authorities to decide not to prosecute a person if, in their opinion, grave considerations of procedural law indicate that effective prosecution would be impossible. 123. Several reservations or declarations concern the limitations to granting extradition under the domestic legislation of the State. Some of these reservations clarify, in general terms, that the relevant conventions shall be applied, in matters relating to extradition, subject to the modalities and procedures laid down under the national laws of the requested State. On many occasions, however, reservations are more precise. Some States have indicated that they would refuse the extradition of their nationals; on some occasions, these reservations further clarify that nationals would be tried and sentenced under national laws. Under some other reservations, requests for extradition would be refused for persons granted to whom political asylum has been, or for persons accused of political crimes or for their opinions. In the same vein, some reservations aim at excluding the application of those provisions in a convention that state that a request for extradition could not be refused on the sole ground that it concerns a political offence or an offence connected with a political offence or an offence inspired by political motives; these reservations have been objected to on the ground that they would be incompatible with the object and purpose of the relevant convention, since they are intended to exclude the application of fundamental provisions of the convention. Some States have further declared that the provisions under which conventions shall not be interpreted as imposing an obligation to extradite (if the requested State Party has substantial grounds for believing that the request for extradition has been made for the purpose of prosecuting or punishing a person on discriminatory accounts or that compliance with the request would cause prejudice to that person's position for any of these reasons) must be applied in such a way as to ensure the inevitability of responsibility for the relevant crimes. In yet other cases, the reservation excludes the handing over of the suspect in the event that the crime ascribed entails the death sentence in the requesting State. Furthermore, some reservations are made to the effect that extradition is restricted to offences that, under the domestic law of the requested State, are punishable with a penalty more severe than a stated minimum, or that it is subject to the fulfilment of other conditions under domestic law. Under a different reservation, the handing over of a person could only be based on "strong suspicions" that he committed the crimes he is accused of, and would depend on a court decision. 124. A reservation made by Belgium to some of the above-mentioned conventions, whereby "in exceptional circumstances" it reserved "the right to refuse extradition or mutual legal assistance in respect of any [relevant] offence ... which it considers to be a political offence or as an offence connected with a political offence or as an offence inspired by political motives", has proven particularly contentious. Objections were made to the reservation, stating that it seeks to limit the scope of application of a critical provision that should be applied in all circumstances and, by referring to subjective criteria, introduces uncertainty into conventional relations, and that it was therefore incompatible with the object and purpose of the relevant conventions. In light of these criticisms, Belgium has withdrawn its reservation with respect to these conventions. III. Conclusions 125. The present section aims at recapitulating the main variations of clauses which may be of relevance to the study of the topic "The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)" as found in the various instruments examined in the present study, following three thematic issues: (a) the relationship between extradition and prosecution resulting from the clause (which reveals the overall structure and logic of that clause); (b) the conditions applicable to extradition; and (c) the conditions applicable to prosecution. It then proposes some general conclusions arising from the examination of the previous work of the Commission on related topics and the conventional practice with respect to the obligation to extradite or prosecute. A. Relationship between extradition and prosecution in the relevant clauses 126. The fundamental common feature of the above-mentioned clauses resides in the fact that they impose upon States an obligation to ensure the prosecution of the offender either by extraditing the individual to a State that will exercise criminal jurisdiction or by enabling their own judicial authorities to prosecute. The relationship between these two alternative courses of action (to extradite or to prosecute), however, is not identical in all the examined clauses. Under this aspect, the relevant provisions contained in multilateral conventions may be classified into two main categories: (a) those clauses that impose an obligation to prosecute ipso facto when the alleged offender is present in the territory of the State, which the latter may be liberated from by granting extradition; and (b) those clauses for which the obligation to prosecute is only triggered by the refusal to surrender the alleged offender following a request for extradition. 1. Clauses imposing an obligation to prosecute ipso facto, with the possible alternative of extradition 127. The first category includes all those clauses that impose an obligation upon States parties to prosecute any person present in their territory who is alleged to have committed a certain crime. This obligation to prosecute may be said to exist ipso facto in that it arises as soon as the presence of the alleged offender in the territory of the State concerned is ascertained, regardless of any request for extradition. It is only when such a request is made that an alternative course of action becomes available to the State, namely the surrender of the alleged offender to another State for prosecution. In other words, in the absence of a request for extradition, the obligation to prosecute is absolute, but, once such a request is made, the State concerned has the discretion to choose between extradition and prosecution. 128. The clearest example of this first category of clauses is to be found in the relevant common article of the Geneva Conventions which provides that each State party "shall bring" persons alleged to have committed, or to have ordered to be committed, grave breaches to those Conventions, regardless of their nationality, before its own courts, but "may also, if it prefers", hand such persons over for trial to another State party concerned. While this provision appears to give a certain priority to prosecution by the custodial State, it does also recognize that this State has the discretion to opt for extradition, provided that the requesting State has made out a prima facie case. 129. Article 9 of the draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind, adopted by the Commission in 1996, appears to respond to the same logic. Under that article, the State party in whose territory an individual alleged to have committed certain crimes under the draft Code is found "shall extradite or prosecute that individual". While the wording of the article seems to place the two alternative courses of action on the same level, it is clear from the commentary that the obligation to prosecute arises independently from any request for extradition. The commentary specifies that the custodial State has an obligation "to take action to ensure that such an individual is prosecuted either by the national authorities of that State or by another State which indicates that it is willing to prosecute the case by requesting extradition". According to the commentary, article 9 "does not give priority to either alternative course of action" and the requested State is not required to grant a request for extradition if it prefers to entrust its own authorities with the prosecution of the case. 130. The terms of the relevant provision contained in the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft appear to be ambiguous in this respect: as described above, they provide that "[t]he Contracting State in the territory of which the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not extradite him, be obliged [...] to submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution". Even when read in its context and taking into account the preparatory works of the Convention, the text of this provision does not unequivocally resolve the question of whether the obligation to prosecute arises ipso facto or only once a request for extradition is submitted and not granted. Moreover, the views expressed in the legal literature on provisions of this kind do not give a definitive answer to this question. However, the interpretation according to which provisions of this kind impose an obligation to prosecute independently from any request for extradition may today find support in the case law of the Committee against Torture. In a decision relating to a similar provision contained in the 1984 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (article 7), the Committee found that "... the obligation to prosecute the alleged perpetrator of acts of torture does not depend on the prior existence of a request for his extradition. The alternative available to the State party under article 7 of the Convention exists only when a request for extradition has been made and puts the State party in the position of having to choose between (a) proceeding with extradition or (b) submitting the case to its own judicial authorities for the institution of criminal proceedings, the objective of the provision being to prevent any act of torture from going unpunished." 131. The question arises whether other clauses formulated in similar terms should also be interpreted in the same way. In light of the decision of the Committee against Torture, it may be argued that the formula by which the State in whose territory the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not extradite him, submit (or be obliged to submit) the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, indicates that the obligation to prosecute exists ipso facto. However, this interpretation is to be set aside at least in those cases where the clause expressly specifies that the obligation to prosecute is subject to the existence of a prior request for extradition or to a further request made by the State seeking extradition for the requested State to prosecute the individual: these variants of the formula belong to the second category described hereinafter. Other specificities of the provision may also have a bearing on how the clause should be interpreted in this respect. Thus, for example, as described above, some conventions place the said provision in a paragraph of the article concerning extradition; some conventions provide that the obligation is only applicable when extradition is refused for specific reasons (notably, the nationality of the offender); some conventions only contain an obligation for States parties to establish their jurisdiction over the relevant offences (in cases where an alleged offender is present in their territory and they do not extradite him to another party), but do not contain a clause that imposes upon States parties, if they do not extradite, the subsequent obligation to submit the case to their competent authorities for prosecution. A definitive answer to this question cannot therefore be given in general terms and should rather be based on a case-by-case examination of the exact formulation of the provision, its context and preparatory works. 2. Clauses imposing an obligation to prosecute only when extradition has been requested and not granted 132. The second category encompasses those provisions for which the obligation to prosecute is triggered by the refusal of a request for extradition. Under the conventions belonging to this category, States parties (at least those who do not have a special link with the offence) do not have a general obligation ipso facto to prosecute alleged offenders present in their territory. When a State receives a request for extradition, these conventions recognize the possibility for the State to refuse the surrender of the individual, either on grounds based on its own national legislation or for reasons explicitly contemplated in the conventions themselves. If it decides not to grant extradition, however, the State has the obligation to prosecute the individual. In other words, these conventions appear to give some priority to the option of extradition (rectius to prosecution by certain States, most notably those where the crime was committed, to which the alleged offender should normally be surrendered) and provide the alternative of prosecution as a safeguard against impunity. These conventions thus appear to follow the very same lines as originally foreseen by Hugo Grotius when he referred to the principle aut dedere aut punire. 133. The 1929 Counterfeiting Convention and subsequent conventions inspired from it belong to this second category. The Counterfeiting Convention expressly provides that, in the case of foreigners who have committed a relevant offence abroad, "[t]he obligation to take proceedings is subject to the condition that extradition has been requested and the country to which application is made cannot hand over the person accused for some reason which has no connection with the offence"(article 9, paragraph 2). The overall structure of the mechanism for the punishment of offenders in these conventions is indeed based on the idea that the State in whose territory the crime was committed will request the extradition of the offender who has fled to another country and that extradition should, in principle, be granted; these conventions, however, recognize that States may be unable to extradite in some cases (most notably, when the individual is their national or when they have granted asylum to him) and provide for the obligation to prosecute as an alternative. 134. Multilateral conventions on extradition are also to be placed in this second category. By their very nature, the application of the rules of judicial cooperation provided in them is triggered by the submission of a request for extradition. These conventions are based on the general undertaking by States parties to surrender to each other all persons against whom the competent authorities of the requesting Party are proceeding for an offence or who are wanted for the carrying out of a sentence or detention order. This obligation to extradite, however, is subject to a number of exceptions, particularly in the case in which the individual whose extradition is sought is a national of the requested State. These conventions provide for an alternative obligation to prosecute the offender whenever his extradition is refused, particularly on the grounds that he is a national of the requested State, as a mechanism to avoid impunity. 135. As observed above, some of the conventions described in section II.D above should also be included in this category, whenever the relevant clause is to be interpreted as subjecting the obligation to prosecute to the refusal of a request for extradition. 136. It should be noted, however, that conventions belonging to this category adopt very different mechanisms for the punishment of offenders, which may affect the interaction between extradition and prosecution. For example, those conventions that aim at the suppression of specific international offences generally contain detailed provisions concerning the prosecution of such offences, while multilateral conventions on extradition rather regulate the extradition process and do not include provisions on the conduct of prosecution. In the former category, while older conventions (such as that on counterfeiting) contain very limited obligations concerning the punishment of offenders (which remain without prejudice to national limitations to the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction), more recent conventions (notably those described in section II.D above) provide for more elaborate regimes, which may include obligations for certain States to establish extraterritorial jurisdiction. These issues will be further examined below. B. Conditions applicable to extradition 137. Three aspects of the regulation of the conditions applicable to extradition in the relevant conventions deserve particular consideration: the provision of a legal basis for extradition; the subjection of extradition to the national legislation of the requested State; and the inclusion of other norms relating to extradition proceedings. 138. The conventions reviewed differ in the mechanisms they establish to provide a legal basis for extradition of the relevant offences. Multilateral conventions on extradition, as well as a few conventions regarding specific international offences, directly impose upon States parties a general obligation to extradite, subject to certain conditions. The 1949 Geneva Conventions do not address the issue of the legal basis for extradition, and Additional Protocol I only calls on States parties to cooperate in the matter of extradition and safeguards the obligations arising from other treaties on the subject of mutual assistance in criminal matters (article 88). The majority of the conventions reviewed, however, establish a system by which the relevant offence shall be deemed to be included as an extraditable offence in any existing extradition treaty between States parties and such States undertake to include the offence as an extraditable offence in every future extradition treaty to be concluded among them, which is usually combined with provisions whereby States parties which make extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty may consider the relevant convention as the legal basis of extradition and States parties which do not make extradition conditional on the existence of a treaty shall recognize the offence as an extraditable offence between themselves. In other words, these conventions do not contain an obligation to extradite, they operate a renvoi to extradition treaties, which would provide the legal basis for extradition, but may also provide by themselves, in certain circumstances, such legal basis. 139. Besides the multilateral conventions on extradition (which usually spell out the conditions applicable to the extradition process, including possible grounds of denial), nearly all the conventions reviewed specify that extradition is subject to the conditions provided by the law of the requested State. This implies that the requested State has the right to refuse extradition of an individual on the basis of the provisions of its domestic legislation. Such grounds of refusal may be connected to the offence (e.g., the statute of limitations has expired, the offence is not criminalized in the requested State or the crime is subject to death penalty in the requesting State) or not (e.g., the individual was granted political asylum or there exist humanitarian reasons to deny extradition). 140. The need to safeguard the conditions provided by national laws was often a major point of discussion in the preparatory works of the conventions reviewed. In particular, it was emphasized in negotiations that the mechanism for the punishment of offenders to be established should take into account the fact that many States have constitutions which expressly prohibit the extradition of their own nationals and that States sometimes grant political asylum to individuals later sought for extradition. It was then considered that such conventions could not impose upon States parties an absolute obligation to extradite and should allow for the possibility for the requested State to refuse extradition based on its national law. As illustrated by the preparatory works of the Bustamante Code and the 1929 Counterfeiting Convention, this discussion is what originally led to the elaboration of a mechanism that would combine the possibility of extradition with that of prosecution. This discussion is then reflected in those conventions (such as the 1929 Counterfeiting Convention and other conventions following its model) that contain separate provisions on extradition and prosecution applicable to foreigners and nationals, in conventions in which the obligation to prosecute is triggered by a refusal to extradite on the specific ground of the nationality of the alleged offender, or in certain conventions which expressly safeguard the right of asylum. 141. Finally, it should be noted that some conventions have included more elaborate provisions relating to the extradition process, which affect the operation of the clauses on prosecution and extradition. Thus, for example, the Geneva Conventions specify, in the clause itself, that the option of extradition to another State is subject to the condition that such State "has made out a prima facie case". Many of the conventions described in section II.D above specify that each of the crimes concerned shall be treated, for the purpose of extradition between States parties, "as if it had been committed not only in the place in which it occurred but also in the territories of the States required to establish their jurisdiction" in accordance with such conventions, thus eliminating a possible bar to extradition. Some conventions contain other provisions according to which a request for extradition may not be refused on certain grounds (particularly by reason of the political character of the offence or for the fact that it involves fiscal matters) or, on the contrary, such a request shall be denied in certain circumstances (for example, when prosecution in the requesting State will be conducted on discriminatory grounds or would otherwise prejudice the person's position for that reason, or when the request for extradition is based on trivial grounds). Additionally, some conventions impose further obligations aimed at enhancing cooperation and effectiveness in extradition proceedings. 142. In conclusion, it appears that, beyond certain common features included in all conventions, the degree of specificity of the rules concerning the conditions applicable to extradition have varied depending on several factors. Among these, one may note that the inclusion of more detailed provisions has sometimes taken into account the specific concerns voiced in the course of negotiations (e.g., when the issue of the non-extradition of nationals has been raised, it has often led to the express recognition of this exception in the relevant convention), the particular nature of the offence (for instance, the risk of refusal of extradition based on the political character of the offence appears to be more acute with respect to certain crimes) and a certain evolution in the drafting of the relevant provisions to take into account problems that may have been overlooked in the past (for instance, the possible triviality of the request for extradition or the protection of the rights of the alleged offender). Once again, the reasons for the adoption of a certain type of regulation appear to depend on the particularities of each convention and its negotiating history, and should be assessed on the basis of a detailed examination of the relevant preparatory works. C. Conditions applicable to prosecution 143. Three aspects of the regulation of the conditions applicable to prosecution are of particular relevance for our purposes, namely the measures that States parties are obliged to take in order to be able to prosecute when the situation arises; the precise scope of the obligation to prosecute, including the issue of prosecutorial discretion; and the conditions applicable to subsequent judicial proceedings. 144. The conventions concerning specific international offences usually contain detailed provisions imposing upon States parties the obligation to adopt such measures as may be necessary to establish the relevant acts as criminal offences under their domestic law and to make them punishable by appropriate penalties; to establish their jurisdiction with regard to such offences; and to investigate relevant facts and ensure the alleged offender's presence for the purpose of prosecution or extradition. These preliminary steps are essential to allow the proper operation of the mechanism for the punishment of offenders in the relevant convention. In earlier conventions, the failure to impose obligations of this kind implied that there were loopholes in the mechanism. For example, as is apparent from the preparatory works, the drafters of the 1929 Counterfeiting Convention were careful not to impose upon States parties any duty to establish extraterritorial jurisdiction. As a consequence, article 9 limits the obligation to take proceedings against foreigners having committed an offence abroad to the case in which they are in a country "whose internal legislation recognises as a general rule the principle of the prosecution of offences committed abroad": foreigners in other countries would therefore escape punishment. One of the major innovations of the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft was to address this loophole by establishing a double-layered system of jurisdiction, under which the obligation incumbent upon States having a connection with the crime to establish their jurisdiction was complemented by the further obligation of each State to "take such measures as may be necessary to establish its jurisdiction over the offence in the case where the alleged offender is present in its territory and it does not extradite him" to any of the above-mentioned States. In other words, the 1970 Convention established a link between the operation of the provision on extradition and prosecution, on the one hand, and what appears to be a subsidiary exercise of universal jurisdiction, on the other hand. If one recalls, however, that the formula used in that convention has been interpreted as imposing an obligation to prosecute ipso facto, it may be considered that there is a general obligation to exercise universal jurisdiction, unless the State proceeds to extradition. As seen above, this mechanism has later been followed in many (albeit not all) other conventions concerning specific international crimes. 145. The determination of the scope of the obligation to prosecute is complicated by the fact that the formulation used in the various conventions to describe this obligation varies: the Bustamante Code uses the verb "to try"; the 1929 Counterfeiting Convention provides that individuals "should be punishable" and refers to an "obligation to take proceedings"; the 1949 Geneva Conventions impose upon States parties the obligation to "bring before their own courts" the alleged offenders; the 1957 European Convention on Extradition refers to the obligation of the State to "submit the case to its competent authorities in order that proceedings may be taken if they are considered appropriate"; the 1970 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft and other later conventions employ the expression "to submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution"; etc. 146. The question arises whether the submission of the case to competent national authorities would necessarily result in the prosecution and punishment of the offender. As described above, the question was already raised in the context of the negotiations of the 1929 Counterfeiting Convention and led to the adoption of an express provision on the matter. The same issue was considered in detail during the preparatory works of the European Convention on Extradition, in the course of which it was pointed out that the requested State had the obligation to submit the case to its competent authorities, but that "legal proceedings need not necessarily be taken, unless the competent authorities consider they are appropriate". The Subcommittee that prepared the first draft for the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft took inspiration from this formula, specifying that "the State which had arrested the alleged offender must submit the case to its competent authorities for their decision as to whether legal proceedings should be taken against the alleged offender". In other words, this obligation does not necessarily imply that proceedings will be taken, let alone that the alleged offender will be punished. For this reason, it has been authoritatively argued that the formula used in the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft should, strictly speaking, be described as "aut dedere aut persequi". 147. This raises the issue of whether the authorities to whom the case is referred enjoy any "prosecutorial discretion" in their decision whether to go forward with the proceedings. In this regard, following debates in the negotiations, the 1929 Counterfeiting Convention expressly provides that it does not affect the principle that the relevant offences "should in each country, without ever being allowed impunity, be defined, prosecuted and punished in conformity with the general rules of its domestic law"(article 18). Many of the most recent conventions described in section II.D above contain an explicit limitation whereby "[t]hose authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any ordinary offence of a serious nature under the law of that State"(article 7 of the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft), thus excluding that, for the purpose of prosecution, the offence be considered of a political nature. Some other conventions of the same group alternatively specify that the submission to competent authorities is to be made "through proceedings in accordance with the laws of" the State concerned and/or "as if the offense had been committed within its jurisdiction"; in some cases, it is established that "the standards of evidence required for prosecution and conviction shall in no way be less stringent that those which apply" in other similar cases (article 7, paragraph 2, of the 1984 Convention against Torture). It follows from these provisions that competent authorities do retain some prosecutorial discretion and that there may be cases in which a State would abide by its obligations under these conventions, while the alleged offender would neither have been extradited nor actually prosecuted. However, in the context of the preparation of the International Law Commission's draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind, the argument was made that the ordinary sort of prosecutorial discretion would be inappropriate for the crimes dealt with in the Code. It was noted, in particular, that the regime of the 1949 Geneva Conventions was to be interpreted as not providing for prosecutorial discretion for grave breaches. The terminology used in article 9 of the draft Code ("to prosecute") was therefore intended to impose an obligation to prosecute whenever there was sufficient evidence for doing so as a matter of national law, without there being any possibility of granting immunity in exchange for giving evidence or assisting with the prosecution in other cases. In sum, the precise degree of prosecutorial discretion available to competent authorities would seem to need to be determined on a case-by-case basis, in light of the text of the relevant provision and the preparatory works, taking into account the nature of the crime concerned. 148. Finally, some conventions spell out conditions that shall be respected in the conduct of the judicial proceedings, such as the standards of evidence, cooperation among States on evidentiary and procedural matters, guarantees of fair treatment of the alleged offender at all stages of the proceedings, etc. Variations in the content of these provisions appear to depend on different factors, including issues expressly raised in the negotiations, the risk of breach of such standards in the case of prosecution for certain crimes or the progressive evolution of such clauses. In any event, it would appear reasonable to argue that the general conditions applicable to the conduct of judicial proceedings established by international standards binding upon the State would also apply in the case of prosecution in the context of the clauses envisaging prosecution or extradition. D. Final remarks 149. On the basis of the examination of conventional practice, the following conclusive observations are proposed. 150. Firstly, clauses usually qualified as containing an obligation to extradite or prosecute share two fundamental characteristics, namely (a) their objective to ensure the punishment of certain offences at the international level; and (b) their use, for that purpose, of a mechanism combining the possibility of prosecution by the custodial State and the possibility of extradition to another State. Beyond these basic common features, however, such provisions, as found in multilateral conventions, greatly vary in their formulation, content and scope, particularly with regard to the conditions they impose upon States with respect to extradition and prosecution, and the relationship they establish between these two possible courses of action. 151. Secondly, in order to make an accurate assessment of the scope of the obligations incumbent upon States under the clauses that combine the options of extradition and prosecution, the relevant provisions should not be read in isolation. As shown above, these provisions are but one element of an overall mechanism for the punishment of offenders provided for under the relevant international instruments, which usually also includes rules relating to the criminalization of certain offences, the establishment of jurisdiction, the search for and arrest of alleged offenders, rules on cooperation in criminal matters and the regime of extradition. A study of the topic of "The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)" in conventional practice therefore requires that due consideration be given to the other elements of the mechanisms for the punishment of offenders in which these provisions are found. 152. Thirdly, multilateral conventions containing provisions that combine the options of extradition and prosecution may be classified according to different criteria, none of which, however, fully succeeds in reflecting the complexity of conventional practice in this regard. The present study has proposed a categorization of multilateral conventions which combines chronological and substantive criteria. This approach was considered to be the most effective to expose the main sources of inspiration of each convention, the overall historical trends in the evolution of such provisions, as well as the most important common features shared by certain groups of conventions. Nevertheless, other classifications could have been proposed. One could observe, for example, that a fundamental distinction exists between, on the one hand, multilateral conventions on extradition (which aim at regulating international judicial cooperation on criminal matters regardless of the nature of the offence concerned) and, on the other hand, conventions concerning specific offences of international concern (which aim at the criminalization of such offences and the establishment of an effective international system for this purpose). While the former emphasize the obligation to extradite (which is regulated in detail) and only contemplate prosecution as an exceptional alternative to avoid impunity, the latter focus on the conditions to ensure prosecution, mainly regulating extradition as a mechanism to ensure that the alleged offender is brought to trial. In any event, whatever the classification adopted, it should be noted that there has always been a transversal process of cross-fertilization, under which conventions belonging to seemingly different groups have served as inspiration to each other for the purpose of the elaboration of new mechanisms for the punishment of offenders. 153. Fourthly, in light of the study undertaken and beyond the observations made above in the present section, it appears to be difficult to draw general conclusions as to the precise scope of the conventional obligations incumbent upon States under the clauses that combine the options of extradition and prosecution, including on issues such as the exact meaning of the obligation to prosecute and conditions applicable thereto (including prosecutorial discretion), the legal basis and conditions applicable to extradition (including handling of multiple requests, standard of proof and circumstances that may exclude its operation), the relationship between the two courses of action provided for under the obligation, the relationship with other principles (including universal jurisdiction), the implementation of the obligation, or the availability of a "third alternative". The examination of conventional practice in this field shows that the degree of specificity of the various conventions in regulating these issues varies considerably, and that there exist very few conventions that adopt identical mechanisms for the punishment of offenders (including with respect to the relationship between extradition and prosecution). The variations in the provisions relating to prosecution and extradition appear to be determined by several factors, including the geographical, institutional and thematic framework in which each convention is negotiated, notably the pre-existence of other conventions in the same region or substantive field that may have had an influence on the preparatory works; the specific concerns voiced by delegations in the course of the negotiations; the particular issues arising from the nature of the offence that the convention aims at combating; a certain general evolution in the drafting of such clauses to take into account new issues that have arisen in practice; and the development of related areas of international law, such as human rights and international criminal justice. It follows that, while it is possible to identify some general trends and common features in the relevant provisions, conclusive findings regarding the precise scope of each provision need to be made on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the formulation of the provision, the general economy of the treaty in which it is contained and the relevant preparatory works. Convention on Private International Law (Bustamante Code) (Pan American Union) Havana, 20 February 1928, League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 86, No. 1950 The contracting States are not obliged to hand over their own nationals. The nation which refuses to give up one of its citizens shall try him. Geneva, 20 April 1929, League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 112, No. 2623 Article 8 In countries where the principle of the extradition of nationals is not recognized, nationals who have returned to the territory of their own country after the commission abroad of an offence referred to in Article 3 should be punishable in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in their own territory, even in a case where the offender has acquired his nationality after the commission of the offence. This provision does not apply if, in a similar case, the extradition of a foreigner could not be granted. Article 9 Foreigners who have committed abroad any offence referred to in Article 3, and who are in the territory of a country whose internal legislation recognizes as a general rule the principle of the prosecution of offences committed abroad, should be punishable in the same way as if the offence had been committed in the territory of that country. The obligation to take proceedings is subject to the condition that extradition has been requested and that the country to which application is made cannot hand over the person accused for some reason which has no connection with the offence. Convention on Extradition adopted by the Seventh International Conference of American States (Pan American Union) Montevideo, 26 December 1933, League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 165, No. 3803 Article 2 When the person whose extradition is sought is a citizen of the country to which the requisition is addressed, his delivery may or may not be made, as the legislation or circumstances of the case may, in the judgment of the surrendering State, determine. If the accused is not surrendered, the latter State is obliged to bring action against him for the crime with which he is accused, if such crime meets the conditions established in subarticle (b) of the previous article. The sentence pronounced shall be communicated to the demanding State. Convention for the Suppression of the Illicit Traffic in Dangerous Drugs Geneva, 26 June 1936, League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 198, No. 4648 Article 7 1. In countries where the principle of the extradition of nationals is not recognized, nationals who have returned to the territory of their own country, after the commission abroad of any of the offences referred to in Article 2, shall be prosecuted and punished in the same manner as if the offence had been committed in the said territory, even in a case where the offender has acquired his nationality after the commission of the offence. 2. This provision does not apply if, in a similar case, the extradition of a foreigner cannot be granted. Foreigners who are in the territory of a High Contracting Party and who have committed abroad any of the offences set out in Article 2 shall be prosecuted and punished as though the offence had been committed in that territory if the following conditions are realized -- namely, that: (a) Extradition has been requested and could not be granted for a reason independent of the offence itself; (b) The law of the country of refuge considers prosecution for offences committed abroad by foreigners admissible as a general rule. Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of Terrorism Geneva, 16 November 1937, League of Nations, 19 Official Journal 1938, p. 23 (Official No.: C.546.M.383.1937.V) 1. When the principle of the extradition of nationals is not recognized by a High Contracting Party, nationals who have returned to the territory of their own country after the commission abroad of an offence mentioned in Articles 2 or 3 shall be prosecuted and punished in the same manner as if the offence had been committed on that territory, even in a case where the offender has acquired his nationality after the commission of the offence. 2. The provisions of the present article shall not apply if, in similar circumstances, the extradition of a foreigner cannot be granted. Article 10 Foreigners who are on the territory of a High Contracting Party and who have committed abroad any of the offences set out in Articles 2 and 3 shall be prosecuted and punished as though the offence had been committed in the territory of that High Contracting Party, if the following conditions are fulfilled -- namely, that: (a) Extradition has been demanded and could not be granted for a reason not connected with the offence itself; (b) The law of the country of refuge recognizes the jurisdiction of its own courts in respect of offences committed abroad by foreigners; (c) The foreigner is a national of a country which recognizes the jurisdiction of its own courts in respect of offences committed abroad by foreigners. Geneva Convention for the amelioration of the condition of the wounded and sick in armed forces in the field Geneva, 12 August 1949, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 970 Geneva Convention for the amelioration of the condition of wounded, sick and shipwrecked members of armed forces at sea Geneva, 12 August 1949, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 971 Geneva Convention relative to the treatment of prisoners of war Geneva, 12 August 1949, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 972 Geneva Convention relative to the protection of civilian persons in time of war Geneva, 12 August 1949, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973 Paragraph 2 of articles 49/50/129/146 Each High Contracting Party shall be under the obligation to search for persons alleged to have committed, or to have ordered to be committed, such grave breaches, and shall bring such persons, regardless of their nationality, before its own courts. It may also, if it prefers, and in accordance with the provisions of its own legislation, hand such persons over for trial to another High Contracting Party concerned, provided such High Contracting Party has made out a prima facie case. Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others New York, 21 March 1950, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 96, No. 1342 In States where the extradition of nationals is not permitted by law, nationals who have returned to their own State after the commission abroad of any of the offences referred to in articles 1 and 2 of the present Convention shall be prosecuted in and punished by the courts of their own State. This provision shall not apply if, in a similar case between the Parties to the present Convention, the extradition of an alien cannot be granted. European Convention on Extradition (Council of Europe) Paris, 13 December 1957, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 359, No. 5146 Article 6 Extradition of nationals 2. If the requested Party does not extradite its national, it shall at the request of the requesting Party submit the case to its competent authorities in order that proceedings may be taken if they are considered appropriate. For this purpose, the files, information and exhibits relating to the offence shall be transmitted without charge by the means provided for in Article 12, paragraph 1. The requesting Party shall be informed of the result of its request. Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs New York, 30 March 1961, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515 (See also Protocol amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, Geneva, 25 March 1972, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 976, No. 14151) Article 36 Penal Provisions 2. Subject to the constitutional limitations of a Party, its legal system and domestic law, (a) ... (iv) Serious offences heretofore referred to committed either by nationals or by foreigners shall be prosecuted by the Party in whose territory the offence was committed, or by the Party in whose territory the offender is found if extradition is not acceptable in conformity with the law of the Party to which application is made, and if such offender has not already been prosecuted and judgment given. General Convention on Judicial Cooperation [Convention gnrale de coopration en matire de justice] (Afro-Malagasy Common Organization [Organisation Commune Africaine et Malgache]) Antananarivo, 12 September 1961, Journal Officiel de la Rpublique Malgache, 23 December 1961, p. 2242 Article 42 The High Contracting Parties shall not extradite their respective nationals; the status of national shall be determined at the time of the offence in respect of which extradition is requested. Nevertheless, the requested State undertakes to initiate proceedings against its own nationals who have committed infractions in the territory of another State which are punishable as crimes or offences under its own legislation, insofar as it is competent to try such persons, if the other State transmits a request for prosecution along with files, documents, objects and information in its possession. The requesting State shall be kept informed of the action taken on its request. (Hague Convention) The Hague, 16 December 1970, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 860, No. 12325 The Contracting State in the territory of which the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not extradite him, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any ordinary offence of a serious nature under the law of that State. Convention on Psychotropic Substances Vienna, 21 February 1971, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1019, No. 14956 Article 22 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation Montreal, 23 September 1971, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 974, No. 14118 (See also Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation, Supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation Montreal, 24 February 1988, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1589, No. 14118) Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes against Persons and Related Extortion that are of International Significance (Organization of American States) Washington, D.C., 2 February 1971, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1438, No. 24381 Article 5 When extradition requested for one of the crimes specified in Article 2 is not in order because the person sought is a national of the requested state, or because of some other legal or constitutional impediment, that state is obliged to submit the case to its competent authorities for prosecution, as if the act had been committed in its territory. The decision of these authorities shall be communicated to the state that requested extradition. In such proceedings, the obligation established in Article 4 shall be respected. Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents New York, 14 December 1973, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1035, No. 15410 The State Party in whose territory the alleged offender is present shall, if it does not extradite him, submit, without exception whatsoever and without undue delay, the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State. European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism (Council of Europe) Strasbourg, 27 January 1977, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1137, No. 17828 A Contracting State in whose territory a person suspected to have committed an offence mentioned in Article 1 is found and which has received a request for extradition under the conditions mentioned in Article 6, paragraph 1, shall, if it does not extradite that person, submit the case, without exception whatsoever and without undue delay, to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any offence of a serious nature under the law of that State. Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I) Geneva, 8 June 1977, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512 Article 85 Repression of breaches of this Protocol 1. The provisions of the Conventions relating to the repression of breaches and grave breaches, supplemented by this Section, shall apply to the repression of breaches and grave breaches of this Protocol. Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination of mercenarism in Africa Libreville, 3 July 1977, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573 Extradition 3. Where a national is involved in the request for extradition, the requested State shall take proceedings against him for the offence committed if extradition is refused. International Convention against the Taking of Hostages New York, 17 December 1979, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1316, No. 21931 1. The State Party in the territory of which the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not extradite him, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any ordinary offence of a grave nature under the law of that State. Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material Vienna and New York, 3 March 1980, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1456, No. 24631 Inter-American Convention on Extradition (Organization of American States) Caracas, 25 February 1981, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1752, No. 30597 Jurisdiction 3. The requested State may deny extradition when it is competent, according to its own legislation, to prosecute the person whose extradition is sought for the offence on which the request is based. If it denies extradition for this reason, the requested State shall submit the case to its competent authorities and inform the requesting State of the result. Prosecution by the Requested State If, when extradition is applicable, a State does not deliver the person sought, the requested State shall, when its laws or other treaties so permit, be obligated to prosecute him for the offence with which he is charged, just as if it had been committed within its territory, and shall inform the requesting State of the judgment handed down. Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment New York, 10 December 1984, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841 1. The State Party in the territory under whose jurisdiction a person alleged to have committed any offence referred to in article 4 is found shall in the cases contemplated in article 5, if it does not extradite him, submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture (Organization of American States) Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, 9 December 1985, OAS Treaty Series, No. 67 Article 14 When a State Party does not grant the extradition, the case shall be submitted to its competent authorities as if the crime had been committed within its jurisdiction, for the purposes of investigation, and when appropriate, for criminal action, in accordance with its national law. Any decision adopted by these authorities shall be communicated to the State that has requested the extradition. South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Regional Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism Kathmandu, 4 November 1987, International Instruments related to the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism, United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.V.9, p. 153 Article IV A Contracting State in whose territory a person is suspected of having committed an offence referred to in Article I or agreed to in terms of Article II is found and which has received a request for extradition from another Contracting State, shall, if it does not extradite that person, submit the case without exception and without delay, to its competent authorities who shall take their decisions in the same manner as in the case of any offence of a serious nature under the law of the State. of Maritime Navigation Rome, 10 March 1988, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1678, No. 29004 1. The State Party in the territory of which the offender or the alleged offender is found shall, in cases to which article 6 applies, if it does not extradite him, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case without delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a grave nature under the law of that State. United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Vienna, 20 December 1988, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1582, No. 27627 9. Without prejudice to the exercise of any criminal jurisdiction established in accordance with its domestic law, a Party in whose territory an alleged offender is found shall: (a) If it does not extradite him in respect of an offence established in accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, on the grounds set forth in article 4, paragraph 2, subparagraph (a), submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, unless otherwise agreed with the requesting Party; (b) If it does not extradite him in respect of such an offence and has established its jurisdiction in relation to that offence in accordance with article 4, paragraph 2, subparagraph (b), submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, unless otherwise requested by the requesting Party for the purposes of preserving its legitimate jurisdiction. International Convention Against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries New York, 4 December 1989, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789 Article 12 The State Party in whose territory the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not extradite him, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a grave nature under the law of that State. Inter-American Convention on the Forced Disappearance of Persons (Organization of American States) Belm do Par, Brazil, 9 June 1994, International Legal Materials, vol. XXV, 1994, p. 1529 Article VI When a State Party does not grant the extradition, the case shall be submitted to its competent authorities as if the offence had been committed within its jurisdiction, for the purposes of investigation and when appropriate, for criminal action, in accordance with its national law. Any decision adopted by these authorities shall be communicated to the state that has requested the extradition. Economic Community of West African States Convention on Extradition Abuja, 6 August 1994, ECOWAS Convention A/P1/8/94, reproduced in Collection of International Instruments and Legal Texts Concerning Refugees and Others of Concern to UNHCR, vol. 3, June 2007, p. 1085 2. The requested State which does not extradite its nationals, shall at the request of the requesting State submit the case to its competent authorities in order that proceedings may be taken if they are considered appropriate. For this purpose, the files, information and exhibits relating to the offence shall be transmitted, without charge, through the diplomatic channel or by such other means as shall be agreed upon by the States concerned. The requesting State shall be informed of the result of its request. Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel New York, 9 December 1994, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 34547 (See also Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel New York, 8 December 2005, General Assembly resolution 60/42, annex) The State Party in whose territory the alleged offender is present shall, if it does not extradite that person, submit, without exception whatsoever and without undue delay, the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the law of that State. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of an ordinary offence of a grave nature under the law of that State. Inter-American Convention against Corruption (Organization Caracas, 29 March 1996, see E/1996/99 Article XIII 6. If extradition for an offence to which this article applies is refused solely on the basis of the nationality of the person sought, or because the requested State deems that it has jurisdiction over the offence, the requested State shall submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution unless otherwise agreed with the requesting State, and shall report the final outcome to the requesting State in due course. Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials (Organization of American States) Washington, D.C., 14 November 1997, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2029, No. 35005 Article XIX 6. If extradition for an offence to which this article applies is refused solely on the basis of the nationality of the person sought, the requested State Party shall submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution under the criteria, laws, and procedures applied by the requested State to those offences when they are committed in its own territory. The requested and requesting States parties may, in accordance with their domestic laws, agree otherwise in relation to any prosecution referred to in this paragraph. Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions Paris, 21 November 1997, S. Treaty Doc. No. 105-43, reprinted in International Legal Materials, vol. XXXVII, 1998, p. 1 3. Each Party shall take any measures necessary to assure either that it can extradite its nationals or that it can prosecute its nationals for the offence of bribery of a foreign public official. A Party which declines a request to extradite a person for bribery of a foreign public official solely on the ground that the person is its national shall submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings New York, 15 December 1997, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2149, No. 37517 1. The State Party in the territory of which the alleged offender is present shall, in cases to which article 6 applies, if it does not extradite that person, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a grave nature under the law of that State. Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism (League of Arab States) Cairo, 22 April 1998, International Instruments related to the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism, United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.V.9, p. 158 Extradition shall not be permissible in any of the following circumstances: h. If the legal system of the requested State does not allow it to extradite its nationals. In this case, the requested State shall prosecute any such persons who commit in any of the other Contracting States a terrorist offence that is punishable in both States by deprivation of liberty for a period of at least one year or more. The nationality of the person whose extradition is sought shall be determined as at the date on which the offence in question was committed, and use shall be made in this regard of the investigation conducted by the requesting State. Convention on the Protection of the Environment through Criminal Law (Council of Europe) Strasbourg, 4 November 1998, Council of Europe, Treaty Series, No. 172 [See footnote 237 above.] Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (Council of Europe) Strasbourg, 27 January 1999, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2216, No. 39391 Article 27 5. If extradition for a criminal offence established in accordance with this Convention is refused solely on the basis of the nationality of the person sought, or because the requested Party deems that it has jurisdiction over the offence, the requested Party shall submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution unless otherwise agreed with the requesting Party, and shall report the final outcome to the requesting Party in due course. Second Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict The Hague, 26 March 1999, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2253, No. 3511 Article 17 1. The Party in whose territory the alleged offender of an offence set forth in Article 15 subparagraphs 1 (a) to (c) is found to be present shall, if it does not extradite that person, submit, without exception whatsoever and without undue delay, the case to its competent authorities, for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with its domestic law or with, if applicable, the relevant rules of international law. Convention of the Organization of the Islamic Conference on Combating International Terrorism Ouagadougou, 1 July 1999, International Instruments related to the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism, United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.V.9, p. 188 8. If the legal system of the requested State does not permit extradition of its national, then it shall be obliged to prosecute whosoever commits a terrorist crime if the act is punishable in both States by a freedom restraining sentence for a minimum period of one year or more. The nationality of the person requested for extradition shall be determined according to the date of the crime taking into account the investigation undertaken in this respect by the requesting State. Organization of African Unity Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism Algiers, 14 July 1999, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2219, No. 39464 4. A State Party in whose territory an alleged offender is present shall be obliged, whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution if it does not extradite that person. International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism New York, 9 December 1999, General Assembly resolution 54/109, annex, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2178, No. 38349 1. The State Party in the territory of which the alleged offender is present shall, in cases to which article 7 applies, if it does not extradite that person, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a grave nature under the law of that State. Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography New York, 25 May 2000, General Assembly resolution 54/263, annex II, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2171, No. 27531 5. If an extradition request is made with respect to an offence described in article 3, paragraph 1, and the requested State Party does not or will not extradite on the basis of the nationality of the offender, that State shall take suitable measures to submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime New York, 15 November 2000, General Assembly resolution 54/263, annex I, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574 (See also Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime New York, 15 November 2000, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574 Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, Supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime New York, 15 November 2000, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2241, No. 39574 Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime New York, 8 June 2001, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2326, No. 39574) Article 16 10. A State Party in whose territory an alleged offender is found, if it does not extradite such person in respect of an offence to which this article applies solely on the ground that he or she is one of its nationals, shall, at the request of the State Party seeking extradition, be obliged to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. Those authorities shall take their decision and conduct their proceedings in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a grave nature under the domestic law of that State Party. The States parties concerned shall cooperate with each other, in particular on procedural and evidentiary aspects, to ensure the efficiency of such prosecution. Convention on Cybercrime (Council of Europe) Budapest, 23 November 2001, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2296, No. 40916 Article 24 6. If extradition for a criminal offence referred to in paragraph 1 of this article is refused solely on the basis of the nationality of the person sought, or because the requested Party deems that it has jurisdiction over the offence, the requested Party shall submit the case at the request of the requesting Party to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution and shall report the final outcome to the requesting Party in due course. Those authorities shall take their decision and conduct their investigations and proceedings in the same manner as for any other offence of a comparable nature under the law of that Party. a The Scheme is not a binding international instrument. London Scheme for Extradition within the Commonwealth, incorporating the amendments agreed at Kingstown in November 2002a Available at www.thecommonwealth.org/shared_asp_files/uploadedfiles/% 7B56F55E5D-1882-4421-9CC1-71634DF17331%7D_London_Scheme.pdf 16 (1) For the purpose of ensuring that a Commonwealth country cannot be used as a haven from justice, each country which reserves the right to refuse to extradite nationals or permanent residents in accordance with clause 15 paragraph (3), will take, subject to its constitution, such legislative action and other steps as may be necessary or expedient in the circumstances to facilitate the trial or punishment of a person whose extradition is refused on that ground. (2) The legislative action necessary to give effect to paragraph (1) may include -- (a) providing that the case be submitted to the competent authorities of the requested country for prosecution; (b) permitting: (i) the temporary extradition of the person to stand trial in the requesting country on condition that, following trial and sentence, the person is returned to the requested country to serve his or her sentence; and (ii) the transfer of convicted offenders; or (c) enabling a request to be made to the relevant authorities in the requesting country for the provision to the requested country of such evidence and other information as would enable the authorities of the requested country to prosecute the person for the offence. African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption Maputo, 11 July 2003, International Legal Materials, vol. XLIII, 2004, p. 5 Article 15 6. Where a State Party in whose territory any person charged with or convicted of offences is present and has refused to extradite that person on the basis that it has jurisdiction over offences, the requested State Party shall be obliged to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, unless otherwise agreed with the requesting State Party, and shall report the final outcome to the requesting State Party. United Nations Convention against Corruption New York, 31 October 2003, General Assembly resolution 58/4, annex, United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2349, p. 41 Article 44 11. A State Party in whose territory an alleged offender is found, if it does not extradite such person in respect of an offence to which this article applies solely on the ground that he or she is one of its nationals, shall, at the request of the State Party seeking extradition, be obliged to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. Those authorities shall take their decision and conduct their proceedings in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a grave nature under the domestic law of that State Party. The States parties concerned shall cooperate with each other, in particular on procedural and evidentiary aspects, to ensure the efficiency of such prosecution. Convention of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf on Combating Terrorism Kuwait, 4 May 2004, International Instruments related to the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism, United Nations publication, Sales No. E.08.V.2, p. 259 Article 20 Extradition shall not be possible in the following cases: (h) If the law of the requested State prohibits it from extraditing its nationals. In this case, the requested State shall undertake to convict a national who has committed a terrorist offence in any other Contracting State if the offence is punishable by deprivation of liberty of at least one year in both States. The nationality of the person whose extradition is sought shall be deemed to be the nationality as at the date of the commission of the offence for which extradition is sought, on the basis of investigations conducted by the requesting State. International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism New York, 13 April 2005, General Assembly resolution 59/290, annex Article 11 1. The State Party in the territory of which the alleged offender is present shall, in cases to which article 9 applies, if it does not extradite that person, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the laws of that State. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a grave nature under the law of that State. Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism Warsaw, 16 May 2005, Council of Europe, Treaty Series, No. 196 Article 18 The Party in the territory of which the alleged offender is present shall, when it has jurisdiction in accordance with Article 14, if it does not extradite that person, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the laws of that Party. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a serious nature under the law of that Party. International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance New York, 20 December 2006, General Assembly resolution 61/177, annex 1. The State Party in the territory under whose jurisdiction a person alleged to have committed an offence of enforced disappearance is found shall, if it does not extradite that person or surrender him or her to another State in accordance with its international obligations or surrender him or her to an international criminal tribunal whose jurisdiction it has recognized, submit the case to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Convention on CounterTerrorism Cebu, Philippines, 13 January 2007, International Instruments related to the Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism, United Nations publication, Sales No. E.08.V.2, p. 336 1. The Party in the territory of which the alleged offender is present shall, in cases to which Article VII of this Convention applies, if it does not extradite that person, be obliged, without exception whatsoever and whether or not the offence was committed in its territory, to submit the case without undue delay to its competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution, through proceedings in accordance with the domestic laws of that Party. Those authorities shall take their decision in the same manner as in the case of any other offence of a grave nature under the domestic laws of that Party. 