%%%FOOD AID|PLEDGING CONFERENCES|

2010 United Nations/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Pledging Conference for the World Food Programme New York, 8 November 2010 Report of the 2010 United Nations/Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Pledging Conference for the World Food Programme A. Opening and duration of the session 1. The Conference was held at United Nations Headquarters on 8 November 2010. 2. The Conference was opened by the Director, Office for ECOSOC Support and Coordination, Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. B. Attendance 3. The Conference was attended by representatives of the Governments of the following States: Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan, Canada, China, the Czech Republic, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Equatorial Guinea, Finland, Gabon, the Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Kuwait, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Monaco, Montenegro, Norway, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America. 4. The observers for the Holy See and the African Union, as well as the representatives of the following organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations and the specialized and related agencies, also attended the Conference: the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the Economic Commission for Africa, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, the United Nations Population Fund and the World Food Programme. C. Election of officers 5. At its meeting on 8 November, the Conference elected by acclamation the following officials: President: Oumar Daou (Mali) Vice-Presidents: Jarmo Viinanen (Finland) Gheorghe Leucă (Republic of Moldova) Kim Chang Mo (Republic of Korea) D. Documentation 6. The Conference had before it the following documents: (a) Draft report (A/CONF.209/2010/L.1); (b) Background note on the World Food Programme. E. Announcement of pledges 7. The Conference heard the announcement of pledges to the World Food Programme by a number of Governments and took note of the fact that, while several Governments were not in a position to announce their contributions, they proposed to communicate their announcement of such contributions to the Secretary-General as soon as they were in a position to do so after the closure of the Conference. 