%%%ELECTION OF MEMBERS|BIOGRAPHY|

United Nations A/HRC/14/28 General Assembly Distr.: General 4 June 2010 Original: English Human Rights Council Fourteenth session Agenda item 1 Organizational and procedural matters Election of members of the Human Rights Council Advisory Committee* ** Note by the Secretary-General 1. In accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, the Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, composed of 18 experts serving in their personal capacity and nominated by States Members of the United Nations following States' consultations with national human rights institutions and civil society organizations, shall be elected by the Council by secret ballot, from the list of candidates whose names have been submitted in accordance with the agreed requirements. 2. The geographic distribution of members is as follows: (a) five from African States; (b) five from Asian States; (c) two from Eastern European States; (d) three from Latin American and Caribbean States; and (e) three from Western European and other States. 3. At its seventh session, held from 3 March to 1 April 2008, the Council elected the 18 members of the Advisory Committee, of whom four members for a one-year term, seven for a two-year term and seven for a three-year term. 4. Following the demise of Miguel Alfonso Martínez, who had been elected for a three-year term to the Advisory Committee on 25 March 2009 at the tenth session of the Council, a vacancy from the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States needs to be filled for the remainder of his term. The Council will hold an election of the new member at its fourteenth session. 5. On 9 March 2010, the Secretariat of the Council addressed a note verbale to the Permanent Mission of Colombia in its capacity as the regional coordinator for Latin American and Caribbean States with regard to the submission of nominations. 6. On 31 May 2010, the Secretariat received a note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Colombia, communicating the nomination of Miguel D'escoto Brockman, as candidate to membership of the Advisory Committee. The biographical data of the candidate are annexed to the present note. 7. At its sixth session, the Council adopted decision 6/102 on follow-up to its resolution 5/1, in which it described the technical and objective requirements for the submission of candidatures, which include: (a) Recognized competence and experience in the field of human rights; (b) High moral standing; (c) Independence and impartiality. 8. When selecting their candidates, States should apply the following guidelines on technical and objective requirements for the submission of their candidates: (a) Competence and experience: (i) Academic studies in the field of human rights or related areas and/or experience and exposure to leadership roles in the human rights field at the national, regional or international levels; (ii) Substantial experience (at least five years) and personal contributions in the field of human rights; (iii) Knowledge of the United Nations system and of institutional mandates and policies related to the work in the area of human rights, as well as knowledge of international human rights instruments, norms and disciplines; familiarity with different legal systems and civilizations will be preferable; (iv) Proficiency in at least one official language of the United Nations; (v) Availability of time to fulfil the work of the Advisory Committee in an effective manner, both to attend its sessions and to carry out mandated activities between sessions; (c) Independence and impartiality: individuals holding decision-making positions in Government or any other organization or entity which might give rise to a conflict of interest with responsibilities inherent to the mandate will be excluded; elected members of the Advisory Committee will act in their personal capacity; (d) Other considerations: the principle of non-accumulation of human rights functions at the same time shall be respected. 9. In electing members of the Advisory Committee, the Council should give due consideration to gender balance and appropriate representation of different civilizations and legal systems. Biographical data [Spanish only] Miguel D'escoto Brockman (Nominated by the Government of Nicaragua) Nació en California en 1933, llega a Nicaragua, la patria de sus padres, en junio de 1934, unos cuatro meses después del asesinato de Sandino. En 1947 regresa a Estados Unidos donde, después de bachillerarse, estudia Ingeniería Civil y en 1953 entra a la Congregación Misionera Maryknoll donde, en 1961, fue ordenado sacerdote en Nueva York. Después de estudios de Filosofía en Glen Ellen, Illinois, 1953 - 1955, cursa estudios de Teología y Pedagogía en Nueva York, 1957 - 1961. Ingresa posteriormente a la Escuela de Periodismo (Pulitzer Institute) de la Universidad de Columbia, Nueva York, donde, en 1962, obtiene un Master's en Ciencias. Enviado a Chile en 1963 funda el Instituto Nacional de Acción Poblacional e Investigaciones (INAP) y se dedica de lleno a trabajar en las "callampas" o barrios más pobres en la periferia de Santiago y varias otras ciudades como Concepción y Temuco al Sur de Chile. En el año 1970 asume la dirección del Departamento de Comunicaciones Sociales de Maryknoll en Nueva York donde su contribución más grande fue la creación de la Editorial ORBIS que sigue siendo considerada como las más importantes en Estados Unidos sobre temas del Tercer Mundo. En 1973, a raíz del terremoto de Managua, crea la Fundación pro Desarrollo Comunitaria Integral, FUNDECI, para ayudar a víctimas del terremoto. Posteriormente, aún viviendo en Nueva York, se convierte en uno de los fundadores del Grupo de los 12, integrado por profesionales e intelectuales democráticos y progresistas, a favor de la lucha libertaria del Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional. En julio de 1979 fue nombrado Canciller de la República, puesto que ocupó hasta abril de 1990, después de una importante participación en los procesos de Contadora y Esquipulas. En febrero 2007 fue nombrado Asesor del Presidente Daniel Ortega Saavedra en Relaciones Exteriores y Asuntos Limítrofes, con rango de Ministro. El 4 de junio del año 2008 fue electo Presidente de la 63 Asamblea General de las Naciones Unidas por aclamación. Algunos reconocimientos Orden Carlos Fonseca Amador, máximo reconocimiento otorgado por el FSLN. Premio Julio Cortázar por la Paz y la Democracia en América Latina y el Caribe, otorgado por el Instituto de Relaciones Internacionales de Argentina, junio 1985. Premio Internacional Lenín por la Paz, otorgado por la Unión Soviética, junio 1987. Premio Alfonso Comín por la Paz, 1984 Doctorado Honoris Causa en Ingeniería, otorgado por la Universidad de Ingeniería de Nicaragua, 25 noviembre 2005. Orden al Mérito Centroamericano, otorgado por el Parlamento Centroamericano, mayo 2006. Distinción Nora Astorga, otorgado conjuntamente por la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Nicaragua, UNAN-Managua y la Unión Nacional de Estudiantes de Nicaragua, UNEN, 27 junio 2006 Orden José de Marcoleta, otorgado por Cancillería de Nicaragua, 14 junio 2007. Orden Cardenal Miguel Obando Bravo, máxima condecoración otorgada por la Universidad Católica Redemptoris Mater (UNICA), 21 agosto 2007. Orden de la Solidaridad, otorgada por el Consejo de Estado de Cuba, 3 de septiembre de 2009. 