%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|GUYANA|INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS|TREATY-MONITORING BODIES|SPECIAL PROCEDURES|

United Nations A/HRC/WG.6/8/GUY/2 General Assembly Distr.: General 22 February 2010 Original: English Human Rights Council Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Eighth session Geneva, 314 May 2010 Compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 Guyana The present report is a compilation of the information contained in the reports of treaty bodies, special procedures, including observations and comments by the State concerned, and other relevant official United Nations documents. It does not contain any opinions, views or suggestions on the part of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), other than those contained in public reports issued by OHCHR. It follows the structure of the general guidelines adopted by the Human Rights Council. Information included herein has been systematically referenced in endnotes. The report has been prepared taking into consideration the four-year periodicity of the first cycle of the review. In the absence of recent information, the latest available reports and documents have been taken into consideration, unless they are outdated. Since this report only compiles information contained in official United Nations documents, lack of information or focus on specific issues may be due to non-ratification of a treaty and/or to a low level of interaction or cooperation with international human rights mechanisms. A. Scope of international obligations Core universal human rights treaties The following abbreviations have been used for this document: ICERD International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; ICESCR International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; OP-ICESCR Optional Protocol to ICESCR; ICCPR International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; ICCPR-OP 1 Optional Protocol to ICCPR; ICCPR-OP 2 Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty; CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; OP-CEDAW Optional Protocol to CEDAW; CAT Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; OP-CAT Optional Protocol to CAT; CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child, OP-CRC-AC Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict; OP-CRC-SC Optional Protocol to CRC on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography; ICRMW International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families; CRPD Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; OP-CRPD Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities; CED International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Date of ratification, accession or succession Declarations /reservations Recognition of specific competences of treaty bodies ICERD 15 Feb. 1977 Yes Individual complaints (art. 14): No ICESCR None ICCPR Yes (art. 14 (3), (d) and art. 14 (6)). Inter-State complaints (art. 41): Yes ICCPR-OP 1 5 Jan. 1999 Yes (art.6) CEDAW 17 July 1980 CAT 19 May 1988 Inter-State complaints (art. 21): No Individual complaints (art. 22): No Inquiry procedure (art. 20): Yes CRC 14 Jan 1991 Core treaties to which Guyana is not a party: OP-ICESCR, ICCPR-OP 2, OP-CEDAW, OP-CAT, OP-CRC-AC, OP-CRC-SC, ICRMW (signature only, 2005), CRPD (signature only, 2007), OP-CRPD, and CED. Adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/117 of 10 December 2008. Article 17, paragraph 1, of OP-ICESCR states that "The present Protocol is open for signature by any State that has signed, ratified or acceded to the Covenant". Other main relevant international instruments Ratification, accession or succession Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide No Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Palermo Protocol Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Refugees and stateless persons 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, 1954 Convention relating to the status of Stateless Persons and 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Additional Protocols thereto Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (First Convention); Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (Second Convention); Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (Third Convention); Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (Fourth Convention); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem (Protocol III). For the official status of ratifications, see Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland, at www.eda.admin.ch/eda/fr/home/topics/intla/intrea/chdep/warvic.html. ILO fundamental conventions International Labour Organization Convention No. 29 concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour; Convention No. 105 concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour, Convention No. 87 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise; Convention No. 98 concerning the Application of the Principles of the Right to Organise and to Bargain Collectively; Convention No. 100 concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value; Convention No. 111 concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation; Convention No. 138 concerning the Minimum Age for Admission to Employment; Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour. UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education 1. In 2006, the Committee against Torture (CAT) encouraged Guyana to consider ratifying OP-CAT. The same year, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) recommended that Guyana consider making the optional declaration provided for in article 14 of ICERD and ratifying ILO Convention No. 169. In 2005, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) encouraged ratification of OP-CEDAW and ICRMW. In 2004, the Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) recommended ratifying OP-CRC-SC and OP-CRC-AC. 2. In 2009, UNHCR recommended accession to the 1951 Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. B. Constitutional and legislative framework 3. In 2005, CEDAW noted with satisfaction that through the Constitutional reform undertaken in 2001, international human rights instruments are incorporated into domestic law. The 2005 Common Country Assessment (CCA) highlighted that international treaties can be relied upon in seeking redress in the courts for breaches of international human rights law. 4. In 2006, CERD recommended that Guyana include "national or ethnic origin" among the prohibited grounds of discrimination in article 40 (1) of the Constitution and that the prohibition of racial discrimination in that article apply with respect to the enjoyment of all rights and freedoms protected under ICERD. 5. CEDAW and CAT commended Guyana for the adoption of the 2005 Combating of Trafficking in Persons Act. C. Institutional and human rights infrastructure 6. As of 4 February 2010, Guyana does not have a national human rights institution accredited by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (ICC). 7. In 2004, CRC encouraged Guyana to pursue its efforts to establish an independent and effective mechanism in accordance with the Principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles). It added that, among other things, this institution should be easily accessible to children and provide remedies for violations of their rights under the Convention. 8. In 2008, the independent expert on minority issues noted that five parliamentary commissions with responsibilities in the field of human rights had been authorized in the revised Constitution of Guyana: the Human Rights Commission, Women and Gender Commission, Rights of the Child Commission, Indigenous Peoples Commission and the Ethnic Relations Commission. At the time of her mission in 2008, only the latter had been fully established and was functioning. In March 2009, the Government indicated, inter alia, that nominations to the Rights of the Child Commission had been finalized and would be sent to the National Assembly for approval. D. Policy measures 9. In 2006, CERD expressed its concern about the absence of a national strategy or plan of action which systematically address any inequalities that members of indigenous communities face in the enjoyment of their rights. In 2008, the independent expert on minority issues stressed that a new and robust anti-discrimination and equality plan of action was required. 10. In 2005, Guyana adopted the Plan of Action (20052009) for the World Programme for Human Rights Education focusing on the national school system. The 2007 Resident Coordinator Annual Report indicated that the national certification standard for Child Friendly Schools, incorporating child rights and peace education, had been adopted country-wide. II. Promotion and protection of human rights on the ground A. Cooperation with human rights mechanisms 1. Cooperation with treaty bodies Treaty body CERD Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination; CESCR Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; HR Committee Human Rights Committee; CEDAW Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women; CAT Committee against Torture; CRC Committee on the Rights of the Child. Latest report submitted and considered Latest concluding observations Follow-up response Reporting status CERD March 2006 May 2008 Fifteenth and sixteenth reports overdue since 2008 CESCR Second and third reports overdue since 2000 and 2005 respectively HR Committee March 2000 Third report overdue since 2003 July 2005 Seventh report overdue since 2006 November 2006 December 2008 Submitted in 2008 January 2004 Combined second, third and fourth report overdue since 2008 11. In 1997, CESCR indicated that it was necessary to receive additional written replies to the list of issues in order to consider the initial report of Guyana. Cooperation with special procedures Standing invitation issued Latest visits or mission reports Independent expert on minority issues (28 July to 1 August 2008); Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance (14 to 25 July 2003) A/HRC/10/11/Add.2. E/CN.4/2004/18/Add.1. Visits agreed upon in principle Visits requested and not yet agreed upon Facilitation/cooperation during missions The independent expert thanked the Government for its cooperation throughout the preparation and conduct of her mission. A/HRC/10/11/Add.2, para. 2. Follow-up to visits Responses to letters of allegations and urgent appeals During the period under review, 6 communications were sent. The Government replied to 4 of these communications. Responses to questionnaires on thematic issues Guyana responded to 3 of the 21 questionnaires sent by special procedures mandate holders. The questionnaires referred to are those reflected in an official report by a special procedure mandate holder issued between 1 January 2006 and 31 January 2010. Responses counted for the purposes of this section are those received within the relevant deadlines, relating to the following questionnaires: (a) report of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children (E/CN.4/2006/62) and the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (E/CN.4/2006/67), joint questionnaire on the relationship between trafficking and the demand for commercial sexual exploitation, 2005; (b) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (A/HRC/4/31), questionnaire on the sale of children's organs, 2006; (c) report of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children (A/HRC/4/23), questionnaire on issues related to forced marriages and trafficking in persons, 2006; (d) report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants (A/HRC/4/24), questionnaire on the impact of certain laws and administrative measures on migrants, 2006; (e) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education (A/HRC/4/29), questionnaire on the right to education of persons with disabilities, 2006; (f) report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises (A/HRC/4/35/Add.3), questionnaire on human rights policies and management practices; (g) report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms of indigenous people (A/HRC/6/15), questionnaire on the human rights of indigenous people, 2007; (h) report of the Working Group on the use of mercenaries (A/62/301), questionnaire on measures adopted and envisaged, including legislation, regarding mercenaries, 2007; (i) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (A/HRC/7/8), questionnaire on assistance and rehabilitation programmes for child victims of sexual exploitation, 2007; (j) report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women (A/HRC/7/6), questionnaire on indicators on violence against women, 2007; (k) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education (A/HRC/8/10), questionnaire on the right to education in emergency situations, 2007; (l) report of the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children (A/HRC/10/16 and Corr.1), questionnaire on trafficking in persons, 2008; (m) report of the independent expert on the question of human rights and extreme poverty to the eleventh session of the Council (A/HRC/11/9), questionnaire on Cash Transfer Programmes, 2008; (n) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education, (A/HRC/11/8), questionnaire on the right to education for persons in detention, 2009; (o) report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women (A/HRC/11/6), questionnaire on violence against women and political economy, 2008; (p) report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences (A/HRC/12/21), questionnaire on national legislation and initiatives addressing the issue of bonded labour, 2009; (q) report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (A/HRC/12/23), questionnaire on measures to prevent and combat online child pornography, 2009; (r) report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to food (A/HRC/12/31), questionnaire on world food and nutrition security, 2009; (s) report of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (A/HRC/13/30), questionnaire on the detention of drug users, 2009; (t) joint study on global practices in relation to secret detention in the context of countering terrorism (A/HRC/13/42), questionnaire on secret detention, 2009; (u) report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders (A/HRC/13/22), questionnaire on the security and protection of human rights defenders, 2009. 3. Cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 12. In 2004, OHCHR deployed a human rights adviser within the framework of the Social Cohesion Programme (SCP), an inter-agency project of the United Nations Framework Team for Early Warning and Conflict Prevention. SCP contributed to the peaceful elections of 2006. In 20072008, a human rights adviser was deployed to support the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) to incorporate a human rights-based approach into the 20062010 United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). The adviser also provided, inter alia, training on strengthening national human rights protection mechanisms. 13. In 2007, OHCHR provided training on the human rights treaty process to members of national institutions, non-governmental organizations and the media, focusing on improving follow up to treaty body conclusions and recommendations. B. Implementation of international human rights obligations 1. Equality and non-discrimination 14. In 2005, CEDAW was concerned about the persistence of discriminatory legal provisions, particularly the Criminal Law (Offences) Act provision which makes it a criminal act for a girl of 16 years to have sexual intercourse with a relative such as a grandfather or brother, making her liable to imprisonment for up to seven years. It was also concerned at the Married Persons Property Act that prevented non-working spouses from acquiring the same rights in matters of division of property. CEDAW urged Guyana to undertake comprehensive legal reform in accordance with its obligations under the Convention and, in particular, to eliminate discriminatory provisions without delay in the Criminal Law (Offenses) Act and civil law. 15. In 2006, CERD noted that the historic ethnic polarization of the society and of the main political parties of Guyana has reinforced prejudice and intolerance in the country. In 2008, the independent expert on minority issues indicated that Afro-Guyanese felt excluded from having a full voice and stake in the national polity and equal enjoyment of rights in many fields of life including employment and economic participation. The stigmatization of young Afro-Guyanese males and entire African communities was a serious concern. According to the independent expert, derogatory stereotypes of criminality coloured wider societal perceptions of Afro-Guyanese individuals and communities. The Government replied that these allegations were not substantiated. 16. In 2004, CRC was concerned that societal discrimination persisted against girls and vulnerable groups of children, including children living in poverty, Amerindian children and children with disabilities. The 2005 CCA indicated that special education was offered for children with disabilities but with limited coverage. It added that children below 6 years old and their parents had little opportunity to address disabilities that may be corrected at an earlier stage. 17. The 2005 CCA also highlighted the stigma attached to persons with HIV/AIDS and the discrimination against them. 2 Right to life, liberty and security of the person 18. In 2000, the HR Committee encouraged Guyana to consider the abolition of the death penalty. 19. In 2006, CAT urged Guyana to take immediate steps to prevent acts such as the alleged practice of extrajudicial killings by members of the police and to guarantee that prompt and impartial inquiries are conducted, perpetrators are prosecuted and effective remedies are provided to victims. In 2008, the Government provided information mentioning, inter alia, the adoption of the Security Sector Reform Action Plan (20072011). 20. In 2008, the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions sent a communication regarding three men who died in the custody of the police forces. The same year, the independent expert on minority issues noted concerns expressed by Afro-Guyanese and others regarding numerous killings of young Afro-Guyanese men since 2002 and the existence of what had been described as a "phantom death squad". The reports noted execution style killings, disappearances and failure to adequately record or investigate the murders. According to the independent expert, the perception was of a collusion of Government and law enforcement with criminals to facilitate the targeting and killing of young Afro-Guyanese known to the security services. The Government rejected the allegations. 21. In 2008, the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture sent a communication referring to reports that in November and December 2007, men had been tortured by members of the Military Criminal Investigation Department at headquarters and at undisclosed locations. CAT recommended that Guyana ensure that all acts of torture are offences under its criminal law in accordance with the definition contained in the Convention, and that these offences are punishable by appropriate penalties. 22. CAT was concerned about reports of widespread police brutality and the lack of accountability of the Guyana police force. It recommended ensuring that the circumstances under which police officers are authorized to use force and firearms are exceptional and clearly defined. The 2007 Resident Coordinator Annual Report indicated, inter alia, that reports of alleged brutality by the law and order agencies continued to be challenges to effective governance. 23. The disciplinary measures used in the treatment of prisoners were also a matter of concern for CAT, in particular section 37 of the 1998 of Prison Act, which allows whipping, flogging and reduction of diet. It recommended the review of all legal provisions which authorize these practices with a view to abolishing them. 24. In 2006, CAT noted unacceptable detention conditions, in particular in the Georgetown and Mazaruni prisons. The most widespread problems were overcrowding, poor hygienic and physical conditions, as well as lack of human, material and financial resources. It recommended the State take immediate steps to ensure that the conditions of detention are in conformity with minimum international standards. The Government replied, inter alia, that there had been an increase in the budgetary allocations in 2007 and 2008 for the improvement of conditions in the entire prison system. 25. In 2005, while noting the Domestic Violence Act of 1996, CEDAW expressed concern about the insufficient measures to ensure its effective implementation. It urged the State to ensure that all victims have access to immediate means of redress and protection, including protection orders, legal aid and shelters in sufficient numbers. In 2006, CAT expressed concern at reports of a high number of domestic violence cases and recommended taking urgent measures to reduce them, including the training of police, law enforcement and health personnel, in order to investigate and deal with instances of domestic violence. In 2008, the Government indicated that it was working to, inter alia, ensure that service providers are properly trained to enforce legislation addressing this issue. 26. In 2004, CRC recommended that Guyana expressly prohibit corporal punishment by law in the family, school and other institutions. 27. CRC was deeply concerned about the generally violent environment in which Guyanese children were living and at the increased reporting of ill-treatment and abuse of children, including sexual abuse. In 2009, the ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations noted reports of child prostitution in cities and remote gold mining areas. It also highlighted an ILO study concluding that there was an alarming degree of prostitution within the secondary school system and that the sexual exploitation of the girl child was a widespread and serious social problem. 28. The 2005 CCA referred to a 2003 ILO report which confirmed that worst forms of child labour existed among street children, child victims of prostitution and children from remote Amerindian communities in Guyana. In 2009, the ILO Committee of Experts noted with interest the implementation of an Action Programme on the Rehabilitation of Child Labourers and the Prevention of Child Labour in Parika. 3. Administration of justice and the rule of law 29. In 2008, the independent expert on minority issues noted that the justice system and security services were considered inefficient and ineffective. Since 1998, the HR Committee has adopted Views on nine individual communications, where it found that the State was in violation of various provisions of ICCPR, namely with regard to the imposition of a death sentence in the absence of a fair trail (or automatic and mandatory imposition of death sentence), the right of all persons deprived of their liberty to be treated with humanity, the right to access to justice (absence of legal representation), to equality before the law (administration of evidence), to be promptly brought before a judge, and to be tried within a reasonable time (excessive length of pre-trial detention). Despite repeated requests, the HR Committee has not received information from Guyana regarding followup to the nine cases on which Views had been adopted. 30. In 2000, the HR Committee recommended that Guyana ensure strict compliance with procedural safeguards in all criminal cases. In addition, in 2006, CAT recommended the State take all necessary measures to guarantee that the mandatory limits for pretrial detention are respected in practice. It also encouraged Guyana to amend the Constitution and delete the provision that allows the employment of part-time judges, which, in the Committee's view, could jeopardize their independence and impartiality. The 2005 CCA stressed that full support needs to be extended to, inter alia, strengthening the judiciary and furthering the security sector reform in order to enhance protection for all people and to make justice available to those who are poor, marginalized and vulnerable. 31. In 2006, CERD noted that only few complaints about acts of racial discrimination had been brought before the Ethnic Relations Commission and none before the courts, which can partly be attributed to the high standard of proof required in judicial proceedings and to the difficulties to secure witnesses. In 2008, the independent expert on minority issues recalled the CERD observations and recommended that the Government monitor the extent to which the anti-discrimination provisions in the Constitution and legislation have been used as the basis for criminal or other legal proceedings and what the outcomes have been. 32. CERD also remained concerned about the ethnic composition of the Armed Forces and the police of Guyana which were predominantly recruited from the Afro-Guyanese population. It encouraged Guyana to continue and intensify its efforts aimed at ensuring a balanced ethnic representation in the composition of its Armed Forces and police. The Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in 2003, CAT in 2006 and the 2005 CCA also made recommendations in this regard. 33. In 2004, CRC expressed its concern at the incompatibility of the juvenile system with the provisions and principles of the Convention. It was especially concerned at the fact that the age of criminal responsibility, fixed at 10 years, was too low and that 17-year-olds were tried as adults. In 2006, CAT expressed its concern at allegations that children (ages 10-16) were not always separated from adults while on remand. 4. Right to privacy, marriage and family life 34. In 2004, CRC noted with concern that the number of children who were not registered at birth was significant, particularly in remote areas and among Amerindians. CRC was also concerned at the large number of female heads of households and the often limited degree to which fathers assume their parental responsibilities. It noted that a substantial number of parents immigrate to other countries, leaving children behind with relatives or in institutions. 5. Freedom of religion or belief, expression, and right to participate in public and political life 35. The independent expert on minority issues indicated that the Constitution provides for freedom of religion, which was considered to be well respected in practice. 36. In 2000, the HR Committee was concerned that freedom of expression may be unduly restricted by reason of the Government monopoly of radio broadcasting. It was also concerned at the lack of specific remedies for journalists who have been subjected to violence or harassment by the police or other authorities. It recommended that Guyana remove restrictions on freedom of expression which are incompatible with article 19 of ICCPR, and ensure that effective remedies are available to any person whose rights under ICCPR have been violated. 37. In 2008, the independent expert on minority issues noted reports that the Government maintained a monopoly over radio broadcasts; that restrictions were imposed on issuing licences for Afro-Guyanese broadcasters; that bias in reporting of violent events had exacerbated ethnic tensions; and that media time allocation for political opposition was restricted, especially prior to elections. The independent expert added that the President's role as Minister of Communications provided him with ultimate authority over media access and licensing, which was considered inappropriate. The Government replied, inter alia, that a free and independent media exists in Guyana. 38. In 2008, the independent expert indicated that there was criticism of Guyana's electoral system as well as calls for the establishment of a constitutionally based shared Government. She added that since Guyana's political parties are highly ethnicized, the current proportional representation system inevitably creates a government dominated by one ethnic group. The Government rejected this statement and highlighted the multi-ethnic character of the Cabinet. In 2006, CERD urged Guyana to ensure that all ethnic minorities have adequate opportunities to participate in the conduct of public affairs at all levels, including Parliament and the Government. 39. The 20062010 UNDAF noted that, notwithstanding constitutional provisions, women's participation in political processes remained well below levels of equality. The 2005 CCA indicated that in numerical terms, women's representation in leading positions in Government was relatively significant. A 2009 United Nations Statistics Division source indicated that the proportion of seats held by women in the national parliament decreased from 30.8 per cent in 2006 to 30.0 per cent in 2009. 6. Right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work 40. In 2008, The independent expert on minority issues stressed that the scarcity of employment opportunities for women, particularly from Afro-Guyanese and indigenous communities, was a major concern. In 2009, the ILO Committee of Experts noted the low representation of women in traditionally male-dominated areas of work and the weak labour force participation of Amerindian women. The Committee also noted that some of the terms used in Guyana to describe a category of worker were not gender-neutral (e.g. barman, kitchen maid, washman, etc.). It asked the Government to ensure that future wage orders refer to the various categories of workers in a gender-neutral way with a view to avoiding gender bias in the determination of remuneration. 41. The independent expert indicated that discrimination in employment and economic activities were considered by numerous Afro-Guyanese to be endemic problems. They also expressed frustration at being unable to obtain employment in Indian-owned or managed firms due to their African names, their colour, or their addresses in Afro-Guyanese villages. The Government refuted these allegations and emphasized that unemployment was not specific to the Afro-Guyanese. 42. In 2008, the ILO Committee of Experts cited a section of the Public Utility Undertakings and Public Services Arbitration Act, and the Bill introduced to amend it, that compromise workers' right to strike. In particular, the Committee highlighted the broad powers of the Minister to refer disputes to compulsory arbitration, and the provision for sanctions, including fines and imprisonment, in the event of an illegal strike. The Committee expressed its hope that necessary measures would be taken to amend the legislation to bring it into conformity with the ILO Convention No. 87. 7. Right to social security and to an adequate standard of living 43. The 2008 Resident Coordinator Annual Report referred to a survey conducted in 2006, which found that 36.1 per cent of the Guyanese population was unable to meet the outlay required for a basket of basic food and non-food items that define the national poverty line. The same survey found that 18.6 per cent of the population was living in absolute poverty. 44. In 2006, while noting the existence of the National Development Strategy (20012010) and a poverty reduction strategy paper, CEDAW was disappointed that these policies insufficiently addressed the gender dimensions of poverty. It urged Guyana to make the promotion of gender equality an explicit component of its national development strategies, and encouraged programmes that target vulnerable groups of women, such as Amerindian women and poor women living in rural and hinterland areas. 45. The 2007 Resident Coordinator Annual Report stated that the need for greater social protection measures was evident, notwithstanding Guyana's continuing strides in improving the delivery of social services in all 10 administrative regions. 46. A 2004 WHO report noted that access to health care is a right established by the Constitution. However, due to geography, scarce resources, and misdistribution of staff, the access to health services was inequitable. The WHO report added that drugs and services were free at the point of delivery, but shortages of supplies in the public sector made it necessary for patients to seek supplementary care and treatment from the private sector. 47. In 2006, CERD expressed its deep concern that the average life expectancy among indigenous peoples was low, and that they were reportedly disproportionately affected by malaria and environmental pollution, in particular mercury and bacterial contamination of rivers caused by mining activities. CERD urged Guyana to, inter alia, ensure the availability of adequate medical treatment in hinterland areas, in particular those inhabited by indigenous peoples. In 2008, Guyana indicated that health centres and health posts have been constructed in almost every Amerindian Village. 48. In 2004, CRC recommended that Guyana reduce mortality rates by improving prenatal care and preventing communicable diseases, continue to combat malaria, and address the issue of malnutrition through education and by ensuring the availability of adequate nutrition among mothers and children. A 2009 United Nations Statistics Division source indicated that the under-five mortality rate per 1,000 live births was 60 in 2007, and that the proportion of children under 5 moderately or severely underweight was 12.4 per cent in 2006. 49. In 2005, CEDAW noted with concern the high and growing prevalence of HIV/AIDS among women, especially younger women. The 2005 CCA indicated that the Government and its partners were waging a battle against the HIV/AIDS epidemic, by, among other things, promoting expansive awareness raising campaigns, increasing access to and the availability of drugs and directing special efforts to reach high-risk groups. In 2009, the ILO Committee of Experts noted that the HIV/AIDS pandemic continued to result in increasing numbers of children being orphaned and made vulnerable by the disease. 50. The 2005 CCA stressed that the leading reason for inadequate housing was poverty and emphasized, as noted by CESCR, that national shelter strategies should take into account, inter alia, the principles of non-discrimination, legal security of tenure, availability of services, facilities and infrastructures, affordability, cultural adequacy, and the provision of domestic legal remedies in the case of, for example, forced evictions. The independent expert on minority issues noted allegations of discrimination in the allocation of housing and the maintenance and provision of infrastructure to African areas vis-à-vis those of Indo-Guyanese. The Government stressed, inter alia, that the housing policy was based on a fundamental aim to provide better living conditions to those in need irrespective of ethnicity. 51. A 2009 United Nations Statistics Division source indicated that the total proportion of the population using an improved drinking water source was 93 per cent in 2006. The 2005 CCA emphasized that while progress was being made, there was much to be done in terms of reducing inequities in access to safe and affordable drinking water and the prevailing low levels of awareness on what constitutes "safe" drinking water and sanitation. It indicated that Guyana was facing the challenge of developing and implementing a national policy, a legal and institutional framework and strategies on integrated solid waste management. 8. Right to education and to participate in the cultural life of the community 52. In 2004, CRC remained concerned at the high dropout rates, especially among boys. It was also concerned at the decrease in the quality of education and at the widening of educational disparities in the hinterland regions. It recommended that Guyana, inter alia, continue to strengthen measures aimed at increasing enrolment rates in primary and secondary education and to further increase attempts to bring dropouts back to school and other training programmes, ensure that pregnant teenagers are given an opportunity to complete their education, and develop and use indicators for quality education. 53. In 2006, CERD urged Guyana to ensure equal quality of teaching for, and increase school and university attendance by, indigenous children and adolescents. It also encouraged Guyana to provide education and to actively support programmes that foster inter-cultural dialogue, tolerance and understanding with respect to the culture and history of different ethnic groups within Guyana. 9. Minorities and indigenous peoples 54. In 2006, CERD expressed its deep concern about the lack of legal recognition of the rights of ownership and possession of indigenous communities over the lands which they traditionally occupy, and about Guyana's practice of granting land titles excluding bodies of waters and subsoil resources to indigenous communities on the basis of numerical and other criteria not necessarily in accordance with the traditions of indigenous communities concerned. CERD also noted with concern that, under the Amerindian Act (2006), decisions taken by the Village Councils of indigenous communities concerning, inter alia, scientific research and large scale mining on their lands, as well as taxation, are subject to approval and/or gazetting by the competent Minister. 55. The 2005 CCA highlighted that increasing equity in development also means addressing the specific issue of Amerindian people's access and control over their lands. It noted that a land titling process was ongoing, albeit slowly and sometimes in conflict with other land use priorities, such as national parks or concessions to private mining or forestry companies. 56. In 2006, CERD urged Guyana to recognize and protect the rights of all indigenous communities to own, develop and control the lands which they traditionally occupy, including water and subsoil resources, and to safeguard their right to use lands not exclusively occupied by them, to which they have traditionally had access for their subsistence. It also urged the State to undertake environmental impact assessments and seek the informed consent of concerned indigenous communities prior to authorizing any mining or similar operations which may threaten their environment. In addition, the Committee urged Guyana to remove the discriminatory distinction between titled and untitled communities from the 2006 Amerindian Act and from any other legislation. In 2008, the Government replied, inter alia, that there is no limitation on the control that Amerindians have over the lands that they own. Although the sub-soil rights remain in the domain of the State, Amerindian communities have a right of veto over small- and medium-scale mining on their titled land. In cases where communities do not own land, the Amerindian Act and the Constitution protect their collective rights to occupy and use the land. 57. In 2008, the independent expert on minority issues noted concerns regarding the ownership of lands by Afro-Guyanese. Issues including the lack of title documents, complexities related to shared ownership and lands subsequently leased to others (non-African) have created a complex situation in regard to proving and regaining ownership. 10. Migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers 58. In 2009, UNHCR submitted that Guyana has not yet developed domestic procedures and institutions for asylum. It recommended that the Government initiates the drafting and adoption of national refugee legislation, and that registered persons in need of international protection be given access to basic services, including education, affordable health care, and work. 59. UNHCR indicated that Guyana has received asylum-seekers from a wide variety of countries. However, the non-refoulement principle is not fully respected. In 2006, CAT reminded Guyana of the absolute nature of the prohibition on expelling, returning (refouler) or extraditing a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture. III. Achievements, best practices, challenges and constraints 60. The 2006 - 2010 UNDAF highlighted progress made on the construction of social infrastructure such as schools, hospitals and health centres. It added that the systemic nature of poverty makes it a challenge requiring long-term and sustained multi-sectoral attention. 61. In 2006, CAT noted that Guyana had for several years been going through a period of social violence and widespread criminality which continued to have an impact on the country. The Committee pointed out, however, that no exceptional circumstances whatsoever may be invoked as a justification of torture. 62. In 2008, the independent expert on minority issues recognized commendable steps on the part of the Government to address issues of ethnic tensions, criminal activities and economic underdevelopment. Nevertheless, further action was required to restore confidence in good governance and the rule of law among all communities, as well as to prevent further polarization and possible violence. IV. Key national priorities, initiatives and commitments Specific recommendations for follow-up 63. In 2006, CERD requested information, within one year, on the implementation of its recommendations regarding the 2006 Amerindian Act, the land rights of indigenous communities, and the availability of medical treatment in the hinterlands. In 2006, CAT requested information on measures taken in response to its recommendations relating to detention conditions; extra-judiciary killings; sexual and domestic violence; and human rights institutions. Guyana submitted its follow-up reports to CAT and CERD in 2008. V. Capacity-building and technical assistance 64. The 2006 - 2010 UNDAF listed among projected outcomes an increased access to quality services, empowerment of individuals and groups, an enabling constitutional and human rights framework, and poverty reduction. 65. UNHCR expressed its willingness to provide technical support in drafting national refugee legislation and capacity-building for Government officials, among others. 66. CRC recommended that Guyana seek international assistance to address the issues of corporal punishment and street children. 