%%%CLUSTER MUNITIONS|COSTS|CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|

CCM/MSP/2010/PM/7 Reissued for technical reasons. Convention on Cluster Munitions 6 September 2010 English Only Preparatory Meeting Geneva, 6 September 2010 Item 6 (e) of the provisional agenda Consideration of procedural matters pertaining to the preparation for the first Meeting of States parties Arrangements for meeting the costs of the first Meeting of States Parties Estimated costs for the first Meeting of States Parties to the Convention on cluster munitions Note by the Secretariat 1. Pursuant to paragraph 1of Article 11 of the Convention on Cluster Munitions, the relevant decision of the States Parties to the Convention and General Assembly resolution 64/36, the First Meeting of States Parties to the Convention will take place from 9 to 12 November 2010 in Vientiane, Lao People's Democratic Republic. 2 This document is submitted pursuant to the above-mentioned provisions and provides estimated costs in the amount of US$336,000 for convening the First Meeting of States Parties. A breakdown of these costs is provided in the attached table. 3. It should be noted that the costs are estimated on the basis of anticipated workload. The actual costs will be determined after the closure of the meeting and completion of related work, with all relevant expenditures recorded in the accounts. At that time, any adjustments in contributions by the participants sharing the costs will be determined accordingly. 4. With regard to the financial arrangements, it will be recalled that, in accordance with the practice followed on the occasion of previous multilateral disarmament conferences and related meetings, and as reflected in Article 14 of the Convention, the costs are shared among the States Parties to this Convention participating in the meetings, based upon the United Nations scale of assessment pro-rated to take into account the number of States Parties participating in the meetings. States that are not party but that have accepted the invitation to take part in the meetings share in the costs to the extent of their respective rates of assessment under the United Nations scale of assessments. 5. Subject to the States Parties' approval of the estimated costs and cost-sharing formula, assessment notices will be prepared based on the overall estimated costs and applicable cost-sharing formula. Since the above-mentioned activities shall have no financial implication for the regular budget of the Organization, States Parties should proceed with the payment of their share of the estimated costs as soon as assessment notices have been received. 