%%%TREATY COMPLIANCE|MATERIAL REMNANTS OF WAR|REPORTING PROCEDURES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|

CCW/P.V/CONF/2010/SR.1 Fourth Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects 14 December 2010 Original: English Geneva, 22 - 23 November 2010 Summary record of the 1st meeting Held at the Palais des Nations, Geneva, on Monday, 22 November 2010, at 10 a.m. Temporary President: Mr. Sareva (Deputy Secretary-General of the Conference on Disarmament and Director of the Geneva Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs) President: Mr. Woolcott (Australia) Contents Opening of the Conference Election of the President Adoption of the agenda Confirmation of the rules of procedure Appointment of the Secretary-General of the Conference Organization of work including that of any subsidiary bodies of the Conference Election of other officers of the Conference Adoption of arrangements for meeting the costs of the Conference Message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations General exchange of views* Review of the status and operation of the Protocol* Consideration of matters pertaining to national implementation of the Protocol, including national reporting or updating on an annual basis* Preparation for review conferences* Report(s) of any subsidiary organ(s)* The Temporary President, on behalf of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, declared open the Fourth Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects. He commended the 69 countries that had notified their consent to be bound by Protocol V and called on those States that had not yet done so to consider such action as soon as possible. The Convention was intended to address humanitarian challenges associated with the use of certain conventional arms deemed to cause excessive suffering to combatants or indiscriminate harm to civilians and was known to be a flexible and evolving legal instrument. Its latest product -- Protocol V -- was the first multilateral agreement to deal with the problems caused by unexploded and abandoned ordnance. Its faithful implementation would significantly reduce the number of civilians killed and injured by explosive remnants of war during and after armed conflicts. At the first three Conferences, the High Contracting Parties had made significant progress towards rendering Protocol V an effective tool for addressing the humanitarian and development impact of explosive remnants of war and had established a flexible framework for international cooperation and assistance in dealing with explosive remnants of war. He wished the High Contracting Parties every success as they reviewed the Protocol's operation and status, and continued their efforts to further improve the machinery for its implementation. The Temporary President recalled that, at the Third Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V, it had been decided to nominate Ambassador Peter Woolcott of Australia as President-designate of the Fourth Conference, as indicated in paragraph 57 of the final document of the Third Conference (CCW/P.V/CONF/2009/9). He took it that the Conference wished to confirm Ambassador Woolcott in the office of President. It was so decided. Mr. Woolcott (Australia) took the Chair. Adoption of the agenda (CCW/P.V/CONF/2010/1) The President drew attention to the provisional agenda, which was contained in annex II to the final document of the Third Conference and had also been issued as a separate document under the symbol CCW/P.V/CONF/2010/1. He took it that the Conference wished to adopt the provisional agenda. The President recalled that the rules of procedure for conferences of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V, which had been adopted at the First Conference on the recommendation of its Preparatory Committee, were contained in annex II to the final document of the First Conference (CCW/P.V/CONF/2007/1). He took it that the Conference wished to confirm the rules of procedure. The President, referring to rule 10 of the rules of procedure, said that, in accordance with established practice, Mr. Bantan Nugroho, Chief of the Implementation Support Unit for the Convention in the Geneva Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs, had been nominated by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to serve as Secretary-General of the Conference. He took it that the Conference wished to appoint Mr. Nugroho to that office. The President recalled that, at the First Conference, it had been decided to establish an informal meeting of experts to serve as an implementation mechanism for Protocol V. The meeting of experts had been held in Geneva from 21 to 23 April 2010, and the work of the Fourth Conference would focus on its findings. Bearing that in mind, and in view of the brevity of the Conference, he saw no need for the establishment of any additional subsidiary body at the current stage. Drawing attention to the provisional programme of work (CCW/P.V/CONF/2010/8), which was intended to be flexible, he suggested that agenda items 9 to 13 should be considered together, along with the issue of universalization of Protocol V, under the general exchange of views. Subsequently, the outcome of the work of the meeting of experts would be considered topic by topic, on the basis of a report to be introduced by the respective Coordinator of the meeting of experts, who would chair the ensuing thematic discussion. The topics to be discussed were: cooperation and assistance and requests for assistance; the web-based information system for Protocol V (WISP.V); clearance, including related requests for assistance; national reporting; the article 4 generic electronic template; generic preventive measures; and victim assistance. At the end of each thematic discussion, the approval of the Conference would be sought on the recommendations made in the relevant report. The recommendations approved would serve as a road map for the implementation of Protocol V and be included in the final document of the Conference. Following the conclusion of the thematic discussions, the Conference would consider the remaining substantive agenda items (10 - 13) individually. Delegations wishing to speak on a specific topic under a particular item could do so at that time. In the absence of any comments, he would take it that the Conference wished to proceed according to the scenario he had outlined and to adopt the provisional programme of work. The President recalled that, at the Third Conference, it had been decided to nominate the representatives of Pakistan and Slovakia as Vice-Presidents-designate of the Fourth Conference, as indicated in paragraph 57 of the final document of the Third Conference. On the basis of preliminary consultations, there appeared to be agreement to elect Ambassador Zamir Akram of Pakistan and Ambassador Fedor Rosocha of Slovakia as Vice-Presidents of the Fourth Conference. He took it that the Conference wished to confirm those nominations. The President recalled that the cost estimates for the Fourth Conference had been considered at the Third Conference and recommended for adoption, as indicated in paragraph 58 of the final document of the Third Conference; they were contained in annex III thereto. The costs had been estimated on the basis of the anticipated workload. The actual costs would be determined after the closure of the Conference, when the exact workload was known. He took it that the financial arrangements for the Conference were acceptable and could be adopted. Mr. Sareva (Deputy Secretary-General of the Conference on Disarmament and Director of the Geneva Branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs) read out a message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations. In his message, the Secretary-General said that explosive remnants of war continued to kill and maim for many years following armed conflicts. Protocol V, which provided the legal framework for addressing their humanitarian and development impact, had a critical role to play in achieving the goal of eliminating such weapons. At the Third Conference, the High Contracting Parties had taken important decisions aimed at strengthening the implementation of the Protocol. The Fourth Conference could consolidate those commitments and map out a way forward. The Secretary-General was encouraged by the fruitful discussions held on the implementation of the plan of action on victim assistance under Protocol V. He urged the Conference to build further on the culture of information sharing established and to continue its efforts towards the adoption of generic preventive measures aimed at minimizing the impact of incidents involving explosive remnants of war. The Secretary-General commended the 8 States that had become parties to the Protocol in the past year, bringing the total number to 69, and called on those States that had not yet done so to ratify or accede to the instrument without delay, especially those in regions affected by landmines and explosive remnants of war. He reminded all States of their responsibility to protect civilian populations both during and after armed conflicts. The United Nations stood ready to assist them in their efforts. General exchange of views Review of the status and operation of the Protocol Consideration of matters pertaining to national implementation of the Protocol, including national reporting or updating on an annual basis Preparation for review conferences Report(s) of any subsidiary organ(s) Before opening the floor for the general exchange of views, the President congratulated the new High Contracting Parties to Protocol V: Belgium, China, Cyprus, Gabon, Honduras, Italy, Qatar and Saudi Arabia. More States were expected to become parties to the Protocol in the months ahead, a clear sign that the efforts to strengthen the universality of the instrument were proving successful. Further efforts were required, however, particularly within the framework of the plan of action to promote the universality of the Convention. Mr. Iliopoulos (Council of the European Union), speaking on behalf of the European Union; the candidate countries Croatia, Iceland and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the stabilization and association process countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Montenegro; and, in addition, Armenia, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, expressed appreciation for the work done by the President of the Conference and the six Coordinators in the past year. The presence of unexploded and abandoned explosive ordnance had grave consequences for civilians, their communities and the environment. Protocol V had been concluded to help address those problems and its entry into force had demonstrated that the Convention continued to be an important instrument of international humanitarian law. Regarding the universality of the Protocol, the European Union welcomed the marked progress made since the previous Conference, with eight new States ratifying or acceding to the instrument. However, it recognized that there was still scope for further progress and efforts towards universalization, along the lines of the European Union's Joint Action of 2007. There had been steady progress in the implementation of the Protocol too, with the establishment of a general framework for implementation. That had allowed for the refinement of the guide to national reporting and the enhancement of procedures for exchanging information, including on requests for assistance. He called on all Parties to take full advantage of the guide and to comply with their reporting obligations, if they had not yet done so. As a humanitarian actor, the European Union had followed closely developments in respect of victim assistance since the Third Conference. At the meeting of experts, valuable input had been provided, including from NGOs and affected countries on their experience in implementing the plan of action in that area. The joint session co-chaired by the Coordinator on victim assistance under Protocol V and the Coordinator on improvised explosive devices under amended Protocol II had also been useful, and he looked forward to further synergies in that regard. The 2010 meeting of experts had been well organized and very productive, with advances on generic preventive measures and final steps towards the adoption of a guide for the implementation of part 3 of the technical annex. Since clearance of explosive remnants of war remained one of the core issues of Protocol V, consideration of the topic should continue at the 2011 meeting of experts and the Fifth Conference of the High Contracting Parties. He underlined the importance of the strict and effective implementation of the provisions of article 4 of the Protocol on the recording, retaining and transmission of information on the use or abandonment of explosive ordnance, which was closely related to effective clearance. In that connection, he welcomed the statements made at the meeting of experts on national practices regarding the implementation of article 4 and looked forward to further input along similar lines. The European Union was willing to consider possible improvements to the generic electronic template with a view to ensuring greater accuracy in the recording of information on used explosive ordnance. To that end, it looked forward to the establishment of a focal point in the Office for Disarmament Affairs for collecting and transmitting information pursuant to article 4, paragraph (2). Full implementation of the Protocol's provisions was still a challenge for many States. The European Union was aware of the complexity of the tasks involved, and stood ready to provide assistance to those States in complying with the Protocol and other pertinent international instruments. The financial support provided to mine action through the combined efforts of the European Union institutions and member States clearly illustrated that commitment. The total European Union funding for mine action of Euro1.8 billion over the past 10 years represented almost half the world's financial assistance to such activities in that period. The European Union was currently supporting activities in a number of seriously affected countries. Its policy had always included all explosive remnants of war, and during operations on the ground, no distinctions were made between landmines, cluster munitions or other explosive remnants of war. The European Union had decided to fund, under its Seventh Framework Programme, a comprehensive "toolbox on humanitarian demining", focusing on new technologies for mapping, detection and destruction of both landmines and cluster munitions. He looked forward to a productive Conference, which could count on the European Union's support. Mr. Al-Saud (Saudia Arabia) said that his country had become a party to Protocol V by virtue of Supreme Decree M50 of 8 September 2009. Saudi Arabia's northern border region was affected by explosive remnants of war as a result of the Kuwait liberation war of 1991. Its southern border region was similarly affected, owing to the activities of gangs of infiltrators in early 2010. Experts of the Saudi Arabian Armed Forces had been working diligently to clear, destroy and remove all explosive remnants of war in the Kingdom, and specialized teams had identified and marked areas actually or potentially contaminated with such objects. In addition, the Government had launched a project to build 10,000 housing units for persons who had suffered attacks at the hands of the gangs. Mr. Wang Qun (Observer for China) said that his country had ratified Protocol V in April 2010; the Protocol would enter into force for China in December. He noted with satisfaction the increase in the number of High Contracting Parties since the Protocol's entry into force in 2006, the active efforts to promote its implementation, and the strengthening of international exchanges, assistance and cooperation under the instrument. Those were indications that Protocol V struck the right balance between military needs and humanitarian concerns, reflected a common understanding among the Parties and reaffirmed the effectiveness and authority of the Convention with regard to humanitarian arms control. The problem of explosive remnants of war could be resolved more effectively if the principle whereby users of explosive ordnance that became explosive remnants of war were responsible for clearance was made more explicit. That would encourage greater responsibility and restraint with regard to the use of the weapons concerned. As a country affected by explosive remnants of war, China understood the difficulties faced by other countries in the same situation. It supported the provision of international cooperation and assistance to those countries and pledged, to the extent of its capabilities, to participate in such efforts. China was in favour of the timely submission of national reports on the implementation of the Protocol, and to that end, was willing to exchange views with other Parties on the reporting format, as well as other specific issues. Mr. Antonov (Russian Federation) said that, since its entry into force, Protocol V had clearly demonstrated its usefulness and effectiveness. It realized fully a fundamental principle of the Convention by ensuring a balance between humanitarian, military and economic interests. Those States that had not yet become parties to the Protocol should do so as soon as possible. That would enhance the efforts of the international community to meet one of the main challenges of the Protocol, namely reducing the humanitarian suffering caused by explosive remnants of war, including those resulting from the use of cluster munitions. The Russian Federation was complying fully with its obligations under Protocol V. Every year, tens of thousands of various types of explosive remnants of war were deactivated. Public awareness-raising activities were routinely conducted on the potential risks posed by explosive remnants of war, and relevant legislation was being updated. In the Russian Armed Forces, measures were implemented on a permanent basis to ensure compliance with the Protocol's provisions. In 2010, recommendations had been issued to demining units for the complete clearance of areas and facilities of explosive objects. In view of the ongoing restructuring of the Armed Forces, particular attention was being paid to the procedure for transferring information on used explosive ordnance to the relevant parties and to the archiving of such information. Furthermore, compliance with the standards and regulations for the transport of munitions, their storage and scheduled destruction was being closely monitored. As part of their humanitarian demining activities, in 2010 the demining units of the Armed Forces had located, deactivated and destroyed more than 165,000 explosive remnants of war and had cleared a total area of more than 100 hectares. The Russian Federation stood ready to provide further assistance with humanitarian demining and explosive remnant of war deactivation operations, including by using the resources of the Ministry for Emergency Situations, and to train experts in those areas. His Government was interested in establishing cooperation for clearance operations. Extensive areas of Russian territory were still contaminated with explosive remnants dating from the Second World War, which posed a real threat to the population. Their clearance required considerable financial and human resources. Detailed information on the implementation of Protocol V, including important post-conflict measures and steps to maintain proper standards for the handling of munitions, was contained in the Russian Federation's national report. His delegation fully supported the idea of a permanent database on national implementation of Protocol V. It welcomed the results of the 2010 meeting of experts and noted with satisfaction that the recommendations developed would assist with the preparation of national reports and ensure transparency in the Protocol's implementation. Also important was the confirmation provided at the meeting of experts of the recommendatory nature of the provisions contained in the technical annex to the Protocol. Given the increasingly important role Protocol V was likely to play in view of the continuing outbreak of numerous regional conflicts, the Russian Federation was in favour of its further enhancement and universalization. Mr. Ali Rao (India) said that his delegation had provided the Chairperson of the 2002 and 2003 Meetings of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, at which Protocol V had been negotiated and concluded. Subsequently, in 2004 and 2005, it had coordinated the Meeting's Working Group on Explosive Remnants of War. It welcomed the increase in the number of Parties to the Protocol to 69. Early universalization of the Protocol should continue to be a priority in the coming years, along with full implementation. The discussions at the recent meeting of experts had helped to advance the Parties' understanding of the various aspects of implementation, while the working papers and proposals prepared by the Coordinators for the current Conference contained useful ideas for future work. The contribution of the Implementation Support Unit was also appreciated. Mr. Hoffmann (Germany) said that, while the increase in the number of High Contracting Parties to 69 was a positive development, that number was still too low, and it was of the utmost importance for all Parties to increase their efforts to achieve universality. The clearance of contaminated areas was one of the key provisions of Protocol V. It was therefore vital to provide international cooperation and assistance in that area to States in need of technical know-how and resources. In partnership with experienced organizations on the ground, his Government helped countries to clear mines, cluster munitions and unexploded ordnance. The aims of such assistance included: reducing poverty and promoting development; ensuring people's physical safety and alleviating suffering; and helping the countries concerned to fulfil their obligations under the Convention and other related international instruments. Project funding was geared to increasing the efficiency of clearance operations and creating sustainable local clearance and management capacities. Since 1992, his Government had provided funds totalling Euro200 million for humanitarian mine clearance projects in 42 different countries. In 2010 alone, it had spent Euro17.3 million on clearance projects in 20 countries. Germany also contributed large sums to the funding provided by the European Union. The topic of clearance deserved further consideration by the High Contracting Parties. It would seem reasonable to combine the topic with that of obligations under article 4 in respect of recording and retaining information, under the responsibility of the Coordinator on clearance. Further improvements to the article 4 generic electronic template should be envisaged to ensure greater accuracy in recording information on used explosive ordnance. In that connection, it might be useful to draw on the expertise of NGOs and international organizations concerned with clearance activities, as they often knew best what kind of information was required. Germany would also welcome further discussion of the potential environmental consequences of explosive remnants of war clearance. International cooperation and assistance should remain a priority topic of the meeting of experts. Germany urged Parties that were donors to include detailed information in that regard when reporting under the Protocol. Likewise, States that had submitted requests for assistance should provide regular updates on the status of those requests. Over the past five years, much work had gone into preparing a draft guide for the implementation of part 3 of the technical annex to the Protocol, concerning generic preventive measures. The Conference should now adopt the draft guide, so that States could begin using it and provide feedback on their experiences at the 2011 meeting of experts. The guide would help to reduce the number of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), which were an increasing cause for concern. Issues relating to such devices should be considered not only under amended Protocol II but also under Protocol V, since explosive remnants of war constituted a major source for IEDs. With regard to victim assistance, the Parties should continue to develop synergies between the efforts under Protocol V and those under related instruments, such as the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Ottawa Convention on Landmines and the Convention on Cluster Munitions. There were benefits to be derived as well from closer cooperation between the Parties to amended Protocol II and Protocol V, given that both Protocols dealt with explosive ordnance and its effects. In 2009, Germany had funded projects aimed at the economic and social reintegration of victims and their families in the amount of Euro259,000. In 2010, donations to victim assistance projects had totalled more than Euro500,000. In addition, Germany helped its partner countries to implement specific projects to benefit persons with disabilities, which also covered victims of cluster and other kinds of munitions. Mr. Wilson (Australia) said that the discussions at the meeting of experts and the Coordinators' reports produced subsequently demonstrated the usefulness of that informal implementation mechanism. While the significant increase in the number of High Contracting Parties to Protocol V over the past year was welcome, much remained to be done in order to achieve the universality of the instrument. Australia would do what it could to promote the Protocol, particularly in the underrepresented Asia-Pacific region. His Government had fully implemented Protocol V. It continued to work towards implementing the preventive measures specified in part 3 of the technical annex and to maintain a robust ordnance management regime. The Australian Defence Force had revised its doctrine in respect of explosive ordnance to incorporate the Protocol's provisions. Samples of Australia's ordnance stocks inventory were regularly inspected and tested to ensure that they met internationally recognized performance specifications. Australia's mine action strategy had helped to reduce the humanitarian suffering and socio-economic impact associated with landmines, cluster munitions and other explosive remnants of war. It focused primarily on clearance, risk education and survivor assistance. His Government worked in partnership with civil society to ensure that victims of unexploded ordnance understood their right to greater inclusion in social and economic activities. It had supported similar activities in Cambodia, Lebanon, Iraq, the Occupied Palestinian Territories and the Sudan. Australia urged all Parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and other States that had not yet done so to consent to be bound by Protocol V as soon as possible. Mr. Pelaez (Observer for Argentina) said that his country was currently engaged in administrative formalities for the deposit of its instrument of ratification of Protocol V. The Ministry of Defence was developing guidelines for bringing the doctrine of the Argentine Armed Forces into conformity with the Protocol. A strict quality control system had been established for managing the production of munitions, while risk assessment procedures were followed to ensure the highest possible level of security during their temporary storage, transport and handling. Regulations pertaining to each legitimate user of explosives and munitions were implemented -- based on specifications, prescribed use and on-site safety conditions -- and procedures were established for recording, collecting and storing data on explosives and munitions, so that the data could be used to manage and evaluate the effects of their use. In addition, steps were taken to ensure the compatibility of direction and firing control systems with the Information Management System for Mine Action (IMSMA). Specialists from the Armed Forces would be trained in handling unexploded ordnance, taking account of best practices and Argentina's obligations under Protocol V. Argentina had submitted to the Group of Governmental Experts of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons at its eleventh session, held in August 2005, an outline of national practice in respect of generic preventive measures, in a document entitled "Preventive Technical Measures in Munitions Management" (CCW/GGE/XI/WG.1/WP.11). His Government's work on a methodology for the evaluation of the remaining useful life of outdated munitions demonstrated that Argentina's defence programmes complied with the best practices specified in article 9 of the Protocol and part 3 of the technical annex. Mr. Schmidt Ariztia (Chile) said that his country's domestic legislation adequately reflected Chile's obligations under Protocol V, bearing in mind that Chile did not have explosive remnants of war in its territory. Executive orders addressed to the Armed Forces were used to strengthen controls on the handling of weapons and explosives used in training activities. In addition, the various branches of the military formulated their own internal regulations aimed at preventing accidents involving either military personnel or civilians. A preliminary bill on assistance to victims of military explosives was being drafted, taking account of the Protocol and related international instruments. Establishing rules for the provision of victim assistance that were consistent with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities would strengthen victims' fundamental rights and facilitate their access to comprehensive rehabilitation and reintegration services. The basic data-collection phase of the victims' register had been completed, but the register could be updated whenever necessary. Mr. Tabajara de Oliveira (Observer for Brazil) said that the Brazilian National Congress had recently approved the text of Protocol V and that his Government would shortly notify the Secretary-General of the United Nations of Brazil's consent to be bound by the Protocol. Once it had become a party to the instrument, Brazil would spare no effort in promoting the universalization of Protocol V. His delegation believed that cooperation and assistance, and requests for assistance, should continue to be a priority issue at the meetings of experts and the conferences of the High Contracting Parties to Protocol V. As a long-standing participant in international demining activities, Brazil encouraged all Parties, relevant international organizations and institutions to consider providing assistance in response to requests by States affected by explosive remnants of war. Brazil supported the adoption of the draft guide for the implementation of part 3 of the technical annex and of a recommendation for the application of the guide by all Parties at the national level. Ms. Khanna (United States of America) said that the United States remained deeply concerned about the risks posed by explosive remnants of war. It was a world leader in providing need-based humanitarian mine action assistance not predicated on the type or origin of munition. The United States had for many years been involved in programmes to eliminate explosive remnants of war and landmines, expanding its assistance more recently to cover excess and at-risk stockpiles of small arms, light weapons and conventional munitions. Since 1993, her Government had provided $1.8 billion to more than 80 countries for conventional weapons destruction, including $160 million to 31 countries in 2010. The Quick Reaction Force, a deployable team of conventional weapons destruction experts, worked in tandem with host nations to respond to critical risks. The United States also provided substantial survivors' assistance around the world. Despite the progress made by the international community in addressing the issue of explosive remnants of war, conflicts persisted, threatening peace and stability. Her Government thus continued to expand its public-private partnership programme, raising awareness and resources for mine action, assisting survivors with rehabilitation and reintegration and providing technical support. Robust physical security and stockpile management for all national munitions was assured, consistent with the Protocol's provisions on generic preventive measures, and regular surveillance was carried out to ensure effective weapon performance. In order to address the humanitarian concerns associated with the reliability rates of cluster munitions, her Government continued to pursue the national policy goal of ensuring that by 2018 the United States Armed Forces would not use cluster munitions that, after arming, resulted in more than 1 per cent unexploded ordnance across the range of intended operational conditions. Lastly, she expressed support for the universalization of the Protocol and urged States that had not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the instrument. Mr. Song Seong-jong (Republic of Korea) said that Protocol V struck a realistic balance between military demands and humanitarian concerns. He was satisfied that the database of national reports and their annual updates had been successfully implemented. As mentioned in its first and second national reports, his Government had issued instructions on the management of explosive remnants of war to enable their swift clearance, removal or destruction by the Ministry of National Defence, as well as the implementation of relevant provisions of the Protocol in the event that explosive remnants of war were produced in the country's territory in the future. Further information was provided in the Protocol V database. In the three years since the First Conference, the meeting of experts had made much progress in facilitating the exchange of information on explosive remnants of war and in providing a framework for assistance in addressing their effects. He was grateful to the Coordinators for their work, and he hoped that their recommendations and reports would be given due consideration so that the Fourth Conference might devise a pragmatic road map for the implementation of the Protocol. Mr. Akram (Pakistan) said that although there were no explosive remnants of war in Pakistan, his Government was committed to fulfilling its obligations under the Protocol and had participated in all relevant meetings since Pakistan's accession. At the meeting of experts held in April 2010, his delegation had given a presentation on national standards, procedures and experiences, in particular relating to the implementation of article 4. It had also mentioned assistance provided to other countries. Pakistan's first national report had been submitted in 2010. The country's Armed Forces were well prepared to meet the challenges posed by explosive remnants of war, with procedures for their clearance, removal or destruction already a part of standard operating procedures. Procedures for the recording, retaining and transmission of information were also in place, and experts had been trained appropriately. By way of assistance to other countries, the army had helped to clear more than 22,000 square kilometres of contaminated territory in the Sudan and had been involved in similar operations at the Ethiopian border. Under United Nations auspices, Pakistan had also helped clear explosive remnants of war in Liberia, Darfur (Sudan) and Côte d'Ivoire. Standard procedures were also in place for ammunition storage and destruction, as well as marking, fencing and monitoring of explosive ordnance at military installations and bases. There was also a comprehensive plan for issuing media warnings and raising public awareness when necessary. Provision had been made for victim assistance in the form of free medical care, monetary compensation and employment to support rehabilitation. Mr. Clark (United Nations Mine Action Service), speaking on behalf of the United Nations Mine Action Team, commended the work of the informal meetings of governmental experts, chaired by the Coordinators, on thematic issues, and welcomed the focus in 2010 on ammunition management. Unintended explosions of ammunition depots and stockpiles continued to be of serious concern, owing to their humanitarian and socio-economic impact. The Team stood ready to provide assistance in that connection and was developing relevant technical guidelines for States. Three countries had already submitted requests for assistance under Protocol V, including Ukraine, which had requested specific assistance from the Mine Action Service. A technical assistance mission to Ukraine in early 2010 had noted vast amounts of unexploded ordnance covering 1,500 square kilometres of public land, making Ukraine an explosive remnants of war-affected country on a par with more publicly acknowledged countries. Afghanistan and Cambodia, by way of comparison, had a combined contamination of 1,300 square kilometres. Ukraine was also still faced with large areas contaminated by ammunition stockpile explosions, as well as a significant remaining legacy from the Second World War. The Mine Action Service was currently discussing plans for technical assistance with the Government. High Contracting Parties in a position to do so were encouraged to become involved. The Team welcomed the recent increase in the number of Parties to Protocol V and remained committed to promoting universal accession and assisting with implementation. The Mine Action Service had recently established a Standing Mine Action Capacity (S-MAC) to provide assistance to affected States. High Contracting Parties should submit their requests for international assistance and cooperation in the recommended format. Mr. Maresca (International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)) said that the meeting of experts had developed useful tools for assisting States with preparing national reports, developing generic preventive measures and requesting assistance. With regard to the plan of action on victim assistance, the joint session convened by the Coordinator on victim assistance under Protocol V and the Coordinator on improvised explosive devices under amended Protocol II had highlighted the similarities in the needs and challenges facing those injured by mines, booby traps, improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of war, and hence the potential value of a similar plan of action for those injured by the weapons covered by amended Protocol II. Given the close link between the rapid clearance of explosive remnants of war and the availability of accurate information on such objects, further discussion should be held on national procedures for recording and retaining information. ICRC supported the recommendations of the meeting of experts in those areas, as well as its recommendation that cooperation and assistance, and requests for assistance, should be priority issues in 2011. Important progress had been made in 2010 in furthering the implementation of Protocol V, and the accession of new States was to be applauded. All States that had not done so were urged to become parties to the Protocol as a matter of urgency. Thematic discussion on cooperation and assistance and requests for assistance (CCW/P.V/CONF/2010/3) Mr. O'Shea (Ireland), Coordinator on cooperation and assistance and requests for assistance, introduced the related report, which was contained in document CCW/P.V/CONF/2010/3. As had emerged from the meeting of experts in April, assistance could assume many forms, including financial, material, training and advice. National capacity-building was also important to ensure that such activities brought long-term benefits. Moreover, there was no clear division between donors and recipients of assistance: States affected by explosive remnants of war could have valuable experience to share with other affected States as well as with non-affected States assisting others. Most States were in a position to engage in international cooperation and should consider their possibilities in that regard. The report contained four recommendations (para. 17), namely that the Conference should: continue the consideration of cooperation and assistance, and requests for assistance, as a priority issue; encourage the Parties to submit information on cooperation and assistance provided, as well as received; give general encouragement for the provision of assistance in response to requests submitted under article 7 of the Protocol, or in response to needs identified in other ways; and encourage States that had submitted requests for assistance to provide regular updates on the status of their requests, using the amended form approved by the Third Conference. Mr. Boot (Ukraine) said that his delegation attached great importance to international efforts supporting the implementation of Protocol V. Ukraine continued to grapple with the problem of obsolete and unserviceable ammunition, large areas contaminated with explosive remnants of two World Wars, and massive stockpiles inherited from the Soviet era. The scale of the problem made it a wider European concern necessitating joint operations. His Government, for its part, was doing its utmost to lessen the threat, with programmes focused on ensuring public safety, preventing illicit diversion of ammunition and explosives to fuel local or international conflicts, averting environmental contamination, clearing areas contaminated with explosive objects and reclaiming land for agriculture, and dealing with obsolete and unserviceable ammunition in depots and stockpiles. Ukraine would be grateful for further cooperation with international organizations to those ends. Mr. Marchenko (Ukraine), giving a slide presentation on clearance of explosive remnants of war in Ukraine, said that some 30,000 square kilometres of Ukrainian territory were still contaminated with explosive remnants of war. Ukraine acknowledged its responsibilities with respect to all such objects in territory under its control (Protocol, art. 3, para. 1). However, owing to the scale of contamination and the presence of explosive remnants of war in areas difficult to access, marking and clearance was an extremely lengthy process requiring massive resources. In the post-war period, demining efforts had prioritized populated areas and transport networks, leaving large areas still contaminated. Of serious concern, also, was contamination resulting from prolonged military activity in the post-war period: some 1,500 square kilometres of Ukrainian territory were still contaminated with explosive ordnance from 34 former military test sites. The areas in question had been handed over to local authorities. Information on the location of explosive objects was available, since surveys had been made in accordance with Ukraine's obligations under the Protocol. The situation was complicated, however, by the threat of fires and explosions in depots and storage facilities and of consequent large-scale contamination. On a more positive note, some 35,600 tons of ordnance had been successfully deactivated between 2006 and 2008 in response to an emergency situation at a missile and ammunitions base in Zaporizka province. In addition, each year for the past 10 years, some 100,000 explosive objects had been successfully detected and destroyed. Demining operations complied with the International Mine Action Standards, and all precautions were taken for the protection of the civilian population from the risks and effects of explosive remnants of war, including warnings and risk education through the media. Despite his Government's best efforts, however, there had been 274 victims (117 fatalities), including 74 children in the past 15 years. In 2010 alone, there had been 29 victims (13 fatalities), including 4 children. In response to that serious situation, an ambitious State demining programme had been adopted for 2009 to 2014, funded with $17 million from the State budget, $3 million from local authorities and another $3 million from agricultural entities. Some 522,000 explosive objects had already been deactivated under the programme, and efforts were under way to demine 16 former military test sites earmarked for agricultural use. The recent mission conducted by the United Nations Mine Action Service at Ukraine's request had acknowledged the expertise of Ukrainian demining units, which were striving to achieve the best results despite limited resources. The need to step up demining operations and acquire cutting edge demining equipment had also, however, been highlighted. The Mine Action Service had made a number of recommendations, which his Government was in the process of following up, including the establishment of centralized demining coordination and monitoring bodies and information systems. Although Ukraine had managed to eliminate some of the most dangerous risks associated with explosive remnants of war, the problem persisted, posing a threat to the civilian population, as well as a risk of illicit proliferation of explosive materials. Ukraine thus trusted that its request for financial and technical assistance would be met. Mr. O'Shea (Ireland), Coordinator on cooperation and assistance and requests for assistance, said that the statements made by Ukraine and the Mine Action Service demonstrated both the dangers posed by unexploded ordnance and the engagement of the United Nations agencies involved in helping to solve the problem. The topic under discussion was not only assistance, but also cooperation, and he urged countries to build on the cooperative spirit shown thus far. The President said he took it that the Conference wished to approve the recommendations contained in the Coordinator's report. Thematic discussion on the web-based information system for Protocol V Mr. Somogyi (Hungary), Coordinator on the web-based information system for Protocol V (WISP.V), demonstrated the new system, which would be accessible through the website of the United Nations Office at Geneva. The main menus were: country profiles; national focal points; requests for assistance; library; calendar; and report wizard. The latter was the most novel element inasmuch as it allowed assistance projects to be filtered by country, region and type, making it easier for donors to identify potential projects. Countries would be issued with their own password for uploading as much information as they wished on their assistance projects and needs. Countries affected by explosive remnants of war, donor countries and implementing agencies were invited to participate in the forthcoming trial stage, which would last between two and three months. Ms. Žunec-Brand (Croatia), Mr. Hoffmann (Germany), Mr. Clark (United Nations Mine Action Service) and Mr. Bohle (Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian Demining (GICHD)) said that their respective countries or agencies would be willing to participate in the trial. Replying to a proposal by Mr. Song Seong-jong (Republic of Korea) that some form of help should be included on the web page for first-time users of the system, Mr. Somogyi (Hungary), Coordinator on the web-based information system for Protocol V, said that text-based guidelines had already been incorporated and that every effort had been made to keep the system simple. A manual would be sent out to all users when the system was launched. Ms. Matthey-Ijeh (Office of the Chief Librarian, United Nations Office at Geneva) presented the new website of the United Nations Office at Geneva, in which sections had been regrouped using a more graphic and lively approach and new features added, including ones to meet the goals of the United Nations regarding website accessibility. Ms. Bellotta (United Nations Office at Geneva Library) presented the new disarmament resource guides developed by the Library in consultation with expert bodies in disarmament. The guides were now available on the "Disarmament" page of the Office's website. The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 