%%%DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|FISSIONABLE MATERIALS|TREATIES|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|

CD/1894 Conference on Disarmament 14 September 2010 Original: English Islamic Republic of Iran Working paper The position paper of the G-21 on the High Level Meeting on "Revitalizing the Work of the Conference on Disarmament and Taking Forward Multilateral Disarmament Negotiations" 1. The Group notes with appreciation the opportunity presented by the High Level Meeting to be convened by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 24 September 2010 entitled "Revitalizing the Work of the Conference on Disarmament and Taking Forward Multilateral Disarmament Negotiations" to demonstrate political support for the work of the Conference on Disarmament (CD), multilateral disarmament agenda and other UN disarmament bodies. 2. The Group recognizes that the responsibility for the Chair's Summary of this meeting, which should reflect the views of member states, rests solely with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, 3. The Group reaffirms the absolute validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation, and expresses its determination to promote multilateralism as the core principle of negotiations in these areas. In this regard, the Group strongly supports the objectives of the UN General Assembly Resolution 64/34 of 2009 on the "Promotion of Multilateralism in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation." 4. While reaffirming the importance of the CD as the single multilateral negotiating body on disarmament, as mandated by the First Special Session on Disarmament (SSOD-I), the Group expresses its disappointment that the CD has not been able to undertake substantive work on its agenda. The Group, therefore, reiterates its call on the CD members to adopt and implement a balanced and comprehensive programme of work on the basis of its agenda and dealing with, inter alia, the core issues, in accordance with the rules of procedure, and by taking into consideration the security concerns of all States. The Group also calls on all members of the CD to demonstrate flexibility to enable the CD to resume its work. 5. The Group reaffirms that nuclear disarmament remains its highest priority and reiterates its call on the CD to agree on establishing an ad hoc committee on nuclear disarmament as soon as possible. In this regard, while stressing its strong commitment to nuclear disarmament, the Group reaffirms its full readiness to start negotiations on a phased programme for the complete elimination of nuclear weapons with a specified framework of time, including a nuclear weapons convention. The Group reaffirms that the total elimination of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons. 6. The Group believes in the importance of examining the possibility of expansion of the CD membership. 7. The Group supports strengthening CD's interaction with civil society in the disarmament field, particularly nuclear disarmament in keeping with the nature of the CD as a negotiating forum. 8. The Group recalls the Final Documents of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly -- the First Special Session on Disarmament -- and the 2009 Sharm-el-Sheikh Summit Declaration and Final Document of the Non-Aligned Movement, and reiterates its positions as conveyed in its previous statements to the CD. 9. The Group recognizes that SSOD-I put into place disarmament machinery and that there is a need to address challenges to its effectiveness. At the same time, it is important to recall the achievements arrived at by the international community through the UN disarmament machinery. It thus remains important to preserve the nature, role and purpose of each part of this important machinery. 10. The Group supports the convening of the Fourth Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD-IV), inter alia, to discuss and consider issues and machinery related to disarmament, and in this regard expresses deep concern over the persistent lack of consensus to date. 