%%%GENDER DISCRIMINATION|WOMEN'S RIGHTS|PERIODIC REPORTS|

Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women Pre-session working group Forty-eighth session 17 January-4 February 2011 Consideration of reports submitted by States parties under article 18 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women Report of the pre-session working group 1. It is the practice of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to convene a pre-session working group for five days to prepare lists of issues and questions relating to the initial and periodic reports that would be considered by the Committee at one of its future sessions. 2. At its forty-fourth session, the Committee decided that the pre-session working group for the Committee's forty-eighth session would meet from 2 to 6 August 2010, immediately after its forty-sixth session, in order to ensure that sufficient time would be available to States parties to submit their written replies to the lists of issues and questions, as well as to ensure their timely translation. 3. The following experts were designated as members of the pre-session working group for the forty-eighth session: Ms. Barbara Bailey Ms. Ferdous Ara Begum Ms. Dorkas Coker-Appiah Mr. Cees Flinterman Ms. Violeta Neubauer 4. The pre-session working group elected Ms. Neubauer as its Chairperson. 5. The pre-session working group prepared lists of issues and questions with respect to periodic reports of Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Israel, Kenya, Liechtenstein, South Africa and Sri Lanka. 6. To assist in the preparation of the lists of issues and questions, the pre-session working group had before it the reports of the eight States parties listed above, as well as the State party's core document, if available; the general recommendations adopted by the Committee; background information and draft lists of issues and questions prepared by the Secretariat, based on an analytical comparison of current States parties' reports, and the Committee's discussion on earlier reports; and other relevant information, including concluding observations of the Committee and other treaty bodies. In preparing the lists of issues and questions for periodic reports, the pre-session working group paid particular attention to the States parties' follow-up to the Committee's concluding observations on previous reports. 7. The pre-session working group benefited from written and oral information submitted by United Nations entities and specialized agencies, as well as from nongovernmental organizations and a national human rights institution. 8. Lists of issues and questions adopted by the pre-session working group were transmitted to the eight States parties concerned and are contained in the following documents: (a) List of issues and questions with regard to the combined third and fourth periodic report of Algeria (CEDAW/C/DZA/Q/4); (b) List of issues and questions with regard to the combined sixth and seventh periodic report of Bangladesh (CEDAW/C/BGD/Q/7); (c) List of issues and questions with regard to the seventh periodic report of Belarus (CEDAW/C/BLR/Q/7); (d) List of issues and questions with regard to the fourth and fifth periodic report of Israel (CEDAW/C/ISR/Q/5); (e) List of issues and questions with regard to the seventh periodic report of Kenya (CEDAW/C/KEN/Q/7); (f) List of issues and questions with regard to the fourth periodic report of Liechtenstein (CEDAW/C/LIE/Q/4); (g) List of issues and questions with regard to the combined second, third and fourth periodic report of South Africa (CEDAW/C/ZAF/Q/4); (h) List of issues and questions with regard to the combined fifth, sixth and seventh periodic report of Sri Lanka (CEDAW/C/LKA/Q/7). 9. In accordance with the Committee decisions 22/V, 25/II and 31/III, the lists of issues and questions focused on themes addressed by the Convention. The themes included the Constitutional and legislative framework and national machinery for the advancement of women; gender stereotypes; poverty and employment; violence against women, including domestic violence; trafficking in women and exploitation of prostitution; participation of women in decision-making; education and training; employment; health; social and economic benefits; the situation of disadvantaged groups of women, such as older women; rural women; women with disabilities; women belonging to ethnic minorities; refugee and migrant women; equality before the law; and marriage and family relations. 