%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2010 regular session 26 May-4 June 2010 Quadrennial reports for the period 2005-2008 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page 1. Foundation for the American Indian 2. International Council for Education of People with Visual Impairment 3. International Council of Management Consulting Institutes 4. Islamic Relief 5. Italian Centre of Solidarity 6. Summer Institute of Linguistics Special, 2005 I. Introduction The aim and purpose of the Foundation for the American Indian is to enhance quality of life through support for human services, economic development, the arts, education and environmental stewardship. Its goal is to help build the capacity of Indian people to be self-sufficient in order to develop their respective communities and to contribute to measurable improvement in the areas of education, health, technology and economic development. II. Contribution to the work of the United Nations A. Participation in the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities The Foundation did not participate in the work of the Economic and Social Council or its subsidiary bodies at major conferences or other United Nations meetings during the reporting period because it focused its activities on the development and implementation of education, health, agricultural, cultural restoration and renewable energy programmes, working primarily with governmental offices, organizations and contributors to non-profit organizations in Canada and the United States of America. B. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals The Foundation contributed to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in the United States and Canada. Major actions taken were: (a) a meeting on ensuring environmental sustainability, and universal education and on ending poverty and hunger, June 2006, Swan Lake First Nation, Manitoba, Canada, attended by the Rolling River First Nation, Tribal Council, a wind energy financier and Foundation staff; (b) identified developers and funding for a wind energy project for the Swan Lake First Nation and hosted meetings with other First Nations in Canada, including Rolling River First Nation, on potential wind projects; (c) made grants to American Indian tribal colleges for anemometers to collect wind data for potential wind energy development; (d) made grants to train its wind energy expert; and (e) arranged a consulting contract for the Foundation's renewable energy expert with the Cherokee Nation to develop their wind energy project. C. Other events The Foundation attended a conference at the United States Department of Energy, Denver, Colorado, May 2007: the Foundation interfaced with tribal renewable energy programme officers and presented their wind energy initiatives for tribal colleges; had a meeting at the William J. Clinton Foundation, New York, June 2008, to discuss its wind energy initiatives and potential funding projects and worked with other foundations and Government agencies to leverage funding for the five programme initiatives listed above. The Foundation is now seeking and writing grants for funding in the areas of health, education, cultural restoration, agriculture and renewable energy. The Foundation is also working with the David Lynch Foundation to organize income-producing music concerts for these tribal programmes, following the successful Paul McCartney/Ringo Starr concert last May in New York City. D. Participation in United Nations conferences and events Foundation representatives attended a World Diabetes Day event in 2008. The Foundation has utilized financial resources to plan, fund and implement programmes in indigenous communities that are consistent with the Millennium Development Goals. Special, 1989 Founded in 1952, the International Council for Education of People with Visual Impairment is the organization of individuals and agencies concerned with the formal and non-formal educational needs of children with visual impairment throughout the world. The Council works at the global level to bring together educators, administrators, parents and others to promote equal educational opportunities for children with visual impairment. The Council works closely with United Nations agencies and Government and non-governmental organizations concerned with education and carries out these efforts through seven regional committees, each of which develops its own plan of action that builds upon needs articulated by national committees. Of particular concern to the Council are the needs of children and youth in the developing countries where blindness is most prevalent and where, on average, less than 10 per cent of these children have access to any formal education. This situation perpetuates a cycle of illiteracy and poverty that must be broken, as it ensures that people with visual impairment are among the most marginalized groups in the world. The Council is addressing the challenge of breaking this cycle with the launch of its Global Campaign on Education for All Children with Visual Impairment, in partnership with the World Blind Union. This campaign is creating a demand for education and is being implemented within the framework of national campaigns in order to ensure that appropriate educational services are available to children with visual impairment who have not yet been reached. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) are members of the Global Task Force of the Global Campaign on Education for All Children with Visual Impairment. During the reporting period, (a) the Secretary-General of the Council, former President of the World Blind Union attended a meeting at UNESCO in Paris to report on the activities of the VI Global Campaign; (b) the Council helped UNICEF by preparing a directory of education resources for children with visual impairment; (c) the President and Secretary-General of the Council attended a meeting at UNESCO to discuss ways to expand the Global Campaign through the national Education for All coordinators; and (d) the Council served as a member of the working group on children with disabilities of the Non-Governmental Organizations Committee on UNICEF. A. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals The Global Campaign addressed the following Millennium Development Goals: Goal 2, Achieve universal primary education; Goal 3, Promote gender equality and empower women; and Goal 8, Develop a global partnership for development. Working in seven geographical regions (Africa, East Asia, Europe, Latin America, North America/Caribbean, the Pacific and West Asia) the Council was involved in addressing these three Goals at a global level, as described below: Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education The Global Campaign for Education for All Children with Visual Impairment, launched in July 2006, focused on children in the developing world, where it was estimated that less than 10 per cent have access to education. Focus countries served during the period 2006-2008: Viet Nam, the Dominican Republic and Paraguay. Focus countries currently served through the Global Campaign: Viet Nam, the Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Nepal, Ecuador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Fiji and Pakistan. Project period: 2006 onwards. Global Campaign activities: (a) Created a demand for education of children with visual impairment; (b) included the campaign in national Education for All initiatives; (c) ensured provision of support services to children with visual impairment; and (d) facilitated access to education for children with multiple disabilities. Children who benefited through the Global Campaign: Nearly 13,000 children with visual impairment were additionally enrolled in schools in Viet Nam, the Dominican Republic and Paraguay. Higher education project: The Council promoted higher education for students with visual impairment in Indonesia, the Philippines and Viet Nam, in collaboration with the Nippon Foundation. Project period: 2007-2008. Activities: (a) Information and communications technology training for students with visual impairment in higher education institutes; (b) loan schemes to procure laptops for the students; (c) special training in statistics given to the students; (d) creating awareness among higher education institutes regarding the need to create an accessible environment; (e) annual summer training camps; and (f) creating awareness among higher education institutes about the education of persons with visual impairment. Higher education project cost in 2007-2008: $171,000. Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empowerment of women The Global Campaign drew special attention to the education of girls with visual impairment. In fact, campaign guidelines clearly indicated that the national task forces should make special efforts to enrol girls with visual impairment in schools. The Council worked with parents' organizations at the global, regional and national levels to facilitate this initiative. Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development The Council worked with United Nations bodies and international non-governmental developmental organizations to promote this campaign, which is currently supported by 10 international organizations. In addition, organizations of persons with disabilities and Governments are involved to a large extent in the implementation of the campaign. The Council is striving to ensure educational access for children with visual impairment, especially in developing countries. Special, 2001 The International Council of Management Consulting Institutes has made important contributions to furthering the development goals of the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations in general. The Council is the global voice of management consulting and the umbrella body of national management consulting institutes in over 45 countries around the world. These national institutes administer, in accordance with worldwide standards, the profession's code of ethical and professional conduct and Common Body of Knowledge, as well as the internationally recognized Certified Management Consultant designation earned by individual management consultants and the Accredited Consulting Practices designation earned by consulting firms. To become a council member, individual consultants and consulting firms must first be a member of their country's Council-sanctioned institute. If such organizations do not exist in their own country, then membership can be sought with a Council-accredited institute in another country in the region. A. Aims and purposes In partnership with members and the national institutes, the mission of the Council is to elevate standards for management consultants worldwide, and to provide the international community with the confidence that these standards, combined with the certification process of its member institutes, will ensure that certified management consultants serve their clients with world-class competency and professionalism. The mission of the Council is also to support the creation and development of national professional institutes throughout the world, as well as to encourage information-sharing, networking and reciprocity between institutes that adhere to the Council's international standards and its code of conduct. B. Main course of action/history The Council was founded in 1987 and spread rapidly across the globe. By the end of 1991, almost all countries with professional institutes of management consulting were represented. In 2009, there were member institutes in 45 countries around the world. Continued membership in the Council requires that each national institute promote and implement standards among its members through training and certification, which is in turn undertaken through a rigorous country quality assurance procedure implemented by the Council. The Council achieves its objectives through its involvement with external international bodies. The Council is working with the European Committee for Standardization to enhance the development of professional standards to achieve global benchmarks, and with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to promote and train consultants in Central Asia and encourage the creation of national institutes of management consulting. The Council has observer status with the International Accreditation Forum as part of its efforts to achieve higher standards of management consulting. Very recently, relationships have been established with the International Labour Organization (ILO), in addition to the existing association with the United Nations, to work towards the achievement of mutual goals. In 2001, the Economic and Social Council endorsed the International Council of Management Consulting Institutes practice of sending highly qualified and experienced Certified Management Consultants to countries with less developed economies to train, coach and mentor local management consultants and fledgling management consultant institutes in the fundamentals of consulting and in networking with other institutes in their region and around the world. C. Significant changes Since 2001, Council membership has increased, with an additional 19 institutes, including in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, China, Kazakhstan, Latvia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Thailand, Turkey, Uzbekistan and now the Islamic Republic of Iran. The Council Secretariat was moved in 2006 from San Francisco, United States, to Nijkerk, the Netherlands. The Council has continued to spread its message of professional, quality and ethical management to even more countries. Its annual meetings have often been held in less economically privileged locations/countries with fledgling professional institutes. Since 2001, the Council has held international meetings in Istanbul, Turkey; Beijing; Moscow; Barbados; Chongqing, China; and Singapore. Future meetings are planned in Jordan, Taiwan Province of China, Thailand, Romania and Brazil. In 2004, as a non-governmental organization in special consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, the Council adopted its mission of striving to establish professional management consulting institutes in developing economies and working with other non-governmental organizations to assist them in using qualified indigenous management consultants who could help prepare them for leadership, change management and development in the economy. The Council's emphasis has been on practical achievement, either directly or by influencing others. A. Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities In 2006, the Council designated two representatives based in the United States to work with the United Nations. For the past three years, these individuals have attended selected meetings of the Economic and Social Council and the World Bank to acquire a comprehensive understanding of these organizations and to seek collaborative ventures. B. The Commission on Science and Technology for Development The Commission held a panel meeting in Paris following the World Summit on the Information Society held in Tunis in 2005. Building on its extensive global experience, the Council emphasized that, in any development project using technology, a balanced investment needs to be guaranteed in three areas, namely, technology, process and people, with the latter covering, for example, skills, training, organization, cultural issues and values. Investing in only one or two areas will inevitably lead to failure and a wasted investment. C. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters The Council submitted a paper in response to a request for success stories in support of the Millennium Development Goals and was invited to present the paper at the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2007 of the Economic and Social Council. D. Response to the annual ministerial review in 2007 on innovation in the reduction of poverty and starvation A special task force of the Council prepared an extensive paper on improving outcomes from development funding using indigenous management consultants, which contained the following messages: (a) competent indigenous management consultants improve the efficacy, effectiveness and efficiency of development-funded projects and increase the capability and capacity of the economy of any developing country, increasing the likelihood of alleviating poverty; and (b) the Council's core competence lies in establishing and running national professional bodies, and its mission is to build national institutes of management consulting in developing countries. This mission directly supports the position of indigenous management consultants. The Council emphasized (a) the entire development project, from conception to implementation, with a focus on achievement (efficacy), outcomes for the developing economy (effectiveness) and value for money (efficiency); (b) the culture and indigenous background of the professionals involved in the developing countries; (c) the competence of the qualified management consultant as a key selection criterion; and the Council as a catalyst for establishing a national professional body and more competent qualified and indigenous management consultants. E. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals Several national member institutes have been involved in local activities that are in line with the Millennium Development Goals. For example, the Institute of Management Consultants Bangladesh undertook a nine-country project, "Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction from Industry in Asia and the Pacific", for the United Nations Environment Programme. Funded by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, the project provided consulting and technical support to five industries in Bangladesh by introducing cleaner production methods and energy-efficient tools and techniques. F. Activities in line with World Bank objectives The Council believes that its contribution to achieving the Millennium Development Goals and the objectives of the World Bank is the establishment of a competent, indigenous management consultancy profession in many countries, thereby increasing the capacity and capability of domestic economies. Professional ethics and governance are emphasized as examples in many developing economies. G. Working in partnership with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development The Council's response to the 2007 annual ministerial review was forwarded to TurnAround Management and Business Advisory Services Programme of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), through the World Bank. The Programme aims to enhance the business environment, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises in transition economies emerging from the former Soviet bloc. This Programme strategy is consistent with the Council's objectives and uses the Certified Management Consultant qualification to enhance business support professions in these countries. The Council and EBRD have jointly: (a) instructed trainers and provided free training materials in Kazakhstan; (b) mentored the Kazakhstan Association of Certified Management Consultants, a Council member since 2007; (c) produced similar results in Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan; (d) trained management consultants in Kaliningrad, Russian Federation; (e) mentored a Council member in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, together with the United States Agency for International Development; (f) organized "Central European Initiative" events for small and medium-sized enterprises in the Balkan region; (g) made available a key consultant for the EBRD "Women in Business" initiative; and (h) helped to bring the Ukrainian partner institute up to speed through economic benefits provided in partnership with a regional financial institution. H. Work with the International Labour Organization The Council held discussions with ILO offices in Turin, Italy, and Geneva to develop a training programme for consultants in Africa and South America. Special, 1993 Islamic Relief is an international relief and development charity aimed at alleviating the suffering of the world's poorest nations, and it initiates emergency and long-term development projects in some of the poorest communities in the world. An independent, non-political organization, it was established in 1984 and has since grown rapidly around the world. Islamic Relief is headquartered in Birmingham, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and has offices worldwide. Some of these offices focus mainly on advocacy and fund-raising, while others concentrate on implementing projects to alleviate poverty. Islamic Relief specializes in the following areas: education and vocational training; health and nutrition; water and sanitation; income generation; children and orphans support; and disaster preparedness and emergency relief. Approximately 60 per cent of its donations come from individual non-governmental donors. The organization has no relationship with any Government and is thus independent in its management and its activities. However, it may accept donations or services from governmental agencies wishing to support certain projects. For example, the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom has financially supported Islamic Relief's development and emergency relief projects and provided other support. In addition to the Department for International Development and United Nations institutions, other sources of governmental funding for Islamic Relief include the European Commission and its Humanitarian Aid office. During the reporting period, Islamic Relief participated in various conferences and meetings with United Nations agencies on such topics as the Darfur crisis and refugee issues. B. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters Islamic Relief is committed to the objectives and goals of the United Nations. Its involvement consisted of advocacy and networking, and global cooperation as an implementing partner in various initiatives, funded by United Nations agencies, in Afghanistan, Albania, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Lebanon, Mali, Palestine, Pakistan, the Russian Federation, the Sudan and Yemen. C. Millennium Development Goals Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger Target: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose income is less than $1 a day. Action: People helped in emergency projects -- 1,080,511. Target: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger. Action: People fed through seasonal food distributions -- 1,779,324. Target: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling. Action: Children and families helped through education programmes -- 1,273,542. Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women Target: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and in all levels of education no later than 2015. Goal 4: Reduce child mortality Target: Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate. Action: Children and families helped through child-health-related projects -- 82,907. Goal 5: Improve maternal health Target: Reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio. Action: People helped through health-related projects -- 193,716. Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability Target: Halve, by 2015, the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. Action: People helped through water and sanitation programmes -- 917,242. Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development with targets for aid, trade and debt relief Target: Develop further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. Actions: People helped through microcredit and sustainable livelihood programmes -- 1,026,440. Special, 1985 The Italian Centre of Solidarity is a private non-profit organization founded in Rome in 1971. In line with its central belief that problem-solving should focus on the person and not the symptoms, the Centre carries out its core task by bringing together people in difficulty. At the local level, the Centre has developed a wide range of social programmes covering such areas as drug addiction and school dropouts, adolescents and adults with mental health problems, immigrants and refugees (especially from Africa), and the homeless and marginalized. At any one time, the Centre has approximately 800 clients. It employs a staff of over 100 and has an annual budget of approximately Euro5 million. Some 60 volunteers work with the Centre. Over the years, the Centre has created and developed a number of networks. It has contributed to the creation of, among others, the World Federation of Therapeutic Communities, the European Federation of Therapeutic Communities, the Italian Federation of Therapeutic Communities and the Spanish Proyecto Hombre network. The Centre was granted special consultative status at the Economic and Social Council in 1985. Through projects funded by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its predecessors, and by the European Commission, the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Italian Episcopal Conference and other private donors, it has effectively developed drug demand reduction, health and community empowerment projects in many countries. During the reporting period, the Centre participated in the annual sessions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, often working closely with the Vienna NGO Committee on Narcotic Drugs. B. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies The Centre has been an active member of the Vienna NGO Committee on Narcotic Drugs and, during the reporting period, played a leading role in the work of the Committee. The Centre participated in the "Beyond 2008" project, in partnership with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to provide a means of creating and channelling a global contribution by non-governmental organizations to the review of progress in international drug control measures being undertaken by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The Centre's representative to the United Nations Office in Vienna was appointed chair of the programme committee for this project, which was financed by voluntary contributions from the Governments of Canada, Hungary, Italy, Sweden and the United Kingdom and from the European Commission. Actions taken: (a) facilitated regional consultations in Kiev, Johannesburg, South Africa, Belgrade, Dhaka and Budapest; (b) adapted the Biennial Reports Questionnaire of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for use by non-governmental organizations; (c) prepared a conference room paper for the fifty-first session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on the contribution of non-governmental organizations to the implementation of the Political Declaration and Action Plans adopted by the twentieth special session of the General Assembly; (d) organized the "Beyond 2008" non-governmental organization Forum in collaboration with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for which it served as co-chair and rapporteur and which was attended by 300 non-governmental organizations from around the world, with a total of some 900 non-governmental organizations from 145 countries participating in the project; (e) participated in briefing meetings with the Chair of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the President of the International Narcotics Control Board and the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The value of the "Beyond 2008" project in promoting understanding of the international drug control system and non-governmental organization engagement in the development of drug policy and practice was recognized by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/197 on international cooperation against the world drug problem, and by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in its resolution 49/2. C. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals Target 2: Achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all, including women and young people. Actions: (a) field mission to Caritas, Egypt. Developed a project, funded by the Italian Episcopal Conference, to create a centre for psychosocial support of socially excluded women; (b) project financed by the European Union Youth in Action Programme to exchange experiences and good practice among staff of programmes/services for young people at risk of social exclusion. Partner countries for the project included Italy, Lithuania, Viet Nam, the Dominican Republic and Uganda; and (c) project in Bolivia to integrate social and health services and improve the living conditions of the inhabitants of the Yungas, a traditional cocoa cultivation area. The direct beneficiaries were some 25,000 people, mostly ethnic Aymara farmers. Target 1: Reduce by two thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate. Actions: (a) Bolivia: continued support for the development of a general hospital for the Yungas region and a local non-governmental organization. Activities financed by the Centre, the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Italian Episcopal Conference. All activities were related to health and social development and aimed to strengthen the rural health-care network in the area; and (b) Bolivia: participation in a community education programme in maternal health in the northern Yungas, including the provision of information on motherhood, childhood and responsible parenting. Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases Target 1: Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS. Actions: (a) collaboration with two Togolese non-governmental organizations on HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment of AIDS patients. A group of Togolese operators spent two different periods in Rome for training, study visits and counselling. Target 3: Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases. Action: In collaboration with La Sapienza University of Rome, the Centre presented a new project to fight tuberculosis in the Yungas region. In addition to the Centre's international work, which supports the Millennium Development Goals, its work in Italy has a strong focus on these goals, especially those related to child health, universal education and HIV/AIDS. Activities in support of global principles: (a) marks every year with special events, including the International Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking and the International Day against AIDS; (b) Bolivia: reactivated relations with the Centro Boliviano de Solidaridad "Vida", a therapeutic programme for drug addicts. Programme director spent six months training in Rome; (c) Bosnia and Herzegovina: training and supervision for a drug rehabilitation programme, with training sessions held in Italy and Bosnia and Herzegovina; (d) Afghanistan: in partnership with a non-governmental organization from the Czech Republic, the Centre took part in a project (EuropeAid) to fight drug addiction and trafficking by strengthening the local network of organizations involved in the rehabilitation and social integration of drug addicts and the training of staff members; (e) Dominican Republic: prevention of drug abuse among young people of Santo Domingo, including staff training sessions in the country and in Italy; (f) Romania: through an agreement with the National Anti-Drug Agency of Romania, seven professionals were trained in Rome with the objective of starting therapeutic programmes for the rehabilitation of drug addicts in Romania; (g) Viet Nam: at the request of the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, field mission by two Centre experts to study the local situation of drug abuse and prepare a project proposal; (h) Mauritius and Reunion Island: three operators (two from Mauritius and one from Reunion Island) in Rome for training on the development of methodologies in the field of rehabilitation of drug addicts; (i) Tunisia: a social worker from a non-governmental organization in Sfax, Tunisia, received further training on therapeutic community methodologies. In exchange, one operator from the Centre participated in activities in Sfax marking the World Day against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking; (j) Algeria: training and exchange of good practices with another non-governmental organization to explore specific areas for cooperation in the field of drug addiction prevention and rehabilitation; and (k) Africa: design of a project, "Africa Africa", to create a network of public and private organizations in the field of social problems, health, education and prevention of drug abuse in Senegal, Cameroon, Gambia, Ghana, Mauritania and Kenya. Special, 1997 A. Aims, purposes and main course of action The Summer Institute of Linguistics is a faith-based non-profit organization committed to serving language communities worldwide as they build capacity for sustainable language development. The Institute does this primarily through research, translation, training and materials development, working with ethno-linguistic minority communities to build their capacity for the sustainable development of their own languages. B. Significant changes within SIL In December 2007, the Institute's membership approved a change to the by-laws that restructured the Board of Directors. In December 2008, the Institute's membership approved two by-law changes specifying the interval between international conferences and the process for amending the articles of incorporation and by-laws. II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations A. SIL's participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies The Institute sent observers to: (a) the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh sessions of the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues; (b) the thirty-third and thirty-fourth sessions of the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); (c) the 2006, 2007 and 2008 UNESCO International Mother Language Day celebrations; (d) the 2005 UNESCO International Literacy Day; (e) the World Summit on the Information Society, in Tunis; (f) the UNESCO International Conference of Non-Governmental Organizations, December 2005, Paris; (g) the sixtieth anniversary of Her Royal Highness Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn's UNESCO Goodwill Ambassadorship; (h) the Fourth Meeting of the Collective Consultation of NGOs on Education for all; (i) the regional preparatory conferences for the sixth International Conference on Adult Education; and (j) the forty-eighth session of the International Conference on Education. During the reporting period, the Institute also attended a number of conferences, meetings, seminars and workshops on education- and literacy-related issues. In addition, the Institute cooperated with several United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters. B. Activities in support of the Millennium Development Goals While the Institute is engaged in international advocacy and capacity-building to promote the benefits of local language development, the vast majority of its work is conducted at the community level. The Institute is currently working with some 1,200 minority language communities worldwide, supporting them in their language development efforts. Using the local language has profound impacts on a wide range of development issues, such as agricultural information (Goal 1), primary schooling (Goal 2), access to information for women and girls (Goal 3), improved maternal education (Goals 4 and 5), health education (Goal 6) and environmental education (Goal 7). The Institute's information and communications technology programmes enable communities to access technologies in their own languages (Goal 8). The Institute's multilingual education programmes for both adults and children improve access to primary education for children, non-formal education for young people and adults, and adult literacy classes. During the reporting period, the Institute published books on HIV/AIDS, malaria, health and hygiene, environmental sustainability and other development topics in hundreds of languages. The Institute has facilitated the training of adult indigenous authors to promote the development of local content, and of local teachers to improve the provision of linguistically and culturally relevant education. 