%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2011 regular session 31 January-9 February 2011 Quadrennial reports for the period 2006-2009 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Al-Khoei Benevolent Foundation Argentine Society of Pediatrics Associazione Comunità Papa Giovanni XXIII China Association for International Science and Technology Cooperation European Federation for Transport and Environment Health on the Net Foundation International Committee for Arab-Israeli Reconciliation International Research Foundation for Development National Rehabilitation and Development Centre New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council Political and Ethical Knowledge on Economic Activities Rooftops Canada Save Africa Concerts Foundation Teresian Association World Jewellery Confederation 1. Al-Khoei Benevolent Foundation General, 1998 I. Introduction The Al-Khoei Benevolent Foundation is an international, philanthropic, charitable organization founded in 1989 by the late Jurist-Consult of the Muslim Shi'a community, Grand Ayatollah Abu'l Qassim Khoei. The organization is registered in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland with the Charity Commission of England and Wales, and has headquarters in London. The Foundation has branches in Canada, France, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Pakistan, Thailand and the United States of America. Aims and purposes of the organization The Foundation's aim is to empower the Muslim community through diverse activities in education, women's empowerment, cultural events and community activities. The Foundation has expanded its work in capacity-building and in empowering the Muslim community, and has significantly strengthened its cooperation with other agencies and governmental departments. II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations The Foundation works with local governments and NGOs in conjunction with local schools, hospitals, and prisons, facilitating the needs of both Muslims and nonMuslims. The Foundation has played a founding role in establishing key organizations in the United Kingdom, including the National Council for the Welfare of Muslim Prisoners, the Forum Against Islamophobia and Racism and the Association of Muslim Scientists. It is a member of the Religious Education Council of England and Wales. In September 2006, it established a seminal youth section, which founded the youth group Bonat al Mustaqabal (Builders of the Future), which focuses on capacity-building and youth empowerment through leadership training (funded by the Government of the United Kingdom). The Foundation organizes annual health awareness campaigns on health and HIV and AIDS, such as the event on the role of faith-based NGOs in HIV/AIDS awareness, held at the Church Centre in New York on 4 March 2009. A. Participation in the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities A representative of the Foundation attended Commission on the Status of Women, held at United Nations Headquarters from 25 February to 7 March 2008, and submitted an oral statement. It also organized a parallel event at the Commission on the Status of Women on empowering Muslim women and sharing good practices, at the Commission session March 2009. B. Cooperation with United Nations bodies The Foundation was involved in providing aid and assistance to less fortunate countries that have been affected by natural disasters, wars and famine. It organized meetings and seminars to discuss issues related to religious hatred and sectarian conflict, particularly in the Arab world and Muslim countries such as Afghanistan, Iraq, Lebanon, Pakistan and Yemen. C. Activities in line with Millennium Development Goals Goal 1. The Foundation has established: universities, nationally accredited elementary, junior and high schools, congregational places of worship and community centres to provide religious, welfare and other charitable services to the community, and advice and counselling for bereaved families. The Foundation also runs various educational and social projects aimed at youth, women, the elderly and refugees such as those displaced by war. 2. Argentine Society of Pediatrics Special, 2002 Sociedad Argentina de Pediatría is one of the oldest scientific organizations in Argentina. It was founded in October 1911 and includes paediatricians and other child health providers. It has 15,461 members. The Society is devoted to the health, rights and well-being of children. It acts as a permanent adviser to governmental, university, and community organizations in the field of mother and child health. The Society's purposes are to: promote the scientific development of paediatricians and other members of the health team; support educational and research activities; provide services for the certification and for maintaining the certification of paediatricians; produce guidelines and norms for the sound practice of paediatrics; advise governmental authorities on mother and child health care; support the inclusion of children's rights, based on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, in the National Constitution; and collaborate with other organizations. The Society implements the National Programme on Paediatric Actualization, a countrywide distance-learning course for paediatricians, and an eLearning programme on various paediatric topics. Its National Network of Continuous Education provides courses and norms and guidelines designed to address and establish quality standards of care. The Society also publishes extensively, such scientific journals as the Archivos Argentinos de Pediatría, which is now included on the Index Medicus and Pub Med. The Society carries out individual evaluation aimed at certifying and recertifying the paediatricians in Argentina, with the sponsorship of the national Academy of Medicine. The Society also participates in major national and international events related to children's rights, and monitors the work of the Ministry of Health and the Parliament on legislation and governmental decisions on children's health. The Society works actively with the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the Pan-American Health Organization. In keeping with the development agenda of the Economic and Social Council, it has worked in the following areas: reinforced nationwide health-care activities for children and adolescents; worked actively to reduce child mortality and morbidity rates; promoted HIV/AIDS awareness among adolescents; and defended children's rights, especially those consecrated in the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Please see the sections below. The Society works closely with UNICEF Argentina. In 2009, it signed a new agreement of cooperation to implement six new projects, which include agreements with trade unions, local NGOs, the local Red Cross and educational workers. Actions of the Society contributed to: the reduction of mortality rates through actions addressed towards the improvement of quality of paediatric care; active support for legislating sex education in secondary schools, reproductive health and free contraception; and the development of educational materials in the provinces for paediatricians to prevent the disease and halt further transmission. 3. Associazione Comunità Papa Giovanni XXIII Special, 2006 Associazione Comunità Papa Giovanni XXIII (the Association) is an international lay association of pontifical right. It is present in 27 countries in five continents. A. Aims and purposes of the organization The Association aims to help its members to realize their Christian vocation. It carries out awareness campaigns and microcredit schemes, provides services to the disabled, gypsies, homeless, immigrants, elderly, people infected and affected by HIV/AIDS, mothers in trouble and women forced into prostitution. The Association works in war zones to ensure human rights, assists populations displaced by war, and combats human trafficking. B. Significant changes in the organization The number of associated members increased from 1,450 in 2006 to 1,800 in 2009. The areas of activities have expanded to several countries. In March 2009, the Association opened its permanent representation in Geneva to contribute more actively to the work of the United Nations and network with other accredited NGOs in advocacy. The Association participated in and contributed to the work of: the Human Right Council through the Universal Periodic Review; the World Health Organization (WHO) Assembly; the annual ministerial review of the Economic and Social Council, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) Coordinating Board, and the Committee of the Rights of the Child, among others. The Association participated in the following: United Nations Headquarters: (a) Commission for Social Development, 6 to 15 February 2008; (b) Commission on the Status of Women, 25 February to 7 March 2008; (c) Commission on the Status of Women, 2 to 13 March 2009. Geneva: (a) Human Rights Council Universal Periodic Review, 1-12 December 2008 and submitted a report for the Universal Periodic Review of Israel; (b) Economic and Social Council 2009 High-level Segment, 6 to 9 July 2009; (c) Human Rights Council Social Forum 2009, 31 August to 2 September 2009. The Bolivian branch of the Association worked with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Programme, Prevenir es Futuro, in La Paz, to produce a manual for prevention of drug abuse, funded under the Drugs Abuse Prevention Centre and the NGO Grant Scheme. The Association also participated in the scoping meeting for the development of guidelines on nutritional and food support to improve the health status among tuberculosis patients, organized by WHO, from 2 to 4 November 2009 in Geneva. The organization contributed to the Millennium Development Goals in South America, Africa, Asia and Europe. Goal 1. The Association provided material and financial support to families living under the poverty line; initiated microfinance schemes; provided training to women and youth; provided nutritional care to malnourished children and children in schools. Goal 2. The Association supported primary schooling for street kids. Goal 6. The Association provided antiretroviral therapy for persons living with HIV/AIDS in Kenya, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia; worked on the prevention of mother-to-child transmission and provided general medical care. D. Additional information Activities in Support of Global Principles: the Association promoted and defended human rights through Operation Dove, a non-violent peace corps of the Association in the South Hebron Hills, in collaboration with local Palestinians and Israeli human rights groups. Main activities include human rights monitoring, school patrol, the production of weekly reports and documentation for advocacy, the facilitation of delegation visits, and the facilitation of training and workshops on non-violence and reconciliation. 4. China Association for International Science and Technology Cooperation The China Association for International Science and Technology Cooperation is a non-governmental organization whose main clients are governmental agencies, NGOs and science-based enterprises in China. The Association serves as a platform for international collaboration in science and technology within and outside China. Key activities include: conducting research on policies on international science and technology cooperation of specific countries and preparing policy proposals for competent authorities; organizing international science and technology forums and workshops with Chinese and foreign partners; organizing training courses; and providing a platform and advisory services for Chinese enterprises, research institutions and their foreign partners to develop and expand on collaborative activities. The Association organized an international workshop on the sustainable development of mountain forest regions, held from 15 to 18 September 2008 in Lin'an, Zhejiang Province, China, with the sponsorship of the Department of International Cooperation of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China, and the Bureau of Science and Technology of Zhejiang Province of China. Association representatives attended the 2007 Summit on Multi-National Companies and China's Sustainable Development, on 6 February 2007 in Beijing, sponsored by the Ministry of Commerce of China and supported by the United Nations Global Compact Office. Association representatives attended the International Forum on Climate Change and Science and Technology Innovation, held on 24 and 25 September 2007 in Beijing, sponsored by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Environment Protection of China and supported by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). The Association participated in activities sponsored or supported by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and UNEP. The Association organized training courses and workshops to promote the development of developing countries. It assisted three international business incubators in Beijing, Tianjin and Shanghai to form a coalition for the development of a service system and international cooperation for science-based incubators, in April 2007. It organized a third East Asia workshop on functional technology, held on 25 and 26 October 2007 in Beijing. It provided a seri-culture technology training course from 3 to 17 November 2007 in Guangzhou, China, for trainees from Egypt, India, Indonesia, Thailand and Viet Nam. It organized annual training workshops on technological innovation for small and medium-sized enterprises based on science and technology, from 2006 to 2009 in Beijing. It promoted activities related to the promotion of green energy technology at the China-Canada workshop on green energy technology, in January 2007 in Beijing. Association representatives attended the China-Austria workshop on new energy and innovation, in June 2008 in Beijing. In May 2009, the Association assisted the Chengdu Institute of Biology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in developing a cooperative relationship with the School of Engineering and Environmental Sciences of Austria on research related to biomass energy. In November 2009, the Association organized a seminar on intellectual property rights management in international science and technology cooperation, aimed at popularizing knowledge on intellectual property rights protection and associated knowledge related to WIPO and the World Trade Organization. Trainees were from governmental agencies, research institutions and science-based enterprises. 5. European Federation for Transport and Environment The European Federation for Transport and Environment is an independent panEuropean association. It has member organizations in 18 European Union member States, plus Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Norway, the Russian Federation and Switzerland. The Federation also has international associate members, including BirdLife International, the European Cyclists' Federation and the World Wide Fund for Nature and support members, including the International Union of Public Transport and the Community of European Railways and Infrastructure Managers. The Federation's primary focus is on European transport and environmental policy. The aim is to promote an environmentally sound approach to transport across Europe. Established in 1990 and based in Brussels, the Federation has grown to become the principal environmental organization campaigning on sustainable transport in Europe. The focus is on minimizing the negative impacts on the environment and health, minimizing the use of energy, land and all economic and social costs, and maximizing safety and guaranteeing sufficient access for all. Although the Federation's primary focus is on European transport and environmental policy, it also aims to work with international organizations where there is a clear and directly applicable link to European Union legislation such as the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations (Working Party 29) of the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The Federation's activities in their entirety are devoted to promoting sustainable development and improving environmental quality. The Federation attended meetings of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change: the Conference of the Parties, held in Poznan, Poland, from 1 to 12 December 2008, Bonn, Germany, from 29 March to 8 April 2009. Bonn, from 1 to 12 June 2009, Bonn, from 10 to 14 August 2009, Bangkok, from 28 September to 9 October 2009, Barcelona, Spain from 2 to 6 November 2009, and Copenhagen, from 7 to 19 December 2009. During the reporting period, it attended several meetings of the Economic Commission for Europe, the Working Party 29, IMO and ICAO. At the side events organized by ICAO and IMO at the Bonn Climate Change Talks in June 2009, the Federation participated as a panel member. In addition to the above, the Federation also works in coordination with the International Coalition for Sustainable Aviation, which has observer status at ICAO. The Federation has contributed to achieving Millennium Development Goal 7, primarily in Europe, but also globally with regard to reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Goal 7, Target 1. The Federation made oral and written contributions to decision-making (working groups of the ECE Working Party 29, IMO and ICAO, and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) with regard to reducing harmful emissions by improving environmental standards for motor vehicles, ships and aircraft. ECE regulatory decisions are directly applicable under European Union legislation and also adopted by other signatory parties. Decision-making under IMO, ICAO and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change processes have global reach. 6. Health on the Net Foundation The Health on the Net Foundation works to advance the development and application of new information technologies in the field of health. The Foundation's mission is to promote the deployment of useful and reliable online health information and its appropriate and efficient use. To cope with the unprecedented volume of health-care information available on the Internet, the Health on the Net code of conduct (HONcode) offers a multi-stakeholder consensus on standards to protect citizens from misleading health information. As of November 2007, the Federation established a collaborative effort with the Haute autorité de santé (French National Authority for Health), which selected Health on the Net as the official certifying body for all French health websites. This collaboration allowed Health on the Net to promote norms for quality management and guarantee that organizations responsible for the certification of products respect procedures and published criteria. The HONcode, as it is known, has helped to enhance influence not only on French medical websites, but all medical websites interested in obtaining the HONcode certification. By the end of 2009, more than 891 French websites were certified within the HONcode framework. II. Contribution of the Organization to the work of the United Nations The Foundation participated in the plans of United Nations system agencies for boosting implementation of eHealth solutions, organized by WHO, on 11 October 2006, in Geneva; and a briefing session and discussion organized in the context of the World Health Assembly, organized by WHO, on 21 May 2007 in Geneva. It undertook a study of socio-cultural determinants of trust for online medical information, and, in particular, the specificities in French-speaking Africa and proposed guidelines for the publication of trustworthy online medical information, on 18 September 2007 in Geneva. A round table was organized by the Graduate Institute of Development Studies and Health on the Net on 18 September 2007 in Geneva. Health on the Net participated in the seventh General Assembly of the World Blind Union, held in August 2008, to present the project ProVisu, which aim is to promote education to prevent blindness and give access to the Web to visually impaired people. The Federation attended: World Health Day on 7 April 2006 in Geneva; the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Telecom World meeting, in October 2009; the meeting of the Global Health Library (WHO), in November 2009; and the meeting on Internet ethics, law and policies, in December 2009. The Federation collaborates with WHO to ensure the efficient use of new communication tools in the health domain in Switzerland, Europe and Africa. The Foundation's core work is directly connected with Goal 8 more specifically with Target 8F. The Health on the Net Foundation works to foster cooperation between Europe and Africa on the use of information technologies to promote reliable access to health information. Goal 4 and Goal 5. Health on the Net pursued the adjustment of theoretical and practical training material aimed at women. Goal 6. The Foundation has developed instructive material about visual deficiencies listed in the Vision 2020: the Right to Sight -- the Global Initiative for the Elimination of preventable blindness. 7. International Committee for Arab-Israeli Reconciliation The International Committee for Arab-Israeli Reconciliation is dedicated to peace with justice, and to finding non-violent and just solutions to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The organization focuses on human rights with the primary goal of promoting friendship and understanding between the Palestinians and Israelis so that the veil of suspicion and fear which exists between these two peoples can be removed. It aims to undertake activities to advance the achievement of the development agenda of the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations at large. The Committee participated in activities that promote the goals of the United Nations. It submitted a written statement to the Commission for Social Development that was accepted at its forty-eighth session. The Committee participated at the following United Nations events: the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People; the commemoration of the International Holocaust Remembrance Day; and at meetings on the status of women, indigenous issues, social development, and climate change. The organization is always open to cooperation with the United Nations and with other NGOs. During the fifty-third session of the Commission on the Status of Women, it helped organize a side event on the status of religious minority women in Bangladesh. None. The members of the Committee freely participate in interfaith activities to promote friendship and understanding among various communities in their respective neighbourhoods. The members of the Committee were honoured with the title Ambassador of Peace by the Interreligious and International Federation for World Peace. One of the Committee members also received the James Parks Morton Interfaith Tribute Award, from the Interfaith Center of New York. 8. International Research Foundation for Development Special, 1998 The International Research Foundation for Development is an autonomous, nonpartisan, transnational organization composed of an international community of thinkers, policymakers, practitioners, and laypersons who are making a concerted effort to improve the quality of life at various levels in the world. The purpose of the Foundation is to: (a) establish and maintain an integrated global network for scientific policy research and advocacy on contemporary development issues; (b) create a global community of cooperation and partnership on issues of sustainable development; (c) generate and disseminate original and transcendental thought; (d) strengthen civil society intervention in global policymaking; (e) create a viable partnership at all levels for global peace and sustainable development; and (f) launch development projects at community levels. The Foundation has collaborative affiliations with international NGOs in consultative status, international research institutions, universities, regional organizations, and think tanks and advisory groups. Attended the High-level Segment of the Economic and Social Council, held from 30 June to 3 July 2008 in New York. In 2009, the Foundation planned and developed a strategy to communicate and collaborate with United Nations bodies and specialized agencies to launch the International Research Foundation for Development online development dialogue (DevLogue), which are complementary to United Nations activities and global principles. Some of the selected agencies are: the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Commission on Population and Development, the Commission for Social Development, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements, and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). The DevLogue platform facilitates discourse on development issues, particularly on the implementation of Millennium Development Goals and other concerns in support of global principals. In 2006, the Foundation completed a humanitarian project for tsunami-affected villages in Sri Lanka by building houses and school libraries. In 2007, it completed a feasibility study on sustainable development and poverty reduction. D. Activities in support of global principles In 2007, a team of International Research Foundation for Development experts visited sites in Bangladesh, India, Nepal and Sri Lanka in support of the sustainable development project; and organized a community development workshop on livelihoods improvement, inclusion and egalitarian governance, held on 22 and 23 June 2007 in Kathmandu. 9. National Rehabilitation and Development Centre The National Rehabilitation and Development Centre provides essential needs for persons with disabilities in Lebanon. The Centre has the following objectives and purposes to assist persons with disabilities: provide capacity-building, to promote self-reliance and include this group into the development process; rehabilitate persons with disabilities for integration into society; promote income-generating and profitable investment opportunities, including for indigenous groups; provide training, information and education programmes in collaboration with vocational training facilities, public and private schools and teaching institutions; promote the ratification and implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and lobby for the ratification and implementation of other relevant resolutions, treaties, agreements and conventions; promote human rights to prevent child labour and abuse and discrimination and violence against women; and raise environmental awareness. The Managing Director of the Centre was elected Vice-President of Rehabilitation International for the Arab Region. This is as a result of having obtained consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, which has enabled the Centre to have greater access to the international community, and to information, experiences and good practices. The Centre has successfully conducted many conferences, seminars, training sessions, workshops and other activities in collaboration and partnership with various NGOs, forums, and networks at the local, regional and international levels. The Regional Conference on Persons with Disabilities, organized by the International Labour Organization, in March 2007 in Abu Dhabi; the fourth Parliamentary Symposium on Disability Legislation in the Arab World, held in July 2007 in Rabat, Morocco, in collaboration with the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Disability; the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development, organized by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, held in December 2008 in Doha. Activities include participation in: the sixtieth session of Commission on the Status of Women, held in February 2006 in New York; the twenty-fourth session of the Economic and Social Committee of the Economic and Social Council for Western Asia (ESCWA), held in Beirut in May 2006; the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, at ESCWA, in November 2006; the Lebanese Women's Nationality Law Campaign, organized by UNDP, in Beirut, on 12 July 2009; the launch of the Arab Human Development Report 2009: Challenges to Human Security in the Arab Countries, organized by UNDP, in Beirut on 21 July 2009. 10. New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council The New South Wales Aboriginal Land Council was established to ensure the land rights of Aborigines and the vestment of land which led to the establishment of the Aboriginal land rights network in the state of New South Wales. While our aims and purpose remain the same, the nature of our relationship with the Government has changed to a partnership and we continue to provide advice to the Government on a range of matters concerning the development of our communities, especially in relation to land and cultural heritage management, housing, and community development. The Council also continues to play a strong advocacy role nationally and internationally. Representatives of the Council attended all sessions of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues during the reporting period. It also participated in the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, where it submitted oral and written statements. The Council contributed to the Millennium Development Goals through its work on preserving land and natural resources, biodiversity, indigenous development and cultural identity, as well by its support of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. It participated in the Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, held from 10 to 14 August 2009 in Geneva. The Council also organized a side event as a part of the Permanent Forum meeting on 28 May 2009. Please see above. The Council organized an International Expert Group Meeting on Indigenous Peoples and Climate Change, held in Darwin, Australia from 2 to 4 April 2008. It provided operational support to various meetings as a part of the visit of the Special Rapporteur on Indigenous Issues to Australia in October 2009. Goal 2, Target 3. The Council established a self-sustaining Education Endowment Fund to provide scholarships to students. Activities in support of global principles The Council has continued to support the rights, aspirations and interests of Aboriginal peoples consistent with the standards set in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, as well as the development of indigenous peoples across the world. 11. Political and Ethical Knowledge on Economic Activities Political and Ethical Knowledge on Economic Activities is an open network of academics from various disciplines committed to concrete actions on political and economic issues. Its members seek to contribute to, or simply support reflections on this objective. The network's main aim is to discuss ways to consider economic activities differently to turn the Earth into a planet for humanity and solidarity. The international multidisciplinary scientific board includes highly qualified researchers to carry out its work. It organized a conference in Santiago, Chile, in 2002, with the support of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), conferences in Rennes, France, in 2003 and 2005 and a conference in Dakar in 2006. The main changes include obtaining consultative status with the Economic and Social Council and the support of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to our project for measuring well-being (see below). In partnership with the Council of Europe, the network constructed societal indicators to measure local welfare in 2006. This programme subsequently became a link to the OECD road map for measuring and fostering well-being and progress. The network organized a congress on building together local indicators for societal progress, in October 2008, on behalf of OECD and the Council of Europe. It also participated in the work of the Stiglitz Commission and at the OECD world session in Busan, Republic of Korea, where it received an award for its work. The network's main congress was held with ECLAC, in Santiago, Chile, in 2002, and with the Economic Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), in Bangkok, in 2004. In addition, network representatives participated in meetings of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), and ECE. Most of the network's thematic groups meet on the Millennium Development Goals. They include the internal organization and motivation of teams for activities of value creation and social and solidarity economy; a working group on the moral economy; a working group on enterprise as a societal cell; and a working group on personal and social transformation. 12. Rooftops Canada Rooftops Canada has provided technical expertise and leadership in low-cost housing and human settlements development around the world since 1984. Rooftops Canada also works on behalf of the Canadian Housing and Renewal Association, and the Ontario, New Brunswick and British Columbia Non-Profit Housing Associations. Rooftops Canada works with community-based housing groups, NGOs, local and senior levels of government, and the private sector. Our programmes help thousands of families to secure affordable housing in sustainable communities and are based on the premise that the right to housing is a basic human right. Affordable housing development also creates local jobs and incomes which, with related improvements in health and education, are critical to poverty reduction. The Canadian International Development Agency and other Canadian housing partners support Rooftops Canada's technical assistance and capacity-building projects with overseas partners. This includes work in areas such as: social and cooperative housing; institutional development and management; housing microfinance; needs assessments and evaluations; community planning and participation; responses to disaster; and responses to HIV and AIDS. Gender equality is a strong cross-cutting aspect of all our programmes. Internationally, the four core countries of operation include: Kenya, South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe. It also supports regional projects in Southern and Eastern Africa, and partnerships in Cameroon, India and the Philippines. Rooftops Canada acted as a global NGO secretariat for the second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and participated in official Canadian delegations to the former Commission on Human Settlements, Habitat II and the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly held in 2001 to review and appraise the implementation of the Habitat Agenda. Rooftops Canada's main focus is on working with partners in sub-Saharan Africa to respond to the Habitat Agenda which emerged from the second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held in Istanbul in 1996. Achievements over the past four years include: the completion of a six-year programme to strengthen the social housing sector in South Africa; regional and national pilot programmes to promote the use of microfinance for slum upgrading, housing and infrastructure development in sub-Saharan Africa; national and regional programmes to promote human settlements responses to HIV and AIDS, especially in Southern and Eastern Africa; and work with the Canadian Red Cross on a major post-tsunami housing reconstruction programme in Aceh, Indonesia. Rooftops Canada participated as: member of the Canadian Advisory Committee for World Urban Forum 2006, in Vancouver; organizer for the Networking Session on HIV/AIDS and Housing in Africa and Canada, the third UN-Habitat World Urban Forum, held in Vancouver in June 2006; member of the Canadian delegation to the fourth UN-Habitat World Urban Forum, held in November 2008 in Nanjing, China, and organizer for the Networking Session on HIV/AIDS and Housing in Asia and Africa. Rooftops Canada works most closely with UN-Habitat. This includes participation in the World Urban Forums, which UN-Habitat coordinates with host countries. The organization was especially active in planning for the 2006 World Urban Forum, which was held in Canada. Rooftops Canada works closely with the Municipal Finance Programme of UN-Habitat to promote housing microfinance in sub-Saharan Africa. This includes promoting the concept, capacity-building and raising capital finance. It has also collaborated with the UN-Habitat Disaster Management Programme in both Haiti and Indonesia. All of Rooftops Canada's work is aimed at meeting Goal 7, Target 7D. It has mobilized about $10 million in technical assistance, capacity-building and organizational support for human settlements and housing NGOs over the past four years. This has resulted in helping thousands of households to secure land tenure, provide affordable housing and a place to live in peace and dignity. 13. Save Africa Concerts Foundation The Save Africa Concerts Foundation is a non-profit organization founded in 2000 in the United States and Nigeria to mobilize local communities through entertainment to raise awareness about and prevent HIV/AIDS. The main mission of the Foundation is to reduce the impact of HIV/AIDS through "edutainment", which utilizes behavioural change education and entertainment as a form of community mobilization and education. The Foundation works primarily with youth, the labour force and communities and carries out programmes for primary prevention, testing, counselling, and networks for care and treatment in collaboration with multiple local partners in both Nigeria and underserved communities in the United States. Its community-based work focuses on raising awareness about HIV/AIDS and staying negative as well as respecting, caring for, working with people living with HIV/AIDS and sponsoring of children orphaned by parents with AIDS. II. Contribution to the work of the United Nations The Foundation has helped to disseminate the work of the NGO Committee on HIV/AIDS at the United Nations, sponsored monthly publications on the activities of the Committee, and sponsored Lost Madien, a movie on women's health and the primitive health standards that prevail in Africa for women. The Foundation participated actively in UNAIDS as a member of the NGO Committee on HIV/AIDS, and at the Civil Society Development Forum. It sponsored a spokesperson from Nigeria to speak at the most recent World AIDS Day event organized by the NGO Committee on HIV/AIDS. The Foundation uses entertainment to disseminate information on the Millennium Development Goals and particularly on HIV/AIDS and women's health. 14. Teresian Association The Teresian Association is a Catholic organization whose members seek to promote human advancement and transform social structures through education and culture. The Association promotes human rights and is committed to building a society of justice and solidarity through education. It has established schools and training centres for formal and non-formal education, especially focusing on the promotion of women, family and youth. The Association has designated representatives to participate in the work of United Nations bodies, including the Human Rights Council in Geneva, ESCAP, ECLAC and the Commission on the Status of Women. (a) Civil Society Forum, 29 and 30 June 2006, 28 to 30 July 2007, 27 and 28 October 2008, in Geneva; the Durban Review Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009; the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 8 and 9 October, 2009 in Paris; the Annual Department of Public Information/NGO Conference, 3 to 5 September 2008 in New York; the Commission on the Status of Women, 27 February to 10 March 2006, and in March 2009; the Internet Governance Forum, in Hyderabad, India, 3 to 6 December 2008, and Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt, 15 to 18 November 2009. It submitted joint NGO statements at the Human Rights Council. The Association's schools form part of the Associated Schools Project Network of UNESCO. The Teresian Association focuses on educational and social programmes for children, youth, women, adults, indigenous people in areas socially and economically depressed, contributing to the Millennium Development Goals. Its activities include: education and social promotion in Argentina, Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Peru, the United States and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), among others. 15. World Jewellery Confederation Confédération International de la Bijouterie, Joaillerie, Orfévrerie des Diamantes, Perles et Pierres (World Jewellery Confederation) is the oldest representative organization in the international jewellery business, dating back to 1926. It is also a member of the United Nations Global Compact. The Federation's purpose is to encourage harmonization, promote international cooperation in the jewellery industry, and to consider issues that concern trade worldwide and protect consumer confidence in the industry. It relies on the initiative of its national member organizations to support and implement its decisions and protect the public's trust in the jewellery industry. At the World Jewellery Federation Congress, held in Cape Town, South Africa in April 2007, discussions focused on how the jewellery industry could contribute to creating sustainable economic opportunities in developing countries. The Congress was inclusive, encompassing the entire pipeline of production from manufacturing to retailing. The Cape Town Declaration affirmed the jewellery industry's commitment to its new relationship with the Economic and Social Council. The theme was echoed at the 2009 Congress, held in Istanbul, highlighting corporate social responsibility issues. The Federation attended the World Jewellery Confederation at the second United Nations Global Compact Leaders Summit and the substantive session of the Economic and Social Council, held in Geneva in July 2007. It issued a statement on behalf of the jewellery industry, in which they pledged to undertake projects that support the Millennium Development Goals. The Federation attended a session on corporate social responsibility and the Millennium Development Goals, hosted by the NGO Section in New York in January and February 2008. The follow-up to that session was a workshop on corporate social responsibility and the Millennium Development Goals, in February 2008, with the participation of MHC International, a London- and Geneva-based research and service company that specializes in macro and social development issues for the public and private sector. The Federation organized a day-long meeting with representatives of UNDP at the United Nations Office at Geneva in October 2009, to demonstrate how it can build a model to contribute to the Millennium Development Goals through responsible business practices. It also prepared an initial action plan for the development of a comprehensive corporate social responsibility training programme for its members. The Federation had a very strong advocacy role in support of the Millennium Development Goals in the industry sector. In particular, it launched a number of initiatives in support of Goals 1 and 8, in particular Target 8A. In January 2008, in partnership with the Association internationale des formateurs en objectifs du millénaire pour le dévelopment, the Federation undertook a feasibility study for the design and development of corporate social responsibility/Millennium Development Goals-oriented training modules for members in the jewellery sector with the long-term aim of establishing a Centre of Excellence for such training. In April 2008, at the Federation's Congress in Dubai, the General Assembly of the Federation formally approved a resolution calling for the creation of a foundation, based in Switzerland, that will be responsible for financing and administering the worldwide corporate social responsibility programme for the jewellery industry. In July 2007, the Federation launched a new website designed to provide information about the jewellery sector's corporate social responsibility programme and the role of the industry in promoting sustainable economic and social development in the countries in which it is active. 