%%%SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|TRANSPORT|CHEMICALS|WASTE MANAGEMENT|MINING|AFRICA|

Commission on Sustainable Development Eighteenth session 3-14 May 2010 Item 3 of the provisional agenda* Thematic cluster for the implementation cycle 2010-2011 -- review session * E/CN.17/2010/1. ** Previously issued, with additional background information, under the symbol E/ECA/CFSSD/6/21. Report of the regional implementation meeting for Africa** 1. In preparation for the eighteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), in collaboration with the Department for Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations Industrial Development Programme (UNIDO), organized the Africa regional implementation meeting in Addis Ababa from 27 to 30 October 2009. The meeting was held under the auspices of the sixth session of the ECA Committee on Food Security and Sustainable Development, whose theme was, "Sustainable consumption and production for sustainable growth and poverty reduction in Africa". 2. The regional implementation meeting reviewed progress made by African countries in the implementation of commitments contained in Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, focusing on the thematic cluster of issues to be considered by the Commission on Sustainable Development during the 2010/2011 cycle; namely: transport; chemicals; waste management; mining; and sustainable consumption and production, including a 10year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production. The meeting also reflected on and identified main implementation challenges and constraints, lessons learned and the way forward, including policy measures and actions needed to accelerate implementation. 3. In order to facilitate the review, the regional implementation meeting had before it background documents, including regional reports reviewing the various thematic issues to be considered at the eighteenth session. The review reports provide more details on implementation progress in the five thematic cluster of issues. The reports, which will serve as reference documents for the deliberations at the eighteenth session, will be disseminated to member States, African regional and subregional organizations and all relevant stakeholders. 4. The present report constitutes the statement of the regional implementation meeting for Africa to the Commission on Sustainable Development at its eighteenth session. II. Preamble 5. The participants at the meeting adopted the following preamble: We, the representatives of African member States, intergovernmental organizations and major groups, Having met in Addis Ababa from 27 to 30 October 2009 at the regional implementation meeting for Africa for the eighteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, Recalling and reaffirming the commitments on sustainable development made by African countries at major United Nations conferences and summits, notably at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 1992, the General Assembly five-year review of the implementation of the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 1997, the Millennium Summit and the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002, as well as those contained in multilateral environment agreements and African Union summit declarations and decisions, Also recalling and expressing support for various initiatives undertaken by African countries at regional and national levels to domesticate and translate into action the various internationally agreed goals and commitments on sustainable development, Expressing deep concern over the continuing, and in many cases worsening, multiple social, economic and environmental challenges that confront African countries, and in particular the complex and interlinked challenges of persistent and widespread poverty, food and energy insecurity, poor stewardship of environmental and natural resources, as well as the current financial crisis and their negative impacts on Africa's sustainable development efforts, Expressing concern that, despite being the least responsible for climate change, Africa will be worst hit by its impacts, which are already being felt in the region, and further, noting that climate change threatens to erode hard-won development gains and complicate efforts aimed at sustainable development, Stressing that the multiple sustainable development challenges confronting the region require urgent actions, as well as coordinated and integrated approaches at all levels that take into consideration the continent's legitimate sustainable development concerns, Underscoring the centrality of achieving more sustainable consumption and production pathways, underpinned by peace, security and good governance and gender-responsive policies, to effectively respond to these challenges, Hereby affirm as follows: 1. The region has made progress in promoting sustainable consumption and production, as demonstrated by the establishment of a regional institutional mechanism, which provides technical support in promoting sustainable consumption and production in Africa and the adoption of the regional 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production by the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment. This framework is playing an important role in catalysing regional, national and local initiatives and actions on sustainable consumption and production, while the capacity created through the national cleaner production centres and the Africa round table on sustainable consumption and production is providing a platform for effective delivery and implementation; 2. Owing to trade liberalization and diversified and expanded economic activities, among other factors, an increasing number of African countries are importing, producing and using chemicals and products containing chemicals, in particular pesticides. However, many countries in the region lack the capacity necessary for the sound management of chemicals, including assessment and monitoring the risks associated with trade in chemicals and chemicals contained in products. Furthermore, the region lacks adequate capacity for the sound management of chemicals throughout their life cycle, including disposal, hence the urgent need to build capacity in sustainable chemicals control and management in Africa; 3. Inappropriate waste management practices, in particular the widespread dumping of waste in bodies of water and uncontrolled dump sites, compounds the problem of low access to sanitation facilities and portable water across the region. In this regard, adequate priority should be accorded to waste management programmes, in particular the management of hazardous wastes, in national development policies and programmes, including the development of appropriate waste management infrastructure; 4. Africa has made progress in improving mining regulatory frameworks. Notwithstanding, there is need to do more to ensure that mining regimes in Africa contribute to the creation of equitable and sustainable mineral wealth from the viewpoint of a diversified mining industry. This should be integrated into the local, national and regional economies through optimized linkages that do not compromise other forms of land use, including environmental, social and cultural considerations; 5. Transport is a crucial driver of sustainable development. Integrated transport systems are a key component that is needed in Africa to facilitate connectivity, access and trade for sustainable economic growth. However, African countries face huge transportation-related costs. On average, Africa's transport and insurance costs represent 30 per cent of the total value of exports, which compares unfavourably with 8.6 per cent for all developing countries. The high number of deaths associated with road transport accidents is of grave concern. In addition, respiratory diseases associated with inefficient and out-dated transport technology are increasing. Therefore, there is an urgent need for enhanced support and investment in developing safe, energy-efficient, health- and environment-friendly transport infrastructure and modes of transportation; 6. Africa's development partners have been providing invaluable support to facilitate the development and implementation of strategies and programmes at regional, national and local levels aimed at fulfilling commitments in the thematic cluster of issues under consideration. Major groups, including business, civil society, women, youth and indigenous people, have also been very active in supporting Africa's actions towards this end. However, while countries have taken a number of actions and made some progress to fulfil commitments in relation to the issues under consideration, much remains to be done. The emergence of new challenges, such as the current food crisis and high food prices, as well as the financial meltdown, has hampered implementation progress; 7. Section III below highlights progress and achievements in the implementation of commitments on chemicals, waste management, mining, transport and sustainable consumption and production including the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production. It outlines implementation challenges and constraints, as well as lessons learned and the way forward, including policy measures and actions needed to accelerate implementation in each of the thematic issues. III. Review of implementation progress, challenges and constraints and the way forward A. Sustainable consumption and production, including the 10-year framework of programmes for sustainable consumption and production 1. Actions taken and progress made 6. The African 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production has been launched. The programme has a strategic focus linking sustainable consumption and production with the challenges of meeting basic needs in a more sustainable manner. 7. A regional institutional mechanism, the Africa round table on sustainable consumption and production, which provides technical support in promoting sustainable consumption and production in Africa, has been established. 8. A number of projects are being implemented within the framework of the 10year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production, including the Africa eco-labelling project, which focuses on the development of an African eco-labelling mechanism and the development of national and local programmes on sustainable consumption and production in selected countries. 9. Within the context of the broader goals on sustainable consumption and production, a number of initiatives have been, or are in the process of being, realized: (a) An initial set of national cleaner production centres have been established in 11 countries in Africa to promote resource efficient and cleaner production, with the joint support of UNEP and UNIDO; (b) In addition to several regional energy-infrastructure projects aimed at increasing access to energy, off-grid systems based on renewable energy have been developed in the rural areas of many countries; (c) African business organizations are participating in the Global Compact initiative, which embodies social and environmental responsibility principles that are consistent with sustainable consumption and production goals. In addition, several companies are members of the World Business Council on Sustainable Development; (d) Several measures have been taken at local, national, subregional and regional levels towards increased and sustainable agricultural production, including an increasing number of initiatives in organic food production and consumption. 2. Challenges and constraints to implementation 10. The main challenges and constraints in the development and implementation of sustainable consumption and production programmes and activities include the following: (a) Inadequate awareness and knowledge of the benefits of sustainable consumption and production, as well as limited human, technical and institutional capacities in the subject area; (b) Inadequate policies, strategies and legislation on sustainable consumption and production, and poor enforcement where they exist; (c) Under-pricing of natural resources and low recognition of sustainable consumption and production in most policies; (d) The implementation of sustainable consumption and production in a fragmented and isolated manner; few economic and other marked-based instruments are in use and little progress has been made in their application to the area of sustainable public procurement; (e) Inadequate financial incentives and appropriate financing mechanisms for sustainable consumption and production investment and the financial and institutional instability of national cleaner production centres, as well as limited network coverage across Africa. 3. Lessons learned and the way forward 11. Political will and commitment is essential for the effective implementation of the African 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production. The organizational support provided by UNEP, together with the political leadership and support provided by the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment and the financial support provided by the Marrakech Task Force on Cooperation with Africa, have been instrumental for the achievements registered so far. 12. A coherent and integrated national strategy to promote sustainable consumption and production using a range of policies and actions, including eco-fair labelling, is needed to bring about holistic patterns of sustainable consumption and production. Furthermore, national strategies need to be formulated as integral priorities of national strategies for sustainable development, including poverty reduction strategies and national environmental action plans. 13. The effective development and implementation of sustainable consumption and production in African countries could be significantly facilitated through its mainstreaming into the priorities and decision-making criteria of development financing agencies. 14. Visible implementation of activities in this area at an early stage is important to demonstrate and popularize the concept of sustainable consumption and production. 15. In order to make further progress on sustainable lifestyles, there is a need for massive multimedia education and awareness campaigns to inspire action for change to sustainable lifestyles. Mobilization and active involvement of the private sector, non-governmental organizations and other civil society organizations is vital in strengthening advocacy and investments in sustainable consumption and production initiatives. 16. National cleaner production centres need to be upscaled, and their networks expanded, to cover the entire continent. Moreover, resource-efficient and cleaner production needs to be mainstreamed into national development programmes as a way of fostering sustainable development. 17. In the context of the implementation challenges and lessons learned, the region has identified and prioritized a number of concrete actions and projects for urgent support from development partners, namely capacity-building for the development and implementation national sustainable consumption and production action plans; implementation of an African local sustainable consumption and production initiative; implementation of a regional programme on resource-efficient and cleaner production, involving building the capacities of the national cleaner production centres and sustainable consumption and production bodies; strengthening the African eco-labelling mechanism; promoting an integrated waste management system in Africa; implementing programmes on education for sustainable consumption and production in Africa; promoting sustainable building and construction in Africa; promoting small-scale renewable energy and biomass-based co-generation; and encouraging regional knowledge management and information exchange on sustainable consumption and production in Africa. These priorities appear as part of the report of the regional implementation meeting. 18. In support of these priorities, Africa is looking forward to a bold global 10year framework of programmes with concrete means of implementation to support regional, national and local actions. B. Chemicals 19. Many African countries have put sector policies and institutions in place for the sound management of chemicals. 20. National cleaner production centres have been established in some countries to contribute, inter alia, to support the introduction of the sound management of chemicals, including sound practices and techniques, in particular in the private sector. 21. The African stockpiles programme is active in supporting sound management of obsolete stocks of pesticides. The programme is supported by the Global Environment Facility. 22. Africa has made progress in phasing out leaded petrol. This phase out has been facilitated by the Clean Air Initiative for Sub-Saharan Africa and the UNEP Partnership for Clean Fuels and Vehicles. 23. Some countries have received support in introducing cleaner gold mining and extraction technologies to minimize or eliminate mercury releases, and in developing regulatory capacity and mechanisms to enable the sector to minimize the negative environmental and public-health aspects of mercury use in gold mining. 24. Most African countries have acceded to or ratified the following main international conventions on chemicals, namely, the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal, the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer, the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and the Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade. Multilateral environment agreements that deal with specific categories of chemicals and have dedicated financial instruments, such as the Montreal Protocol and the Stockholm Convention, have advanced more rapidly in the implementation phase in many African countries. However, domestication of the conventions and/or development of national implementation plans for these conventions remain slow. 25. The Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management, which has been endorsed by the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment, is providing the policy framework and integrated approach to foster the sound management of chemicals in the region. A regional plan of action has been adopted and a coordinating mechanism for the strategic approach to international chemicals management (the African Core Group) established with a view of facilitating regional work. Two regional meetings have been held. Many countries have embarked on its implementation, including the funding provided by the quick start programme of the strategic approach to international chemicals management. 26. Regional centres for the Basel Convention are providing capacity-building support and fostering subregional and regional cooperation in chemicals management. 27. There is inadequate awareness of possible risks posed by chemicals among major segments of the African population. This is further complicated by the general lack of reliable data and information on toxicity and safe use and disposal practices for chemicals. 28. There is insufficient cooperation in the development and transfer of appropriate, accessible and affordable technology of safe chemical substitutes and in the development of production capacity. Progress in defining national, subregional, regional and international best available technologies/safe chemical alternatives has been too slow to address the chemicals management challenges in Africa. 29. Most African countries still lack the institutions and facilities to monitor chemicals, in particular hazardous chemicals, or to develop appropriate control strategies to prevent adverse impacts on human health and the environment. 30. There is inadequate financial and human resources and insufficient political support, which hamper the development of chemicals policy, including the implementation of the strategic approach to international chemicals management. 31. The lack of a comprehensive chemicals policy, insufficient enforcement of promulgated legislation to improve sound chemicals management and poorly defined roles of various stakeholders hinder the sound management of chemicals. 32. There is a limited capacity within African countries to allow for effective participation and engagement in negotiations on international chemicals and other environmental agreements, further complicated by the proliferation of meetings under the various multilateral environment agreements, for which preparations and participation by African countries may be inadequate. 33. More support is needed to enable countries in Africa to access environmentally sound technologies and safe chemicals. It is recognized that institutions of higher education and technical and research institutions should play a significant role in adopting and replicating environmentally sound technologies on chemicals. 34. A strong emphasis should be placed on the integration of sound management of chemicals into national policies for economic growth and poverty reduction. Mechanisms need to be strengthened to ensure the promotion of sound chemicals management, including in relation to the production and use of chemicals as an integral part of agricultural modernization and sustainable development. 35. There is an urgent need to further pursue and implement integrated approaches in implementing multilateral environment agreements and other international regimes that provide support to African countries in their efforts to achieve sound management of chemicals. 36. There is an urgent need to invest in facilities and institutions for monitoring and evaluating key chemicals in the African environment as a basis for national, subregional and regional priority-setting for chemicals management. This needs to be accompanied by proper mechanisms for information exchange among African countries, building upon existing initiatives such as the Pesticide Action Network and its database, and the Chemical Information Exchange Network. 37. Greater emphasis should be given to the involvement of the private sector, civil society, farmers and community groups, research and education institutions (including the cleaner production centres and related service providers), in the design and implementation of chemicals management policies and strategies. 38. Implementation of the strategic approach to international chemicals management should be promoted for chemicals policy and management, taking due consideration of existing national policies, institutions and chemicals profiles. More emphasis needs to be placed on strengthening the required formal institutional frameworks and on the enhanced coordination of action at the national and subregional levels, with the involvement of all relevant stakeholders. 39. Regional centres, including laboratories, should be strengthened to enable them to fulfil their mandate, particularly in capacity-building, information generation and dissemination and sharing of best practices. C. Waste management 40. The application of advanced small-scale digesters to produce biogas, compost fertilizer and/or animal feed from organic waste fractions have been widely accepted in Africa as best practices, and progress is being made in developing and implementing specific projects in various countries. 41. Several African countries have embarked on energy production, including cogeneration from agricultural residues such as "bagasse", straw, sawdust, and cotton and coffee husks. 42. The resource-efficient and cleaner production approach has proven to be a feasible best practice for reducing wastes from businesses and other organizations in different parts of Africa and is now being promoted through the network of national cleaner production centres. 43. The production of ethanol from organic wastes, including molasses, is widespread, and further opportunities are available using other organic wastes, such as rice straw, and for carbon dioxide recovery from ethanol production. 44. Some countries have made progress towards formalizing waste management initiatives, including through community-based approaches such as waste recycling projects aimed at poverty reduction and job creation. This is the case both for industrial waste and for municipal waste. In this regard, many African countries have recycling initiatives, especially for paper, plastics, scrap metals and glass. 45. Some countries have started banning the use of specific disposable products, notably the use of plastic products. 46. Many countries in the region have made progress in formulating and adopting waste management policies, legislation and strategies aimed at minimizing the generation of waste and ensuring the sound management of waste. Several countries have introduced integrated waste management strategies that incorporate reuse and recycle principles. 47. Africa still almost exclusively relies on land disposal of wastes. Few sanitary land-fills have been established. Among the few sanitary landfills in operation, some are implementing landfill gas collection and composting. 48. Progress is being made in ensuring sound treatment of hazardous waste by establishing appropriate facilities such as incinerators for hospitals and secure landfills. 49. Most African countries have ratified or acceded to relevant international instruments, including the Basel Convention. In addition, African countries have adopted the Bamako Convention on the Ban of the Import into Africa and the Control of Transboundary Movement and Management of Hazardous Wastes within Africa, although only 27 countries have ratified or acceded to it. 50. The Protocol on Liability and Compensation for Damage Resulting from Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal was adopted in Basel in 1999, although only nine countries, seven of which are African countries, have ratified or acceded to the Protocol to date. 51. Some countries have implemented programmes for waste management in pursuance of the attainment of the Millennium Development Goal related to sanitation and public health. 52. The single largest implementation challenge remains creation of sufficient capacity for sound management of waste and the implementation of activities for appropriate recovery and recycling of various waste streams across Africa. Progress towards its realization is constrained by access to finance, data and technical capacity. 53. Current by-laws in most countries in Africa put the responsibility for waste management on municipalities, which are insufficiently equipped to deal with collection, transportation and disposal. 54. The importation of second-hand consumer goods and production and/or importation of substandard products contribute to rapid increase in waste generation and its complexity. 55. The implementation and enforcement of waste regulations and conventions are severely constrained by issues related to good governance and transparency in the management of wastes. 56. Inadequate awareness and appreciation of best practices for environmentally sound management of waste is a major constraint, which calls for a paradigm shift towards getting more information and awareness to the general public and the communities concerned. 57. The involvement of the private sector in partnerships with local communities in solid waste management activities has provided employment and job opportunities for a substantial number of jobless city residents, many of whom were previously unemployed women and youth. 58. Solid waste management is an important income-generating activity, and such income is not only from wage payments but also from sale of materials recovered from solid waste. 59. Cities with sound refuse collection systems in place have a good source of income for city and municipal councils. It is necessary to exchange knowledge and experience in Africa on successful experiences that can be replicated. 60. The manner in which solid waste was previously managed is gradually changing. For example, there are increasing signs of waste being segregated at source and being collected and stored in waste bins. Sorting is being done at communal waste collection points by organized groups. D. Mining 61. Most African countries with significant mining activities have reviewed and amended their mining frameworks and codes in the last 20 years in order to reflect a shift from the Government as an owner/operator to Government as regulator/administrator, with the private sector assuming the lead in mining projects. 62. At the subregional level, efforts to harmonize mining codes have increased, including emphasis on the need for transparent and efficient regulatory frameworks. 63. Dialogue and consensus-building on mining frameworks has been facilitated through regional forums such as the round table on "Managing Africa's natural resources for growth and poverty reduction" convened by ECA in 2007. The outcomes of the round table triggered other initiatives, including the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, the African Legal Support Facility and the International Study Group to Review Africa's Mining Regimes. 64. Through a technical task force of the International Study Group, the African Union has formulated and adopted the "Africa Mining Vision", which advocates "transparent, equitable and optimal exploitation of mineral resources to underpin broad-based sustainable growth and socio-economic development". 65. African countries have increasingly signed on to voluntary global initiatives to enhance transparency and accountability in the mining sector. These initiatives include the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, the Global Reporting Initiative, the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and the Extractive Industries Review. 66. Generally, there is an improvement in the participation by local communities in mining projects and in benefits accruing to communities. The improvements in participation by local communities have been facilitated by international schemes based on corporate social responsibility. 67. Significant strides have been made at national level to include environmental and social requirements in African mining regimes. The legislative regimes emerging in most countries now include requirements for environmental assessments and, to a lesser degree, for social impacts. 68. Progress has been made in addressing health and its social impacts relative to mine workers and mining communities. This is largely attributable to improved corporate social responsibility by mining companies, which offer programmes to help those suffering from HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. 69. At the regional level, the African Legal Support Facility launched by the African Development Bank should help member States to negotiate improved contracts that support sustainable development of the extractive sector. 70. A few countries in Africa have moved forward using resources and funding for research and development activities, including looking at the development of policies and strategies, technologies to deal with specific matters and value-addition to mineral products. 71. Support for value addition to artisanal and small-scale mining mineral products, mostly gold and gemstones, is slowly improving, involving many countries in the region. 72. Several countries are providing a range of support facilities through artisanal and small-scale mining technology centres. At the regional level, the Yaounde Vision on Artisanal and Small Scale Mining continues to provide guidelines for development in this sub-sector. 73. There has been an increase in technical assistance by development partners to support mining reform in many African countries. 74. There has been an increase in programmes to address the challenges (technical, economic, social, gender and environmental) associated with the artisanal and small-scale mining sector. 75. Although mining frameworks and codes have been put in place, progress to ensure that women are employed in all levels of the mining industry has been slow. 76. Focusing on mine workers, more attention has been placed on safe working conditions and on improving the health of the worker. Mining accidents, which continue to take place, should be prevented through the creation of a safe working environment. 2. Implementation challenges and constraints 77. There is inadequate capacity to monitor compliance with legislative requirements, especially the technical and business reporting requirements, as well as in environmental and social management plans. 78. Existing fiscal instruments do not optimize the collection of resource rents, such as windfall and additional profit taxes, while continuing negotiations with major mining interests poses a challenge to transparency. 79. There is inconsistency in the existence and/or application of instruments and systems to ensure the effective participation of impacted communities and other stakeholders in mining operations, and there is a lack of venture capital sources that would allow African entrepreneurs to enter the mining sector. 80. Implementation of provisions for both social and environmental rehabilitation funds embedded in legislation presents capacity challenges to Governments. Mechanisms to identify and settle mineral-related conflicts and disputes, including addressing social, economic and religious concerns, are lacking. 81. Creating direct and indirect linkages with the rest of the economy remains elusive. 82. Overcoming the large mining infrastructure financing constraints through public-private partnerships and the grouping of infrastructure users to achieve economies of scale via integrated development corridors remains a major challenge. 83. There has been increased levels of environmental destruction occasioned by weak closure and post-closure provisions, leading to an increased number of abandoned or "orphan" mining sites in Africa. 84. Institutional and human capacities for regulating and managing the sector are weak, especially those related to administrative, technical, training and financial functions. 85. African countries are urged to invest in new forward-looking, development-oriented mining regimes that create equitable and sustainable mineral wealth from a diversified mining industry that is integrated into the local, national and regional economy. 86. With increased mining along the coast and on the seabed, African countries should look at a regulatory framework to deal with off-shore and coastal mining. 87. Member countries should seriously consider the adoption and application of the minerals conventions emanating from the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, and other systems such as the toolkits, legislation and industry codes for hazardous substances of the International Council on Mining and Metals, for example mercury and cyanide. 88. Governance systems in the mining sector need to be rooted in broader participation by local communities in mining decisions that affect them and corporate social responsibility cannot continue to be exercised in a wholly discretionary manner. Countries should establish and strengthen legislative instruments and systems to ensure the effective participation of affected communities and other stakeholders. At the pan-African level, through the African Union Commission and ECA, a multi-stakeholder forum should be established to ensure inclusive participation in mineral development debates. 89. The "polluter pays principle" is insufficiently ingrained and enforced in environmental legislation in some African countries. Emphasis should be placed on this principle in environmental laws. 90. Member countries should ensure that environmental-impact assessments are mandatory in all legislation, mining concessions or mineral development agreements, and that they include obligatory social and environmental rehabilitation funds. 91. Infrastructure costs should be shared with other economic activities. Capacity should be developed for resource-based development corridors that optimize the collateral use of mining infrastructure, including transport, power and water, to establish economic activity in other sectors, such as agriculture, forestry and resource processing. 92. The African Union Commission, ECA and other United Nations bodies, as well as the African Development Bank, should speed up implementation of the short-term action plans of the New Partnership for Africa's Development to provide cheap and sustainable energy, which are currently in acute deficit. 93. Investment must be made in appropriate knowledge-creating capacities, including human resources, research infrastructure and innovation systems to support the creation of value and extend linkages to the rest of the economy. 94. In order to address the deficiencies in skills, finance, marketing and technology faced in the area of artisanal and small-scale mining, member countries need to put in place regimes and assistance programmes that facilitate maximization of the contribution of the sector to rural development strategies and poverty alleviation in an environmentally sustainable manner. 95. There should be enhanced support for regional cooperation for geo-mapping and resource development corridors, especially in respect of power projects; strengthened capacity for negotiating large mining infrastructure-financing projects; enhanced capacities to boost environmental and social management practices; and assistance to small-scale mining ventures to promote sustainable and commercially viable mining practices. 96. In order to prevent mining legacies, abandoned and/or orphaned mining sites, mine water problems, accumulation of waste and pollution, there should be more research and development to ensure that enforcement and compliance approaches are put in place. 97. In addition to environmental funds, environmental accounting should be promoted, since operational costs in this field is a critical part of the life cycle of mines. 98. Emphasis should be placed on research and development in the field of mine closure and dealing with mining legacies; programmes and initiatives should be undertaken by Government, industry and other stakeholders. 99. The increasing number of industrial accidents resulting in serious negative environmental health, social and economic impacts in mining communities highlights the need to enhance the capacity of the mining sector to develop and implement industrial accident prevention and preparedness strategies and plans. 100. Development support needs to be directed at building sustainable institutional and human capacities in key areas, including financial, technical and management functions. E. Transport 101. Some transport infrastructure development, including the building of roads, railways, airports and seaports, has taken place. The region is still lagging behind, however, in developing sustainable transport. 102. The integration of transport sector strategies into poverty reduction goals through the Poverty Reduction and Transport Strategy Review process is under way in over 30 African countries under the Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Programme. 103. To ensure the integrated development of Africa's infrastructure and to avoid duplication of efforts, the African Union Commission, the African Development Bank and the secretariat of the New Partnership for Africa's Development have embarked on a joint initiative known as the "Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa". 104. There have been a number of regional and subregional meetings resulting in declarations and resolutions and plans of action aimed at developing and improving the operations of transport in Africa. 105. Progress has been made in enhancing safety in air transport through the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme. 106. Subregional conventions and protocols have been adopted, many of which are being implemented. With respect to transport facilitation in Africa, a multitude of international and bilateral agreements and protocols aimed at simplifying and harmonizing trade and transport between States have been signed. 107. Most African countries had phased out leaded gasoline by the end of 2008. Countries are also reducing sulphur levels in diesel fuels by introducing cleaner vehicle regulations, particularly age limitation and fuel efficient vehicles. 108. Measures have been undertaken to establish and restructure road agencies and road funds, as well as to enhance the capacity of local governments to effectively coordinate rural transport infrastructure and services. 109. An energy-efficient mass public transport system known as bus rapid transit (BRT) was recently introduced in Africa. BRT simulates a mass transit using exclusive right of way lanes. 110. Some African countries, under the programme Access Africa, are implementing bicycle transport initiatives as a way of exploring the potential of low cost and low carbon mobility, as a way to promote environmentally friendly cities. 111. Following a high-level meeting held in Djibouti on 26 January 2009, in order to combat the increasing threat of maritime piracy in the Horn of Africa and the Gulf of Aden, many Governments, in cooperation with the International Maritime Organization (IMO), are taking steps, including developing a code of conduct, to combat acts of piracy and armed robbery against ships. 112. Africa has succeeded, in a limited way, in mobilizing resources from the public sector, the private sector and external development partners to finance transport infrastructure and operations. 113. Inadequate transport networks in Africa limit connectivity, accessibility and trade within the continent. 114. Inadequate policies and strategies, as well as the slow implementation of subregional and regional agreements, remain major obstacles to the development of sustainable transport in Africa. 115. Many African countries do not have policies that facilitate private sector participation in transport infrastructure development and operation. 116. Liberalization and privatization in rail, air and maritime transport is still in its infancy. Efforts to harmonize policies and regulations pertaining to cross-border movement of goods, services and people have not been wholly effective. 117. The number of workers in African public transport enterprises and agencies is relatively high, but the availability of skilled personnel is still limited in most transport industries. Moreover, in many countries there is lack of institutions equipped with appropriate powers and technical capacity to formulate, plan and manage infrastructure development and services as well as to monitor and enforce policies and regulations. 118. Despite the critical importance of the transport system in economic development and poverty reduction, the prevention and mitigation of its environmental impact remains a challenge. 119. Transport costs in Africa are among the highest in the world. Transport services are unaffordable for many African citizens as transport costs are high compared to the average incomes of the citizens. Limited skills of managerial and operational staff as well as poor transport infrastructure and facilitation play significant roles in the high transport costs in the region. 120. The prevailing poor state of road safety remains a serious challenge in Africa, as accidents, and the resulting loss of life and destruction of property, have assumed intolerable proportions. A major weakness in this area is the paucity of lead institutions that are responsible for road safety. Coupled with this, there appears to be a lack of consistent enforcement of traffic regulations. 121. Transport data and information in Africa is limited and poorly organized. At the same time, there is inadequate utilization of information and communications technologies throughout the continent. 122. Significant gaps remain between the demand and available financial resources for sustainable transport development. 123. National policies should be reviewed and harmonized in a coherent manner, with global and regional policies and agreements to facilitate the reflection of regional and global level decisions in national policies, budgets and development plans. Furthermore, countries should ensure that appropriate institutional frameworks that clearly delineate regulatory and operational functions of all modes of transport are put in place. 124. Social and environment impact mitigation measures should be incorporated and enforced in the development of infrastructure. In addition, there is a need for countries to take further measures to minimize emissions and promote development of environment-friendly transport systems in Africa. 125. Countries need to develop policies that promote energy efficiency. Such policies should aim, inter alia, to promote the importation of energy-efficient vehicles; the use of clean fuels; limitation of the age of imported second-hand vehicles; and improvement of traffic management. 126. Transport costs can be optimized through the full implementation of transport facilitation initiatives, the promotion of intra-modal, inter-modal transport competition, and multi-modal transport systems to improve efficiency. 127. In order to promote safety in the transport sector, countries need to prioritize road safety programmes and allocate adequate funds for such programmes. Countries should also ensure compliance with safety regulations and standards established by the relevant regional and international bodies, in particular the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) in the area of air transport. Furthermore, countries need support in order to strengthen their capacity to address maritime security problems, particularly in relation to the escalation of maritime piracy in recent years, in a holistic manner, including through an in-depth look at the root causes of piracy. 128. Information and communications technology (ICT) offers a powerful tool in accessing, processing and disseminating large volumes of information in the shortest time possible, and it should be utilized in the transport sector. 129. In order to secure sufficient financing for the development and maintenance of transport infrastructure, countries should enhance public source financing by ensuring that an adequate share of GDP is allocated to the sector from public funds and by raising external resources to take advantage of resources from multilateral and bilateral donors, and other innovative funding mechanisms. 130. Since Africa's financial resources are limited in comparison to its huge infrastructure financing needs, its development partners are called upon to continue providing sufficient development assistance and to honour their commitments despite the current global economic crisis. F. Interlinkages and cross-cutting issues 131. The different thematic areas under review are all interlinked and when dealt with in an integrated way can help address the various crises, for example, by reducing the carbon intensity of growth and by increasing agricultural productivity in a sustainable way, while implementing the decisions of the Commission on Sustainable Development. Sustainable consumption and production initiatives aim at adopting the life cycle approach in order to promote optimal use of resources, waste minimization and recycling, with a view to ensuring sustainable patterns of consumption and production. The chemicals, mining and transport sectors entail resource-intensive processes and have high polluting potential. The adoption of sustainable consumption and production in these sectors will go a long way in ensuring efficiency in resource use and minimizing pollution. In terms of cross-cutting issues, the promotion of sustainable consumption and production in the different thematic areas calls for the adoption of holistic, integrated and participatory approaches across the board. This includes the development and implementation of appropriate policies, strategies and programmes. Since impacts are transboundary, regional cooperation should be fostered, including through strengthening mechanisms for policy and programme coordination and knowledge management. 132. Agricultural waste such as bagasse, straw, sawdust and cotton and coffee husks is being used by African countries for energy production, including co-generation. Some countries are taking advantage of the co-funding opportunities provided by the clean development mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 133. Several countries in the region have initiated the development of cleaner energy sources and measures for the improvement of energy efficiency. 134. Mechanisms and frameworks such as the African 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production, the strategic approach for integrated chemicals management, integrated waste management, transport and mining that seek to promote integrated and resource use efficiency have been adopted and are being promoted. Among other notable initiatives is the "Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa" of the African Union Commission and the African Development Bank, which is aimed at ensuring the integrated development of Africa's infrastructure and the avoidance of the duplication of efforts. 135. Many countries in the region have made progress in establishing initiatives and programmes and in formulating and adopting policies, strategies and legislation to foster sustainable development. These include laws and policies in the broad area of environmental management as well as in sectoral areas such as mining, energy, agriculture and health. Many African countries have also ratified major chemicals and waste-related conventions as well as other multilateral environment agreements. In the mining sector, African countries have increasingly signed on to voluntary global initiatives. 136. Some progress is being made towards policy and programme integration, mainly within the framework of poverty reduction strategies, national sustainable development strategies and sector-wide approaches. The Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management and national sustainable consumption and production programmes are the other tools being used for integrated programme development and implementation. 137. A wide range of recently formulated policies and legislation, which provide for transparent governance and multi-stakeholder participation, including consideration of gender concerns in policy and programme formulation and implementation, have led to a general improvement in community participation in programme development and implementation. 138. The region has made some progress in putting in place structures and frameworks that are vital to the enhancement of regional cooperation in a wide range of areas pertinent to the issues under consideration, including the New Partnership for Africa's Development programme of the African Union, as well as other regional frameworks. African ministerial conferences, councils and other mechanisms have also been put in place for policy and programme coordination and advocacy in the region. 139. Inadequate institutional, human and/or financial resources capacities continue to be a major contributing factor to the slow rate of implementation of national policies and legislation, including the international regimes on issues under review. The implementation gap, which is widening, is crippling the achievement of the desired sustainable development objectives. 140. Compartmentalized approaches still prevail in the implementation of global, regional and national initiatives. These approaches result in poor coordination, duplication and strain on limited resources. 141. The region is confronted with systemic challenges such as inadequate capacity for monitoring, and research and development. There is poor dissemination of the limited data and information collected. Opportunities to facilitate knowledge, including the use of indigenous knowledge systems and the sharing of best practices, are limited. 142. Lack of national cleaner production centres in many African countries is hampering the promotion of resource efficient and cleaner production in various sectors as well as the sound management of chemicals and waste. 143. The understanding and appreciation of the various policies and strategies by political leaders is crucial in generating the political will and commitment essential to ensuring effective implementation of the strategies. There is a need for effective communication strategies to enable the political leaderships to understand and appreciate strategies and programmes such as the 10-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production. 144. Mobilizing resources from both national and official development assistance (ODA) sources needs to be strengthened in order to ensure substantially scaled up and sustained resources provision for the implementation of programmes at regional, subregional and national levels. Incentives should be developed and implemented to encourage and attract investments by the private sector in the development of clean and efficient energy, sustainable transport systems, sound management of chemicals and waste technologies, the development of national content for the mining sector and infrastructure. 145. Integrated initiatives and approaches, such as regional and national sustainable consumption and production programmes, the strategic approach to international chemicals management, environmental and social management plans, as well as integrated transport master plans, provide a unique opportunity for tackling cross-cutting issues and challenges in a holistic and optimal manner. Emphasis should be placed on developing such integrated programmes and ensuring that priority national development strategies incorporate such initiatives. In this regard, capacity for integrated analysis, policy development, planning and implementation needs to be strengthened at national and subnational levels. In addition, harmonization of policies and programmes across countries in the region needs to be scaled up. 146. The information and knowledge base for planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation needs to be strengthened. The capacity for research, documentation and dissemination of reliable data, information and best practices at the national and regional level should be enhanced. 147. Cooperation in the development, transfer, adaptation and diffusion of appropriate and affordable technologies, in particular energy-efficient technologies, safe chemical alternatives and cleaner technologies, needs to be strengthened. There should also be enhanced information exchange on such technologies. 148. In order to achieve the set goals, global, regional and subregional initiatives should be linked and coordinated with national development processes. Countries need support in translating international initiatives into implementable national and local action plans. Such national plans should also be developed and implemented in the context of achieving basic needs. A good example is linking sustainable consumption and production to the challenge of poverty reduction. 149. There is a need to design, promote and strengthen appropriate economic, financial and market-based instruments for sound chemicals management, sustainable transport development, waste minimization, mining and sustainable consumption and production. 150. Existing national cleaner production centres should be scaled up and expanded to countries where they do not exist as a platform for the development and implementation of appropriate programmes in resource-efficient and cleaner production, including the sound management of chemicals and waste. 151. Capacity-building programmes need to be developed and implemented in order to upgrade the knowledge base, including the use of indigenous knowledge systems and the skills of staff involved in policy formulation, planning and implementation, as well as of those engaged in regulatory and enforcement functions. 152. Appropriate institutional frameworks must be established, and national, regional institutes and centres of learning and specialized training and applied research and technology development strengthened and expanded. IV. Conclusion 153. Significant progress has been made in putting policies and other frameworks in place at regional, subregional and national levels in order to achieve targets associated with the themes under review. However, these policies and frameworks have to be translated into substantial concrete action -- and the widening implementation gap needs to be reduced. Priority needs to be given to implementation of the various strategies, plans and declarations, with a strong emphasis on tangible results on poverty reduction, food and energy security, health and sustainable environment and natural resources management. There is also a need to support the ongoing efforts in the area of monitoring and evaluation of policies and actions and to facilitate exchanges of experience and dissemination of best practices. 154. Closing the implementation gap should be enabled by adequate financing, capacity development and by facilitating Africa's access to technological and managerial know-how and environmentally sound technologies. There is need to fulfil ODA commitments, including the commitments made by developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of GNP for ODA to developing countries by 2015. 155. The private sector plays an important role in mobilizing and providing means of implementation, including developing and disseminating sustainable consumption and production technologies and practices. There is need to support national efforts to create effective enabling conditions for private sector involvement and investment, including the development of local entrepreneurship. 