%%%SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT|AFRICA|PARTNERSHIP|

Commission on Sustainable Development Nineteenth session 2-13 May 2011 * Reissued for technical reasons on 12 January 2011. ** E/CN.17/2011/1. Item 3 of the provisional agenda** Thematic cluster for the implementation cycle 2010-2011 -- policy session Report on the intersessional consultative meeting on "Solid waste management in Africa" Rabat, 25 and 26 November 2010 Chair's summary Contents Page Introduction Opening session Importance of integrated solid waste management Barriers to integrated solid waste management and recommended strategies Involving the informal sector in solid waste management Strengthening and creating partnerships Annex Rabat Declaration on Sustainable Waste Management in Africa 1. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, in partnership with the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), organized the intersessional consultative meeting of the Commission on Sustainable Development on "Solid waste management in Africa" in Rabat on 25 and 26 November 2010. The meeting was attended by approximately 80 participants, comprising Government representatives of 24 African counties, France, Portugal, Romania and Yemen; representatives of public waste utilities, the private sector, academia and non-governmental organizations; international resource persons; and representatives of United Nations organizations and other development organizations. 2. The African region is facing severe challenges in coping with the rapidly increasing volume and changing characteristics of urban and industrial wastes. The quantum of waste is increasing significantly owing to economic growth, rising population, and increasing consumption and per capita waste generation. Apart from municipal solid waste, emerging waste streams including electronic waste (e-waste), health-care waste, plastic waste, construction and demolition (C&D) waste, and household hazardous waste have become matters of concern. These wastes, if not managed properly, will have a significant adverse impact on human health, ecosystems and resources, which will threaten the sustainability of the region. Adoption of alternative models of growth which decouple economic growth from excessive use of resources and minimize generation and disposal of wastes should be the strategy chosen. Promotion of the reduce, reuse and recycle (3Rs) principle should form the key element of such a strategic approach. 3. The issues of open dumping and burning are rampant across the region, with open dumping dominating the waste disposal methods. Since this largely affects the potential opportunity to utilize wastes as valuable resources for income-generation, there is a need for the complete phasing out of urban dumping and uncontrolled disposal. 4. There are a number of social issues, such as the health and working conditions of poor women and children involved in unhealthy practices of waste collection and sorting, mainly in the informal sector. The development of appropriate recycling infrastructure and markets constitutes not only an effective solution to the problem of eradicating open dumping, but also a means to address critical factors (working conditions and health, environment and labour issues) affecting informal waste-pickers. 5. It is important for African countries to institute appropriate policy frameworks and governance mechanisms leading to waste prevention, waste minimization and improvement in waste collection, processing, treatment, disposal and recycling. A few experiences in African countries show that integrating private, formal and informal systems of solid waste management can significantly increase the efficiency and effectiveness of municipalities in delivering required services and can allow municipalities to preserve valuable resources while also providing health and environment benefits. 6. The meeting was organized with the following objectives: (a) To strengthen the capacities of waste management utilities in Africa in respect of addressing waste management challenges (through, inter alia, sharing of lessons learned and experiences undergone, achieving a better understanding of the requirements of institutional and policy frameworks and identifying gaps in policies and practices); (b) To identify opportunities for building partnerships for expanding waste management services; (c) To develop communities of practice for scaling up best practices. Over the years, a number of good practices in sustainable waste management have emerged. Actions leading to a scaling up of these practices are required and these actions could range from policy reforms to infrastructure development and raising public awareness; (d) To empower cities with respect to addressing economics of solid waste management with a better understanding of policy frameworks and economic instruments. II. Opening session 7. In his opening speech, the Secretary of State in charge of Water and Environment of Morocco focused on the importance of an integrated vision for solid waste management and the need to involve all key stakeholders. He stressed that solid waste must not be considered a liability but rather an asset which can provide an opportunity for investments that generate positive social and economic outcomes while protecting the environment. He also underscored the importance of involving the private sector with supporting legal and institutional frameworks. 8. Kenza Kaouakib-Robinson, Senior Sustainable Development Officer, Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, informed the meeting that the Commission on Sustainable Development at its nineteenth session would be focusing on addressing the challenges and obstacles impeding the implementation of an internationally agreed agenda in five thematic areas which include waste management and sustainable consumption and production patterns, both closely linked to integrated solid waste management (ISWM). She emphasized that integrated solid waste management and the 3R strategy, which call for a broader and more holistic vision of waste management, are unique in that they integrate waste management with the key paradigms of sustainable production and consumption, greening the economies, and improving resource efficiency, which together could make a significant contribution to sustainable development. She emphasized the importance of addressing the particular challenges faced by small island developing States and expressed the hope that outcomes of the consultative meeting would provide practical solutions and meaningful input to the nineteenth session of the Commission and the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20). 9. In his opening statement, Graham Alabaster, Chief, Water, Sanitation and Infrastructure Branch, United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), highlighted the changing urban landscape in Africa and the fact that 72 per cent of Africa's urban population live in low-income areas. He emphasized that this vulnerable group should be considered in planning interventions for solid waste management and that solid waste management provided a good opportunity for linking service provision to income-generation through recycling and reuse. He noted that the meeting provided a good opportunity to form regional alliances and share expertise and experiences. 10. Khalida Bouzar, Deputy Director, Division of Technology, Industry and Economics, UNEP, indicated that the waste sector is facing four sets of challenges: the increasing growth in the quantity and complexity of waste streams; the increasing risks of wastes to human health and ecosystems; economic unattractiveness of large-scale reuse and recycling owing to prevailing pricing systems; and the high cost and technical requirements of creating waste management infrastructure. She also indicated that in the course of developing waste management systems, it was important that the informal sector be taken into consideration. She also emphasized the need for national waste management strategies to take into consideration the needs and constraints at local level. III. Importance of integrated solid waste management 11. An increasing challenge, compounding existing resource limitations, is the accumulation of waste resulting from the use of resources and leading to resource degradation, with a consequent adverse impact on human health and ecosystems. The greater the economic growth, the more resources consumed and the more waste generated. A strategic approach is therefore needed to address resource consumption and waste generation within a life-cycle perspective, and to stress preventive strategies such as integrated solid waste management and the 3Rs. 12. In order to strengthen the information and knowledge base on waste quantities and composition, and their linkages with economic growth (as measured, for example, by gross domestic product (GDP)), countries should actively consider inventorying waste generation. For this purpose, it may be prudent to set up a commonly agreed, understood and measurable set of key performance indicators (KPIs). The key performance indicators could assist each national Government in tracking progress, facilitating in particular the decoupling of economic growth from environmental degradation and allowing for intercountry benchmarking. 13. In respect of mainstreaming integrated solid waste management in the national economy, countries should create an enabling environment of sound policies, appropriate technologies, and effective institutional and financial frameworks, with a view to: promoting waste reduction and segregation; improving the efficiency of collection and transport of waste; setting up community recycling facilities; ensuring participation of the informal sector; shifting from open dumping to secured sanitary land filling; monetizing carbon credits from recycling and processing of waste; and encouraging eco-innovations across supply chains. 14. Supporting integrated solid waste management includes support for the concept of reduce, reuse and recycle. Apart from being associated with economic gains (such as material and energy recovery) and social benefits (such as employment), the 3R concept is linked to various global issues including climate change and the phasing out of harmful substances such as ozone-depleting substances and persistent organic pollutants. IV. Barriers to integrated solid waste management and recommended strategies 15. Barriers to integrated solid waste management may be described in terms of their policy, institutional, technological, financial and attitudinal dimensions. While several initiatives have been put in place to address these barriers across the world, including in Africa, a systematic effort on a strategic basis and supported by partnerships is not commonly observed. The meeting urged concerted effort in this direction, especially for the African region. Various deliberations and discussions in this regard led to the following observations and recommendations. Policy 16. There is a need to emphasize national-level policies on decentralization and empowerment of local authorities. These policies should recognize the importance of city-specific strategic action plans for integrated solid waste management. The development of effective action plans requires appropriate data and adequate institutional capacity and mechanisms. 17. Often, the term "waste" is not clearly defined in many African countries. There is a need to have a specific waste and resource management framework so as to achieve better recognition and relative prioritization. Policy integration at apex level should be supportive encompassing, for example, health-related policies. 18. Waste management-related policies should encourage regional solutions and take advantage of economies of scale. Currently, there is a disconnect between policies at national level and those at local level and therefore a dire need to harmonize policies across all levels. This could be achieved through subregional dialogue on policies. 19. Policies should focus on rural areas (relevant to Africa), with their scope not being limited to urban areas. There is a need to improve on the implementation and enforcement of policies and regulations. 20. Clear-cut policies, frameworks and operational guidelines are needed to further engage the private sector. At the same time, policies that assign economic value to waste-pickers and field personnel need to be developed to ensure that they are recognized and their life situation ameliorated. 21. Policies should address rising concerns about the regulation of electronic waste (e-waste). Waste management-related policies should also address the issue of the disposal of used vehicles through vehicle retirement policies and vehicle import policies. There is a need as well to improve on policy and enforcement in respect of transboundary movement of wastes. Appropriate capacity-building and training of custom authorities could provide significant benefits in respect of tracking the transboundary movements of defunct electronic products and retired vehicles. 22. One of the most critical issues is the absence of strong political commitment to and political ownership of sustainable solid waste management and related sustainability issues -- involving public health and the environment -- as reflected in the lack of accurate data and information on waste (waste generation, composition, collection, recycling and disposal). In most cases, data are generated from discrete donor-driven projects. Institutional 23. There is currently a multiplicity of institutions whose activities are characterized by overlaps and ambiguity with respect to responsibilities and jurisdictions. Coordinated action of various national and local institutions remains a challenge especially as regards the implementation of multi-stakeholder-driven strategic action plans for integrated solid waste management. Building capacity of local authorities is also vital, especially regarding the handling of waste streams including hazardous waste. Training and capacity-building programmes should be mainstreamed into education so as to produce more professionals in the waste management sector in Africa. Training should centre on the operator (field) level as well. Community-based organizations and communities might also receive training in management of decentralized waste treatment facilities. In this regard, setting up of local training centres focusing on maintenance, operational and supervisory aspects could be useful in expanding effective waste management services. 24. Institutions critical to integrated solid waste management should include those engaged in the provision of infrastructure and related operations as well as regulatory and enforcement institutions. Institutional arrangements and responsibilities should be clearly defined. Operational aspects should involve the private sector, and public-private-partnerships, with some degree of "control". Involvement of professional organizations could be helpful in this regard. Such institutional mechanisms should be built up and strengthened, with regulation-related responsibility being vested with the Government (in order that the performance of private service providers may be monitored). 25. Personnel of public-health departments, which are generally responsible for waste management, often lack training, skills or experience in waste management. It is important to assign higher priority to waste-related departments and divisions. Waste management departments should also have independent authority to handle, with defined roles and responsibilities, all functions related to integrated solid waste management (planning, commercial and financial). 26. There is a need to set up a knowledge hub on waste management across Africa designed to publish research publications, hold annual technical events and "waste expos" for the purpose of disseminating knowledge and promoting regional networking, including transfer of knowledge across all levels and among all stakeholders (academia, managers, practitioners and fieldworkers). Twinning (for example, South-South cooperation) arrangements should be promoted and supported so as to promote shared learning, mentoring and networking. Technological 27. There is a need to develop Africa-specific technical guidelines suitable to the local context possibly including environmentally sound waste landfill guidelines (with respect to sitting, design, operations and closure) and standards and guidelines for incinerators established for the destruction of health-care waste. Guidelines must address complex issues such as treatment of leachates and biomethanation plants (including gas handling). 28. University researchers and fieldworkers and field professionals must work in partnership to develop appropriate and cost-effective technology and solutions and standards. This may lead to adaptations as well as innovations in waste-to-resource technologies. Funding should be mobilized to support partnerships-based and practice-oriented research. 29. Priority should be given to technology options that entail resource (materials and energy) recovery. There is a need to promote biomethanation-related technologies so as to take advantage of the rich organic content (approximately 6070 per cent) of waste produced in the hot climate of Africa. Conversion of waste to fuel (bricketing) can be a potential option for achieving energy security. 30. With imported or foreign equipment, there are often problems to be faced in respect of procuring spare parts and dealing with reduced operational and technical support and backup. However much relevant technologies from developed countries are needed for complex waste streams, including e-waste and hazardous wastes, indigenous technologies should be preferred and promoted to the extent possible. Information on appropriate technology is often "driven" by technology suppliers and vendors who recommend specific technologies. Independent assessments are important in the African context. Improved access to information-related technologies will provide a useful basis for action in this regard. 31. In Africa, the use of appropriate technology is "uneven". Technology suitability needs to be checked using integrated frameworks (economic, environmental and social) such as sustainability assessment of technologies (SAT). Significantly, sustainability assessment of technologies is participatory and hence can reflect local preferences and decisions. It is prudent to adopt a holistic perspective (in other words, one that is upstream-downstream) when making choices in respect of technologies. Sharing of technology data sheets will be useful in achieving an understanding of the most suitable equipment and technology. 32. African countries may not aim at the highest standards of waste management at the outset. A stepwise approach could be recommended: first handle immediate high-priority problems (for example, set up separate collection systems for health-care waste). In Africa, there is a phase of technology transition to be considered, especially regarding the management of existing dump sites. A phased or staged approach should be recommended. 33. For cost reduction, optimization of the collection and transport component of waste management (which absorbs approximately 67 per cent of the total cost) is required. Special efforts are necessary to address the issue of narrow streets. In this regard, new and specialized vehicle designs are needed. 34. It is equally important to develop experience in the use of technology. Areas such as preventive maintenance are important; operation and maintenance manuals and guidelines for operators are needed; and the need for on-the-job training (in the local language) and practical capacity-building programmes (on how, for example, to prepare lists of spare parts and spare parts inventories) must be addressed. The setting up of workshops for maintenance of equipment is an essential part of waste management infrastructure; however, consideration of this factor is often lacking throughout the entire waste management system in Africa. Economic and financial 35. Economic instruments, such as the polluter pays principle, need to be adopted while taking into consideration the local economy and the willingness to pay. The possibility of raising finances by charging for waste-related services, in particular, should be tested and further explored. 36. Greater involvement and awareness on the part of financing institutions (FI) are required. The engagement of multilateral institutions such as the World Bank and the African Development Bank is critical in financing waste management projects. National Governments should also provide loans and subsidies to "operators". 37. The Clean Development Mechanism can be a good source of an incremental revenue stream in the context of the implementation and operation of waste management projects. Concerted efforts, supplemented by practical training and guidance manuals, should be made to encourage local authorities in Africa to take advantage of these international financial mechanisms. Attitudinal 38. Waste is a resource and can have added value. This notion is still not understood by some Governments, communities and businesses. Additionally, waste generators often feel that waste management is the responsibility solely of the Government. 39. Waste segregation is often conducted informally and not yet at the desirable level. Waste should be segregated at source. Mixed waste is a risk as well as a missed opportunity. In this regard, community involvement is key. Awareness-raising efforts need to be intensified, including through the engagement of extension officers, support for waste-pickers and the formation of informal-formal partnerships. V. Involving the informal sector in solid waste management 40. There is a need to recognize the role of the informal sector in waste management. Waste-pickers are deprived of legal status. In this regard, an effort should be made to address issues of working conditions, health and labour standards. Effective dialogue should be carried out to understand the complex nature of formal and informal interactions by involving local negotiators and nongovernmental organizations. Specific training programmes targeting the informal sector, including training on new technologies for recycling, would provide added benefits. 41. It is important to promote dedicated units or centres for waste minimization and recycling. Establishment of such centres could help mainstream activities of waste-pickers. 42. It is necessary to address the health risks incurred by all workers in the recycling chain, particularly women and children illegally engaged in waste-picking, while continuing to focus on the economic benefits of recycling. VI. Strengthening and creating partnerships 43. There is significant recovery potential in African countries; and effective partnerships among local authorities, the private sector and the informal sector, could lead to the transformation of wastes into valuable resources, in terms of waste to energy, to the economy and to employment. National, legal and policy frameworks should support policies and institutional measures favourable to scaling up such partnerships across the region. 44. While it was recognized that Africa has a wealth of experience and information, it was also noted that there is a lack of information-sharing on various aspects of partnerships such as types of partnerships, conditions and competencies of partners. There is also a lack of appropriate policy, legal and institutional frameworks within which to promote and guide partnerships at various levels. While political will and awareness are key to expanding and sustaining partnerships, cities are not always empowered to enter into partnerships and cannot access international funding mechanisms independently. 45. Recognizing the limited capacity of local authorities responsible for waste management, the meeting recommended the active involvement of all actors at local, national, regional and international levels, including the informal sector. One important innovation could be the establishment of effective networking arrangements among potential partners and stakeholders for exchanging information, best practices, tools and technologies. 46. The meeting recommended building on existing partnerships for waste management. As a first step, collating information on existing partnerships would be helpful. While considering international partnership models, existing and new partnerships should nonetheless be tailored to the African context, taking into account the differences and specificities of various categories of partners at international, regional, national and local levels. 47. In order to make partnerships effective, the political and institutional framework should be favourable to all key stakeholders and potential partners -- including municipalities, international business communities, small service providers (including the informal sector), international financing institutions, local and regional banks, non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations -- to enable an effective collaborative outcome. 48. Pursuant to the above observations and recommendations, the participants unanimously adopted the Rabat Declaration on Sustainable Waste Management in Africa (see annex). 49. The participants expressed appreciation for the generous support of the Government of Morocco in hosting the intersessional meeting and requested that the host country submit the Chair's summary of the meeting, including its Declaration to the Commission on Sustainable Development at its forthcoming nineteenth session. Rabat Declaration on Sustainable Waste Management in Africa 1. Representatives responsible for solid waste management from 28 countries, including 24 from Africa, together with representatives of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Centre for Regional Development and experts from the sector, debated the various priority issues on solid waste management in Africa and related topics in Rabat on 25 and 26 November 2010. 2. The purpose of the meeting was to identify the special needs of the African continent, develop a clear position for the forthcoming nineteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development, and build a coalition, through which good practices could be shared and replicated for the purpose of reducing the negative impacts of improper waste management on the environment and health, and of taking advantage of the various economic benefits of sustainable solid waste management, with a focus on poverty alleviation. The participants concluded that: 3. Waste management issues are not of sufficiently high priority for many national and local governments in Africa. One of the key requirements for the implementation of sustainable solid waste management in Africa is explicit support at the political decision-making level. Recognition of the contribution that sound solid waste management practices can make to sustainable development, coupled with adequate allocation of resources, will enable national and local governments to make significant progress in solid waste management. 4. There is an urgent need to create and implement comprehensive national policy, legal and institutional frameworks, with linkages to human health and environmental protection, for supporting solid waste management. Decentralization and empowerment of local authorities are crucial. 5. Access to and availability of funds, a prerequisite for establishing waste management systems and infrastructure, need to be enhanced at both national and local levels. This should be coupled with the utilization of various financial instruments and mechanisms so as to ensure sustainability. 6. Awareness-raising, education and capacity-building in the field of waste management at all levels and involving all stakeholders are crucial for the African continent. In this regard, intensive efforts should be made by Governments, institutions and non-governmental, regional and international organizations to ensure that appropriate initiatives are implemented. 7. Although some expertise is available within the region, good and bad practices are often not shared. There is a need for regional or subregional associations and partnerships which can be achieved by building on existing networks, developing new ones where necessary, and working with the United Nations system, international financing institutions and other partners. 8. The establishment of well-designed integrated solid waste management systems can be a more profitable business if it is based on the reduce, reuse and recycle (3Rs) principle. Indeed, the fact that much of the recyclable waste from the African region is transported to other continents for reprocessing, indicates that there are lost economic benefits for the region. There is a need to foster a greater understanding of these benefits as constituting a driving force for promoting integrated solid waste management practices and to focus on waste as a resource. 9. The role of the informal sector is under-recognized and needs to be strengthened. Its formal inclusion in the waste management process will benefit all stakeholders. The legislative environment in African countries can be strengthened so as to create enabling conditions for improving living and working conditions within the informal sector. 10. Adequate information on solid waste is lacking. Information on the volumes of waste produced and its composition will allow informed decisions on investments and technology selection. To ensure improved service coverage, local authorities and other service providers should be encouraged to put in place monitoring systems designed to collect data and information related to direct and secure investments. 11. The issue of transboundary movement of waste into Africa raises concern. Aside from the risks they pose to human health and the environment, new and emerging waste streams, including e-waste, will further stress waste disposal. Enforcement of international conventions is required, including through regional cooperation. 12. Although Africa is undergoing an extremely rapid urbanization, there is a need to consider solutions for rural areas as well as for megacities and smaller urban centres. Adopting a "one size fits all" approach will not be appropriate, given the diversity within the region. 13. Building partnerships involving all key stakeholders, including international financing institutions, the private sector, local and regional banks, non-governmental organizations and community-based organizations, will enhance effective waste management practices. The participants declared that: 14. Solid waste management represents a challenge but its improvement will offer multiple benefits for Africa. They therefore fully endorsed the outcomes of the meeting as a key contribution to the forthcoming nineteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development to be held in May 2011. The support of the Government of Morocco in hosting the meeting was gratefully acknowledged. The participants requested that the host country submit the outcome of the meeting, including the Rabat Declaration, to the Commission on Sustainable Development at its nineteenth session. 26 November 2010 