%%%CHILDREN|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|CHILD DEVELOPMENT|EDUCATION|GENDER EQUALITY|AIDS PREVENTION|VIOLENCE|CHILD ABUSE|CHILD LABOUR|RIGHTS OF THE CHILD|PARTNERSHIP|DISASTER PREPAREDNESS|

United Nations Children's Fund Executive Board Annual session 2010 1-4 June 2010 * E/ICEF/2010/8. Item 3 of the provisional agenda* Annual report of the Executive Director: progress and achievements in 2009 and report on the in-depth review of the medium-term strategic plan 2006-2013 Summary The in-depth review of the UNICEF medium-term strategic plan (MTSP) for 2006-2013 (E/ICEF/2005/11) was carried out from November 2009 to March 2010 and included the annual review of achievements and constraints in 2009. Building on the outcome of the 2008 midterm review (see Executive Board report E/ICEF/2008/18), the review was an opportunity to (a) take stock of changes in the global context affecting children, including emerging issues; (b) review progress towards the Millennium Development Goals and commitments of the Millennium Declaration; (c) identify and elaborate on key strategic shifts in the MTSP; and (d) update the results framework of each focus area, based on lessons learned, analysis of progress and recent developments and a review of management issues. The report was produced in conjunction with the UNICEF annual report of the Executive Director to the Economic and Social Council (E/ICEF/2010/3), which gives more detailed information and examples of UNICEF work in many of the areas emphasized in General Assembly resolution 62/208 of 19 December 2007 on the triennial comprehensive policy review (TCPR) of operational activities for development of the United Nations system. Trends in progress and performance against key indicators are further analysed in the accompanying Data Companion. Feedback was obtained from Executive Board Members, National Committees for UNICEF and UNICEF country offices. Management performance was also reviewed, based on the established key performance indicators. 1. The in-depth review of the results and strategies outlined in the MTSP and the analysis of the changing external environment showed that UNICEF was guided by the urgency of achieving the Millennium Development Goals, recognizing that children are at the very heart of those goals. The review and analysis also confirmed that the framework and overall strategic focus of the MTSP remain appropriate, and effectively articulate the contribution of UNICEF to the Millennium agenda, to the rights of children and women and to global knowledge. 2. The review has been important and timely, especially given the lead-up up to the 2010 high-level meeting on the Millennium Development Goals. By helping UNICEF to sharpen its strategic focus, the review will assist UNICEF to make still more effective contributions towards achievement of the Goals. UNICEF will need to emphasize certain areas of work more strongly, focus more intently on a holistic approach to children's rights and continue to leverage its comparative strengths in working collaboratively with other United Nations organizations and partners. 3. The under-5 mortality rate has steadily declined, and progress has been accelerated by expanding basic child health interventions. These include the use of insecticide-treated mosquito nets, vaccinations -- with impressive reduction in deaths due to measles -- oral rehydration therapy for diarrhoeal diseases, micronutrients, and treatment of severe acute malnutrition. 4. Recent evaluations of the Accelerated Child Survival and Development strategy and the Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses approach have highlighted the need for better use of the available evidence on disease burden and for more adequate monitoring and evaluation in order to design high-impact interventions and to ensure that programmes are on track. 5. Despite the fall in child mortality, progress in reducing maternal and newborn deaths has been slower. It is estimated that over 3 million newborns and half a million women continue to die annually from childbirth-related causes (Goal 5). The inextricable link between the health of the mother and the health of the child has become a much more significant focus of UNICEF. Health systems must more effectively support pregnant women and children in the early days of their lives; behaviour change communication can be enhanced to improve key childcare and other practices. 6. Sixty-three countries are on track to achieve the Goals of reducing child underweight by half, compared to just 46 countries only three years ago. Nutrition is now widely recognized as integral to both health and food security. In this regard, particular attention is paid to pregnant women and children under age two whose cognitive ability will likely be permanently diminished without adequate nourishment in those formative years. Vitamin A and zinc supplementation, salt iodization and flour fortification have all been scaled up, and rates of exclusive breastfeeding have improved. 7. UNICEF strategically invested in nutrition programmes when global food prices rose, and the organization has emphasized the importance of addressing nutrition security in the context of food security. The organization significantly contributed to accelerating the use of ready-to-use therapeutic food for treatment of acute malnutrition, with purchases of the product increasing from 100 metric tons in 2003 to over 11,000 metric tons in 2008. 8. The UNICEF-initiated Unite for Children, Unite against AIDS placed the missing face of the child on the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Today, coverage of programmes for prevention of mother-to-child transmission and treatment of paediatric AIDS has dramatically increased. Despite major progress, however, access to antiretroviral treatment for HIV-infected pregnant women remains low. There has been an improvement in young people's obtaining comprehensive and correct knowledge about HIV and how to avoid transmission; however, most young people still lack this knowledge. There is an urgent need to address gender disparities in knowledge and practices as one critical dimension of vulnerability to HIV. 9. There has been steady progress towards reaching the safe drinking water target of Goal 7, but rapid acceleration is required in order to reach the sanitation target, particularly in rural areas. Community-led approaches to total sanitation have led to remarkable progress in improving practices. These approaches have been taken up by over 50 countries, although often at limited scale. 10. A large number of countries have achieved significant progress in net school enrolment and several stand a good chance of achieving universal primary education by 2015 (Goal 2). However, among the continuing concerns are the inequalities within and across regions and countries associated with gender, language, ethnicity, disability, income-poverty and geography. Retention at the primary level and transition from primary to post-primary education remain key challenges in basic education. An overarching aim is to improve the quality of education. In this regard, an evaluation of the Child-friendly School approach found that schools involved in the initiative had become more "child-centred"; showed stronger democratic participation in the management of the school; and were more inclusive. However, it was also noted that more work needs to be done to involve communities in meaningful ways. 11. The protection of children has been very high on the agenda, from violence and trafficking to early marriage, female genital cutting, and sexual exploitation. UNICEF promoted the concept of protective environments for children in communities, schools and families, and forged innovative partnerships to address sexual violence against girls and women. The latest edition of the UNICEF report Progress for Children (September 2009) provided the first comprehensive analysis of available protection data. 12. The economic downturn and humanitarian crises exacerbate vulnerabilities of children to child labour, violence and trafficking. Despite progress in implementing a systems approach to child protection, much more work needs to be done to shift towards this approach and away from a reactive and project-based response. A lack of human and financial resources for child protection continues to be a constraint. 13. The Millennium Development Goals will not be reached unless focused efforts are made to strengthen basic social services in countries with the highest burdens of child and maternal deaths and disease, and to reach the excluded, the poorest and the most vulnerable. Intensive efforts are now being exerted to reach currently unreached children in most countries. Using a human rights-based approach, UNICEF aims to contribute to reducing disparities. This emphasis is also embedded in the recommendations of the Evaluation of Gender Policy Implementation in UNICEF: Planned follow-up action (E/ICEF/2008/CRP.12). 14. Increased investments have been made in data collection, evaluation and knowledge management to better inform overall development strategies and address gaps. Evaluations are now more strategic and better integrated into programme design, and external evaluations are being commissioned to provide a better understanding of the effectiveness of key programmes. 15. An office of research is being established and knowledge management systems are being expanded. The Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS) for household data collection are now conducted every three years, instead of five, to ensure more timely information on progress against the Goals. In many countries, the survey sample size has been expanded so that subnational disparities can be analysed. 16. Along with its partners, UNICEF is helping countries implement social protection measures such as conditional cash transfers for the most vulnerable populations. With the guidance of the Executive Board, UNICEF cooperation with middle-income countries has been strengthened, with particular support given to policies and capacity development to address disparities. However, capacity constraints in some UNICEF field offices have limited the effectiveness of this engagement. These efforts will require additional resources, stronger partnerships and continued learning programmes. Strengthening support to humanitarian and post-crisis situations 17. UNICEF humanitarian work has become better coordinated and more systematic, in recognition of the need to address disaster preparedness, risk reduction and capacity development as well as response. UNICEF is an active actor in humanitarian clusters -- as leader or member. The Core Commitments for Children (CCC) in humanitarian action continue to be mainstreamed into the organization's work. UNICEF work in armed conflict includes demobilization programmes for child soldiers, and monitoring and reporting on implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions. 18. Significant investment has been made in training and in the management of rosters for the Humanitarian Clusters related to children, including those in which UNICEF plays a leadership role. However, surge deployment for major emergencies, although greatly improved, remains a significant challenge in meeting both CCC and cluster obligations. 19. In many of the countries affected by humanitarian crises or recovering from emergencies, there is a need to develop more flexible inter-agency approaches and tools taking into account capacity gaps and the transition from humanitarian to development contexts. Emphasis on management efficiency 20. UNICEF has strengthened accountability mechanisms. Audit compliance has improved, an office of investigation has been established, and an ethics officer has been appointed. Good progress has been made in preparing for VISION-One ERP (Virtual Integrated System of Information-One Enterprise Resource Planning) and the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS). 21. Significant improvements have been made in a range of human resource practices. A new E-recruitment system has just been implemented. An assessment programme for both incoming and existing UNICEF representatives has been established. UNICEF has also increased resources and programmes for staff development. These efforts have emphasized better training in the area of policy and advocacy, an improved induction programme for new representatives, and furthering of the leadership development initiative to identify high-potential mid-management staff. The New and Emerging Talent Initiative was started two years ago to bring bright new talent with leadership potential into the organization. 22. UNICEF business processes, many of which are cited by both staff and partners as being too burdensome, are being streamlined and made more user-friendly. Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have welcomed the recently concluded simplification of the cooperation agreement and guidelines for partnerships. 23. For the last two years, an all-staff survey has been independently conducted with the strong support of the staff association. The results each year showed that 93 per cent of UNICEF staff members are proud to work for the organization. Emphasis on partnerships 24. Collaborative approaches have been critical in changing the way UNICEF works. The organization has strongly supported United Nations system-wide coherence and partnerships with United Nations agencies and the World Bank in areas such as health, education, protection and humanitarian assistance. The MTSP has been aligned with the plan cycles of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and with the cycle of the Comprehensive Policy Review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system. 25. Since 2007 UNICEF has undertaken various studies on the strengths and weaknesses of its approach to civil society partnerships. These culminated in the development of the UNICEF Strategic Framework for Partnerships and Collaborative Relationships (E/ICEF/2009/10), which the Executive Board approved in 2009. Building on this framework, the principles of partnership found immediate application in the revision of the programme cooperation agreements. This has simplified a number of administrative procedures for civil society partnerships while emphasizing the principles of mutual accountability and shared results. 26. Global programme partnerships (GPP) have long been part of the development architecture, although their recent expansion in number and scope is unprecedented. A 2009 UNICEF study on UNICEF engagement in global programme partnerships recognized the contribution of GPP to development. The study concluded that the GPP needed to systematically support country ownership, align and harmonize their assistance, and make good use of mutual accountability frameworks, while continuing their emphasis on achieving results. A. Focus area 1: Young child survival and development Overview 27. There is continuing progress on reducing mortality in children under the age of 5. In 1990, an estimated 12.5 million children died before their fifth birthday; by 2008, this figure had been reduced to 8.8 million, the lowest number on record. Despite the fall in child mortality, progress in reducing maternal and newborn deaths has been slower. It is estimated that over 3 million newborns die annually, while half a million women continue to die annually from childbirth-related causes. A high proportion of infants surviving a maternal death will die within the first year of life. 28. The coverage of childhood immunization has continued to increase: the global immunization rate for DPT 3 was 82 per cent in 2008, up from 81 per cent in 2007, but is likely to miss the target of 90 per cent by 2010. Encouraging signs of progress are noted in malaria control, with data from 26 sub-Saharan countries showing that, between 2000 and 2008, insecticide-treated nets coverage among children increased at least threefold in 23 countries. However, malaria treatment showed little or no expansion during the same period. Moreover, little or no progress has been seen in expanding treatment coverage for pneumonia and diarrhoea in Africa since 2000. 29. Integrated campaigns, including supplementary immunization activities (24 countries in 2008) and child health days and weeks (34 countries in 2008) have proven to be very effective. For example, two-dose vitamin A supplementation coverage among least developed countries increased from 41 percent in 2000 to 88 per cent in 2008, well above the target (80 per cent). 30. A common feature of the interventions that have been scaled up significantly is that they could be delivered through episodic outreach or campaigns, building on the backbone of the childhood immunization or antenatal care platforms. UNICEF has supported increased coverage of these and other interventions while improving their articulation with efforts to strengthen the health system. However, it is clear that these episodic, primarily preventive, interventions alone are inadequate to further reduce child mortality. A recent evaluation of Accelerated Child Survival and Development demonstrated less success over the three-to-four-year study period for curative interventions, such as anti-diarrhoeal, malaria and pneumonia treatment, which require ongoing access to services. Community-based treatment provides an option for rapidly increasing coverage with effective interventions for these common childhood illnesses. UNICEF is undertaking a number of steps to strengthen community-based care, many of which relate to the need for more and better-trained human resources and better management of existing resources. In partnership with the World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF has produced clear policy guidelines on expanding coverage of community-based treatment of malaria, diarrhoea and pneumonia, and has been working with partners to ensure that these interventions are included in national plans and strategies for child survival. More than 45 countries in Africa and Asia have now adopted policies enabling community workers to provide care for at least one of these three conditions. Implementation of these programmes is a key priority. 31. Chronic nutritional deficiency, as reflected by stunted growth among children under the age of 5 in developing countries, has declined from 40 per cent in 1990 to 29 per cent in 2008. Marked reductions in chronic undernutrition can be achieved through improvements in women's nutrition before and after pregnancy, early and exclusive breastfeeding, good-quality complementary feeding for infants and young children with appropriate micronutrient interventions, combined with the prevention and rapid treatment of infectious diseases. However, progress in the area of infant and young child feeding has been modest. The exclusive breastfeeding rate in developing countries has increased from 33 per cent in 1995 to only 37 per cent around 2008. Rapid improvement has been achieved in the approximately 16 countries that have effectively implemented a combination of sound policies, legislative enforcement and community-based support for breastfeeding. Nutrition security is increasingly part of discussions on food security, livelihoods, social protection and the move to increase investments in agriculture. There is also greater alignment among the concerned United Nations agencies through the United Nations Standing Committee on Nutrition. 32. Current trends suggest that 91 per cent of the global population will use improved drinking water sources by 2015. However, at the global level, there is recognition that much of the development assistance for water supply and sanitation has not been sufficiently targeted to the countries and areas that are making the least progress towards the MDG targets. Significant disparities between regions, countries and local areas remain: in 2008, 743 million people in rural areas and 141 million in urban areas lacked access to an improved drinking water supply. In 2008, 55 per cent of the world's rural population and 24 per cent of the urban population lacked access to improved sanitation. 33. Progress towards the health-related Goals is impeded by inefficient use of resources, unbalanced funding of different services, and fragmented funding flows. As a response, the High Level Taskforce on Innovative International Financing for Health Systems has emphasized the importance of investing in health and also created the potential for new funding sources. Furthermore, the efforts of the Health Eight (H8) forum -- referred to as the International Partnership for Health -- have led to increasingly coordinated approaches to advocacy with G8 leadership, for leveraging resources and providing support to programme countries. UNICEF, WHO and other partners will support countries to access these funds and to implement activities effectively. 34. New technologies offer promise both in terms of reduction of certain disease burdens and in implementation and scaling-up of programmes. New vaccines, such as rotavirus and pneumococcal vaccines, if administered comprehensively in the countries with highest burdens of disease, will contribute to a reduction in deaths and illnesses due to diarrhoea and pneumonia when combined with other preventive, protective and treatment strategies. Ready-to-use therapeutic foods and micronutrient powders for home food fortification offer effective ways of combating severe malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies. Summary of achievements and constraints in 2009 of each key result area 1. Key result area 1: Support national capacity to achieve Goal 1 by improving child nutrition through improved practices and enhanced access to commodities and services. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $56.3 million 35. UNICEF and its partners helped to raise the priority of child nutrition within the national development agenda in several countries in 2009. In Sri Lanka, for example, the Government launched a comprehensive integrated nutrition programme; in Rwanda, UNICEF supported the first-ever national nutrition summit. New national nutrition strategies and plans were finalized by several countries in 2009. 36. An estimated 47 per cent of programme countries now have national plans or the equivalent that include targets for scaling up improved family and community care practices for mothers and children. Some 39 per cent of countries have conducted a gender analysis to identify challenges in family and community care practices. In both these areas, there has been a steady improvement during the MTSP period, with the most significant improvement occurring in 2009. 37. Community-based child nutrition programmes expanded in 2009, covering wider areas and reaching more children, notably in Ethiopia and Madagascar. The success in reaching and treating malnourished children in Malawi is attributed largely to new community-based management protocols. Elsewhere, UNICEF-sponsored surveys and partnerships with community and religious leaders helped to improve planning and awareness in support of such programmes. 38. Mobile telephone-based child malnutrition monitoring and mapping initiatives are helping to improve reporting in several countries, including Mauritania and Senegal. In response to continuing high food prices in many countries, UNICEF stepped up efforts to monitor prices, analyse underlying causes and assess impacts on children. 39. Several countries reported advances in food and condiment fortification efforts in 2009, including through the adoption of the new standards for iron fortification of flour. Use of Sprinkles home-based micronutrient supplementation expanded in 2009, with pilot projects launched in several countries in Asia and elsewhere. By 2009, 58 countries had adopted legislation or decrees mandating flour fortification with at least iron or folic acid, up from 33 in 2003. Flour produced in these countries, in addition to flour fortified voluntarily, now represents 30 per cent of wheat flour produced in large roller mills, providing potential access to nearly 2 billion people. UNICEF continues to provide policy and technical support for national programme design, while partners such as the Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition (GAIN), the Micronutrient Initiative and the Flour Fortification Initiative support implementation. 40. Improvements in the policy environments for universal salt iodization were reported in several countries in 2009, including Pakistan and the Russian Federation. In 2009, more than 90 per cent of households in 36 countries used iodized salt, compared to 21 countries in 2002. Overall, 72 per cent of households consumed adequately iodized salt. UNICEF is working with GAIN to accelerate efforts in 13 key countries and to overcome barriers such as lack of comprehensive salt iodization laws, poor quality control, low awareness and challenges facing small-scale producers. 2. Key result area 2: Support national capacity to achieve Goals 4 and 5 through increased coverage of integrated packages of services, improved practices and an enhanced policy environment. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $754.9 million 41. An increasing number of UNICEF country offices are promoting the Reach Every District (RED) strategy to reduce disparities in immunization coverage. In 2009, UNICEF procured 2.96 billion doses of vaccines on behalf of 88 countries, along with 360 million auto-disable syringes. Some 176 million children in 57 countries were reached through measles campaigns in 2008 and 2009. Improvements in coverage were partly driven by UNICEF and partners by using a strategy of integrated campaigns through supplementary immunization activities or through child health days and weeks. 42. Turkey achieved certification for the elimination of maternal and neonatal tetanus (MNT) in 2009, the 13th country to eliminate MNT since 2000, with 45 countries still remaining. Support was provided to 19 countries to implement high-quality campaigns and assess progress towards elimination. Supplementary tetanus toxoid vaccination campaigns were held in 30 countries, reaching more than 50 million women of reproductive age in the highest-risk districts. In 2008, 81 per cent of infants were protected at birth against tetanus. 43. UNICEF remains a core partner of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, supplying 2 billion doses of oral polio vaccine in 2009 and intensifying support to the communications component. In 2009, the number of confirmed wild polio virus cases was 1,606, down slightly from 1,651 in 2008, with 78 per cent of cases in the four remaining endemic countries: Afghanistan, India, Nigeria and Pakistan. Four countries were classified as having re-established polio transmission. These countries have been given equal priority to the endemic countries. 44. UNICEF is playing a major role in introducing new vaccines to protect the lives of children. Particular attention was given to the challenge of cold-chain capacity posed by new vaccine formulations, which require far greater volumes of storage and transport. Globally, 162 countries had introduced haemophillus influenzae type B (Hib) vaccine by the end of 2009, but only 2 of the countries supported by the GAVI Alliance had introduced pneumococcal conjugate vaccine. In 2009, rotavirus vaccine was recommended for universal use, with priority given to countries with high diarrhoea mortality. 45. Further progress was achieved in scaling-up programmes for the management of severe acute malnutrition in 2009. In response to a global shortage of ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) at the end of 2008, which affected implementation in a number of countries, solutions, such as improved forecasting, stock prepositioning and shifting production capacity closer to the final users, have been initiated, avoiding a global shortage in 2009. Total RUTF procured by UNICEF rose from 2,500 MT in 2006 to 8,000 MT in 2009. UNICEF support helped expand community-based and outreach therapeutic feeding programmes in several countries, including Afghanistan and Ethiopia, in 2009. 46. In June 2009, WHO declared the influenza A (H1N1) virus a pandemic. UNICEF continued to support national communications to reduce the spread of the virus and its impact. UNICEF worked with WHO and UNESCO on guidelines to reduce the spread of the virus in schools and avoid school closures. In some countries, the pandemic provided an opportunity to improve community management of pneumonia, the main cause of death from influenza. 47. Collaboration with WHO also resulted in several important jointly produced technical guidance and advocacy materials: "Diarrhoea: Why children are still dying and what can be done"; "Home visits for the newborn child: a strategy to improve survival"; and "Global action plan for the prevention and control of pneumonia". Zinc was officially recommended by UNICEF and WHO for diarrhoea treatment in 2004; by 2009, 54 countries had explicit national policies that promoted the use of zinc in treating childhood diarrhoea. 48. UNICEF continued to provide technical support to develop evidence-based plans, budgets and investment cases -- using "Marginal Budgeting for Bottlenecks" (MBB) as a results-based planning budgeting tool -- for improving maternal, newborn and child health, working with 15 African and Asian Governments in 2009. A regional investment case was produced with the Asian Development Bank through the Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health; a similar initiative in Africa is in progress. 49. In 2009, UNICEF distributed over 574 million vitamin A capsules in 74 countries. While countries like Bangladesh and Philippines will soon procure their own vitamin A, the number of countries financing such programmes from national budgets remains low. More than 70 countries now have national legislation or regulatory provisions in force to protect breastfeeding based on the International Code on the Marketing of Breast Milk Substitutes. UNICEF is intensifying support through "communication for development" to national programmes and communities in an effort to strengthen exclusive breastfeeding of infants. 50. Global Handwashing Day provides a major opportunity to draw national attention to the importance of handwashing with soap and to leverage this into policy and programme design. The success of the initial Day in 2008 was repeated in 2009, with over 200 million children and 600,000 schools participating. UNICEF provided support with information packs and web-based planning seminars. 51. Household water treatment and safe storage (HWTS) provide effective means of improving water quality and preventing disease. Data on HWTS practices from 67 countries showed that an estimated 33 per cent of households reported treating drinking water at home. Despite lower coverage of improved water sources, rural households, especially in Africa, are less likely to practice HWTS or use microbiologically adequate methods. Given this need, UNICEF has made HWTS a programme priority. HWTS is also a key strategy in the ongoing global effort for dracunculiasis eradication, where the number of cases had been reduced to 3,000 in 4 countries by late 2009. 52. UNICEF remained a key member of the Roll Back Malaria partnership and the largest provider of insecticide-treated nets (ITN), procuring nearly 43 million ITNs for 49 countries in 2009, a 62 per cent increase over 2008. The vast majority of these nets were distributed through routine antenatal care, immunization services and child health days. UNICEF also procured over 8.25 million malaria rapid diagnostic test kits globally in 2009. UNICEF and its Roll Back Malaria partners are directly contributing to significant declines in case prevalence (e.g. a 50 per cent reduction in Liberia from 2005 to 2008) and mortality rates (e.g. a 65 per cent reduction in deaths in Sudan). New partnerships have also been entered with WHO and the Office of the United Nations Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Malaria, leading to initiatives aimed at ensuring that malaria will cease to be a public health problem by 2015. 3. Key result area 3: Support national capacity to achieve Goal 7 (Target 7 C) by increasing access to and sustainable use of improved water sources and sanitation facilities. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $262.9 million 53. UNICEF supported water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) activities in a total of 99 countries in 2009, compared to 95 in 2005, including in 57 of 60 priority countries. In line with the UNICEF water, sanitation and hygiene strategies for 2006-2015, programmes continue to address the development of national capacities and policy environment, together with appropriate support to the implementation of water supply and sanitation programmes. 54. In a significant positive trend, the number of countries in which medium-term budgets or expenditure frameworks include discrete budget lines for sanitation and hygiene has increased to 71, representing some 53 per cent of programme countries. 55. Sanitation and Water for All (SWA), an alliance of developing countries, donors, development banks, United Nations agencies and civil society organizations, aims to leverage development and national budgets for WASH results; it gained momentum during 2009. UNICEF provides secretariat services to SWA and will host the first high-level meeting of ministers of finance and development cooperation on this issue. 56. The adoption of community-led approaches to total sanitation, in over 50 countries in Africa and Asia, has been impressive. UNICEF has strongly supported Governments, NGOs and communities to introduce this approach and build the capacity to make it a self-sustaining sanitation movement. 57. UNICEF has worked in partnership with the Rural Water Supply Network and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) to develop strategies for more cost-effective boreholes, including improving the environment for private-sector operations. This initiative has included the development of low-cost manual drilling techniques, which are more readily taken up by local entrepreneurs and can rapidly expand water access in areas with suitable hydrogeology. 58. UNICEF has been a leader in hand pump development and supply for many years. However the earlier approach, whereby UNICEF managed the full procurement process while providing short-term costs-savings, did not support the development of sustainable country procurement mechanisms. A study of the African hand pump market, carried out in 2009, has shown the potential for procuring through the local market. This approach is now being pursued, and is expected to address the bottlenecks in the supply, operation and maintenance of hand pumps. 4. Key result area 4: In declared emergencies, every child is covered with life-saving interventions, in accordance with the UNICEF Core Commitments for Children (CCCs). Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $229.5 million 59. As part of the cluster approach of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC), UNICEF continued its role as the lead agency for the global nutrition cluster (GNC), providing direct sustained support to at least 10 countries undertaking emergency operations in 2009. Based on the recognition that a major constraint to ensuring an effective, timely and predictable nutrition response in emergency situations was the lack of readily deployable qualified candidates, the GNC identified and trained 27 candidates who can be deployed expeditiously to act as National Cluster Coordinators for future emergencies. UNICEF worked with the cluster to assess and disseminate tools for global management of acute malnutrition in children. 60. UNICEF also continued its role as the leader of the IASC WASH cluster. Initiatives included training on cluster coordination, hygiene promotion, information management and subjects such as latrine construction and household water treatment. The Global WASH Cluster Rapid Response Team, continually in demand throughout 2009, was evaluated as a valuable contributor to the WASH response capacity by donors and cluster stakeholders. 61. UNICEF continued to participate as a strong partner in the global health cluster (GHC) led by WHO. UNICEF has supported the development of tools to improve country-level response, including for initial rapid assessment, gap identification, stakeholder mapping and a health cluster strategy and advocacy plan. UNICEF was also engaged in the Health and Nutrition Tracking Service, established to validate nutrition and mortality data from countries affected by humanitarian emergencies. 62. During 2009, UNICEF health-related emergency response included the following results in provision: (a) an estimated 2,900 emergency health kits to 28 countries; (b) 14.5 million doses of meningitis vaccine to 6 countries; and (c) 122 million doses of measles vaccine to emergency-affected countries. UNICEF field office estimates indicate that specific emergency interventions in 2009 reached a large number of beneficiaries: (a) 17.3 million from health interventions (in 39 reporting countries); (b) 6.5 million from WASH interventions (41 countries); and (c) 775,000 from early childhood development (ECD) interventions (21 countries). An ECD kit was launched in 2009 and is already being used in 45 countries as a tool to restore "normalcy" for young children in emergency contexts and post-crisis settings. Lessons learned and future directions 63. Data show marked inequalities between the richest and poorest population groups in outcomes and coverage for young child survival and development. The unfinished child survival and development agenda remains valid, not only in the least developed countries, but also in many areas within middle-income countries. 64. Recent evaluations of the Accelerated Child Survival and Development strategy and the Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses approach have highlighted the following shortfalls: (a) Insufficient use of disease-burden evidence to design high-impact interventions; (b) Poor alignment of funds with disease-burden priorities; (c) Inadequate monitoring, evaluation and use of existing data; (d) Ineffectiveness of applying generic models that fail to use local evidence to address the major bottlenecks; (e) Poorly trained and undersupplied health workers; (f) Constraints on supply chain management and capacity; (g) Lack of policies for community based workers. 65. Building upon the lessons learned, focusing on scaling-up and accelerating actions will require UNICEF-supported capacity and approaches at the country level for a number of efforts: (a) Perform in-depth analysis of each context, including the burden of disease and undernutrition, patterns of health-care-seeking behaviours and quality of care in families; (b) Set differentiated outcome and coverage targets for different groups; (c) Ensure that interventions match the patterns and causes of disease and under-nutrition; (d) Adopt an appropriate mix of programme strategies and delivery mechanisms; (e) Ensure interlinkages and coordination of approach among agencies; (f) Evaluate the effect of interventions, by establishing baselines and through repeated follow-up assessments. 66. The period since the 2008 midterm review of the MTSP, has seen an increase in emphasis on improving nutrition that now promises to be sustained, not only within UNICEF, but also among the international development community. This is due to a number of reasons: a strengthened and well-articulated evidence base, improved advocacy on the cost-effectiveness of nutrition interventions (Copenhagen Consensus, 2008), and a sharp increase in food prices. With significant input from UNICEF, the United Nations Standing Committee on Nutrition was reoriented in 2009 to enable a more prominent role of the United Nations in nutrition. 67. Efforts will continue to focus on accelerating action in addressing the major killers of children -- pneumonia, diarrhoea, malaria, measles and HIV/AIDS. The implementation of the multisector strategy for pneumonia and diarrhoeal disease control will be prioritized in countries where the disease burdens are high. Increased attention will be on accelerating progress in nutrition and sanitation, particularly in high-burden countries. In addition, there will be a clearer articulation of advocacy and policy-related work in nutrition in relation to livelihoods, food security and disaster-risk reduction strategies. 68. Following the midterm review of the MTSP, there has been a stronger integration of water, sanitation and hygiene promotion in the child survival agenda. Progress made in sanitation, handwashing and household water treatment and safe storage will be consolidated, with the emphasis shifting to sustaining the related behavioural practices, including more integrated approaches to the prevention and treatment of diarrhoeal diseases. Engagement with the private sector will be increased, to ensure market availability of a range of sanitation and hygiene products. In water supply, emphasis will be on reducing the costs of interventions and in promoting sustainability. 69. UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO and the World Bank will continue the joint programme to accelerate progress on reducing maternal and neonatal mortality and morbidity, giving greatest emphasis to operationalizing support to the six countries with the highest burden of maternal deaths. 70. UNICEF will focus on building national capacities for using key epidemiological/impact modelling tools, such as the Lives Saved Tool; disseminating the bottleneck analysis approach for designing programme strategies; improving the use of national databases and building capacity to conduct high-quality monitoring activities and evaluations. Given the clear vulnerabilities associated with climate change, urbanization and migration, stronger analyses will be required to inform and adjust programming strategies. Disaster-risk reduction strategies will also be integrated into programming for young child survival and development. 71. Across focus area 1, a more strategic approach is being employed to partnerships. UNICEF will aim to leverage policies, resources and action to close the critical gaps in financing and national systems strengthening as well as the areas of interventions, knowledge and innovations needed to advance progress towards the relevant MDGs. Wider partnerships will be sought for expanding social mobilization, communication for development and the scaling-up of community-based interventions. B. Focus area 2: Basic education and gender equality 72. It is widely accepted that failure to deliver on Goals 2 and 3 will compromise the ability to reach the other MDGs. Since the adoption of Education for All (EFA) in 1990, much progress has been made in education across the globe -- for example, the number of children out of school has dropped by 33 million worldwide. The proportion of girls out of school has also decreased, to around 54 per cent, and in most countries gender parity in enrolment is on track. However, disparities at national and subnational levels remain wide. This is compounded by specific external threats to children, including the impact of HIV and AIDS. Progress in education has also been hampered, and in some instances reversed, by the increasing number and mounting scale of emergencies in all regions. Some 65 per cent of out-of-school children live in 33 conflict-affected countries. 73. Gaps in the provision of quality education also remain a challenge to many countries. Dilapidated classrooms, unavailable or outdated textbooks and enormous shortages of teachers -- with many countries needing to expand the pool by 6 to 10 per cent annually -- continue to hamper education systems. Teachers still suffer from lack of adequate training and poor service conditions. Furthermore, the limited number of systemic learning assessments clearly indicates that many children are not achieving even basic literacy and numeracy. 74. The data on children out of school are largely quantitative, with limited information available on the local factors that result in some children being excluded. In partnership with UNESCO, UNICEF is launching a new global initiative on out-of-school children that will strengthen data collection and analysis and expand the knowledge base on disparities. UNICEF support to countries in addressing gender-based and other disparities in education includes the School Fee Abolition Initiative (SFAI) and the United Nations Girls' Education Initiative (UNGEI) partnership, which remains the principal global mechanism and platform for addressing gender disparities. In collaboration with partners, priority will be accorded to reaching the most marginalized children and communities. 75. The main UNICEF strategy for quality education has been the child-friendly schools (CFS) initiative, which provides the basis for a holistic approach to equity and quality of education, as it addresses, among other things, inclusion, child-centeredness and participation, with particular emphasis on intersectoral interventions. Additional emphasis will now be placed on adolescent learning, given the current and future demographic trends in many countries and regions. 76. Strategies to improve quality have not been matched with effective ways of measuring learning outcomes. This is an area where the international community, including UNICEF, need to offer stronger support to countries. UNICEF will continue to be involved in global efforts, particularly with an equity focus, to ensure that community-level approaches focus on the relevance of learning outcomes to children's lives. 77. A better understanding of what constitutes effective interventions with regard to sexuality and HIV education programmes, and how to improve them, has been achieved through evaluation of programme effectiveness as well as inter-agency guidance on comprehensive education sector and cluster responses. 78. Education has become a part of the first response in emergencies. Efforts to restore learning include the use of improved emergency education supply packages. Non-formal accelerated learning programmes have been used, often at local levels, to address educational needs among those who are at risk of becoming a "lost generation" in post-crisis contexts. Progress has also been made in strengthening overall emergency preparedness, drawing on broader partnerships, including the country-level education clusters. Disaster-risk-reduction strategies are being implemented in a growing number of countries. Improved school design, construction, facilities and amenities are key aspects of the CFS model, within the overall efforts to strengthen disaster risk management in education. This includes UNICEF efforts to support the inclusion of environmental education into school curricula. Several countries address conflict risk reduction through peace education programmes. 79. Efforts are being made in rebuilding education systems in post-crisis contexts in many countries, including support to education management information systems; curriculum reform; systems for teacher capacity development; payroll and other financial management systems; and other contributions to policy reform and sector development. 1. Key result area 1: Support national capacity to improve children's developmental readiness to start primary school on time, especially for marginalized children. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $52.3 million 80. UNICEF efforts to improve participation in education also include school-readiness strategies with development of ECD policy frameworks and standards. UNICEF provided support to revise or develop new national ECD policies in 23 countries in 2009. These are being translated into a range of school-readiness initiatives, including the preparation of early childhood educators, school-readiness monitoring and parental education. Some 43 countries have adopted the UNICEF-led Early Learning and Development Standards (ELDS) approach, which provides quality standards to monitor school and developmental readiness of young children. 81. The "Getting Ready for School: A Child-to-Child Approach" pilot in six countries was recently evaluated. Based on the evaluation, these countries are putting plans in place to integrate school-readiness policies and practices within the national education systems. The number of programme countries that have a national policy on universal school-readiness increased from 50 in 2005 to 61 in 2009. Some 51 countries have adopted national standards and assessment tools. The efforts of UNICEF and its partners to strengthen national capacity, coupled with direct support for interventions in focus districts, has resulted in substantial increases in enrolment in early learning centres in several countries, including Ethiopia, Nepal and Uganda. 2. Key result area 2: Support national capacity to reduce gender and other disparities in relation to increased access and completion of quality basic education. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $123.7 million 82. Through the School Fee Abolition Initiative, UNICEF has strengthened policy dialogue on the financial barriers to education and furthered school fee abolition as a key strategy for accelerating access and reducing disparities within national education-sector reforms. UNICEF is also promoting the mainstreaming of pilot initiatives that address disparities in access to education for ethnic minorities, orphans and vulnerable children, and the children of nomads and internally displaced persons. 83. UNICEF continued to support major initiatives for reducing gender and other disparities, including bilingual and intercultural education, and measures to reduce gender-based violence and bullying in school, complementary education provision and accelerated learning programmes, as well as the extension of non-formal activities. The UNGEI-led the development of an equity and inclusion tool for the Fast Track Initiative (FTI) in national plans. This was field-tested, and will be rolled out in 2010. The vast majority (84 per cent) of programme countries now have national education plans that include measures to reduce other disparities, such as poverty, ethnicity and disability, up from 58 per cent in 2005. 84. In the ten years since it has been launched, UNGEI has brought gender issues, particularly girls' education, to the top of the agenda of policymakers. 3. Key result area 3: Support national capacity to improve educational quality and increase school retention, completion and achievement rates. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $311.2 million 85. More than half of the education programme assistance in 2009 focused on improving the quality of education. CFS principles were incorporated into policies in the world's two most populous countries in 2009. In China, several years of pilot testing and advocacy supported the decision by the Ministry of Education to carry out a phased expansion of CFS to all schools in pilot counties, followed by pilot provinces and then gradually across the entire country. In India, all or major elements of the CFS systems framework were integrated into quality improvement plans in 15 states. India also passed the landmark Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act in 2009. 86. UNICEF intensified its support to the adoption and scaling-up of child-friendly school approaches. Capacity development activities were supported in 63 countries. The CFS manual was expanded to include modules on climate change and environmental education, WASH in schools, and education management information systems. 87. In 2009, UNICEF and its partners advocated for and supported "WASH in Schools" activities in 88 countries, which directly supported the construction of safe and private washing and sanitation facilities, improved drinking water, and hygiene education. A joint WHO/UNICEF guideline on minimum standards for WASH in Schools for low-cost settings was developed and disseminated to support the implementation of national policies. 4. Key result area 4: Restore education after emergencies and in post-crisis situations. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $112.5 million 88. With the number and scale of emergencies increasing across all regions, the need for effective transitions between development, emergency and post-crisis situations has become common. In response, UNICEF, in collaboration with its cluster co-lead Save the Children, and other partners, has strengthened education cluster capacities at all levels. UNICEF further contributed to improving coordination for a timely and effective response through its cluster leadership role in 36 countries in 2009. Training in emergency preparedness and response was provided for 30 cluster coordinators and over 1,500 government and partner staff. Cluster coordinators were deployed to major emergencies, and a needs assessment toolkit developed and piloted. An estimated 5.4 million children in 41 countries were reached in 2009 through emergency interventions in education. 89. UNICEF contributed to increased enrolment in emergency and post-emergency countries through support to comprehensive back-to-school programmes, including in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sudan, Uganda, and Afghanistan, where enrolment rates of girls and boys continue to rise despite the ongoing conflict. In West and Central Africa, there is an increasing attention to integrating HIV and AIDS in education initiatives. In the Americas and Eastern Europe, UNICEF continues to support sector activities aimed at prevention and mitigation of HIV, and has also stepped up its support to national preparedness efforts through strategic pre-positioning of essential education supplies. 90. It has become increasing apparent that, to ensure the achievement of MDG 2, it is important to address the needs of the whole life cycle of children's education -- including the transitions between all levels of education. In the context of demographic change, post-primary education, secondary education, and alternative opportunities for adolescents will be addressed more fully with Education for All (EFA) partners in the context of Dakar+10. Meanwhile, UNICEF has begun to review wider options for reaching children who remain out of school, including strategies for equivalent certification. UNICEF will strengthen its analysis and focus on transition points, especially as they affect marginalized children. 91. Early childhood development programmes are generally underprioritized in terms of budget allocation and staffing, and often do not reach the poorest and most disadvantaged children. UNICEF will further promote sufficient resourcing for early childhood education in national sector plans. 92. The objectives and principles of CFS are increasingly being mainstreamed at the policy level by Governments, and have been linked to partner efforts to increase the quality of education. UNICEF will strengthen country capacities to scale up child-friendly schooling, with particular emphasis on teachers. 93. In emergency contexts, a challenge for UNICEF and partners is to ensure a well-coordinated cluster approach to emergency preparedness and response, on the basis of jointly identified needs. A related challenge is to ensure greater investment in joint preparedness and contingency planning, in particular through capacity development at national and subnational levels. Accordingly, UNICEF will fast-track the lessons that have been learned in crisis situations into wider programming. 94. There continues to be a significant gap between policy and implementation in various country contexts. UNICEF will focus on documenting and sharing lessons learned related to the synchronization of community-level experience with policy directives, and will prioritize support to strengthening national capacity for implementation. In partnership with UNESCO, support will be provided for improved data collection, costing and analysis, for targeting as well as for scaling-up demand and supply-side interventions. 95. UNICEF will invest more strategically in the four key strategic partnerships for education (UNGEI, EFA, FTI and IASC) and link these to United Nations coherence initiatives in order to strengthen country-level harmonization processes, build capacities and engage in scaling-up efforts. UNICEF will also advocate for more predictable and sustained funding for basic education. C. Focus area 3: HIV/AIDS and children 96. Globally, there were 430,000 new infections among children under the age of 15 in 2008; over 4.9 million young people aged 15-24 years are living with HIV. Girls are particularly vulnerable to HIV, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, where girls' infection rates can be 4.5 times that of boys. Prevalence continues to increase in the Eastern Europe/Central Asia region, as well as in other parts of Asia, due to high rates of new HIV infections among young people practicing high-risk behaviours. It is estimated that, in the region, 35 per cent of women living with HIV were infected through the use of contaminated injecting drug equipment. 97. Four years into the global initiative Unite for Children, Unite against AIDS, a generation of children free from AIDS is now possible, and good examples of global commitments to achieving Unite for Children goals have emerged. The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria has authorized a review of portfolios to increase support for more efficacious regimens for prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT), and children and families are central to the nine priority areas of the UNAIDS Outcome Framework. 98. The economic slowdown, however, is affecting whether or not newly diagnosed individuals are started or maintained on antiretroviral treatment (ART); this is likely to have a negative impact on mothers and children who are newly identified as HIV-positive. Furthermore, prevention expenditures are likely to decline, especially for marginalized populations, including adolescents who practice high-risk behaviours. To mitigate the potential effects of the downturn, the International Health Partnership (IHP+), the Global Fund, and the World Bank will, in the next biennium, focus their efforts on health systems strengthening, to scale up efficient and effective AIDS responses that affect achievement of Goals 4, 5 and 6. 99. Between 2008 and 2009, there were significant achievements in the areas of PMTCT and paediatric treatment. By the end of 2008, antiretroviral (ARV) regimens for PMTCT were reaching 45 per cent of HIV-positive pregnant women, up from 35 per cent in 2007. Some 19 countries reported coverage rates exceeding 80 per cent for HIV testing and counselling among pregnant women. 100. The number of children initiated on ART has increased significantly over the past few years. While only 75,000 infected children under the age of 15 were receiving ART in 2005, the number had reached about 275,000 by the end of 2008, or 38 per cent of the total of 730,000 children living with HIV and in need of treatment. Initiation of co-trimoxazole prophylaxis within two months of birth for HIV-exposed children increased, from an estimated 4 per cent in 2007 to 8 per cent at the end of 2008. The low coverage highlights the difficulties in identifying the children in need of intervention at clinics and the poor follow-up for these children. 101. The Global Partners Forum in 2008 endorsed social protection as a priority for the protection, care and support of children affected by AIDS. This was followed by a UNICEF-led statement, Advancing Child-Sensitive Social Protection, in 2009 that has helped to mobilize partner support for this approach. Growing evidence, including from the UNICEF-funded Joint Learning Initiative on Children and AIDS, demonstrates that social protection is a key intervention for reaching children affected by AIDS in resource-scarce and high-HIV-prevalence contexts. 102. Faith-based and community organizations are playing a critical role in supporting children affected by HIV and AIDS, but their work is often isolated from government policy and public services, and remains at a small scale. Ensuring increased and predictable support that reaches families, caregivers and children affected by AIDS is a key challenge. Out of 22 countries with survey data available between 2005 and 2008, a median of only 12 per cent of households caring for orphans and vulnerable children were receiving any kind of external support. 1. Key result area 1: Reduce the number of paediatric HIV infections; increase the proportion of HIV-positive women receiving antiretroviral drugs; increase the proportion of children receiving treatment for HIV and AIDS. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $50.2 million 103. UNICEF support to PMTCT and paediatric HIV-reduction programmes continued to expand, to a total of 111 countries, up from 90 in 2005. Overall, in 2008, some 45 per cent of pregnant women living with HIV in low- and middle-income countries received ARV regimens for PMTCT, including ART for their own health, compared with 24 per cent in 2006. An estimated 21 per cent of pregnant women living in these countries were tested for HIV in 2008, compared with 13 per cent in 2006. On average in low- and middle-income countries, 32 per cent of infants born to HIV-positive mothers were given ARV prophylaxis for PMTCT at birth in 2008, up from 20 per cent in 2007 and 18 per cent in 2006. 104. The potential for engaging men through PMTCT services is substantial, as demonstrated in Rwanda, where couples testing grew to over 90 per cent in some facilities in 2008, accompanying an overall increase in HIV-testing coverage among pregnant women. 105. Strong national health systems are crucial for speeding up the integration of HIV prevention and treatment services for women and children within maternal, newborn and child health, sexual and reproductive health, and family planning services, as is the promotion of community participation. UNICEF sponsors a wide range of research initiatives geared towards improving the quality of HIV prevention programmes, including comprehensive assessments of national PMTCT systems and communication campaign impact studies. 106. The Laos Sul-Sul initiative, a South-South cooperation agreement on HIV and AIDS between Brazil and seven other countries, continues to show results, such as paediatric infection rates dropping tenfold in Paraguay between 2005 and 2008. These results are mainly attributed to an increase in the availability of mother-to-child transmission prophylaxis. 2. Key result area 2: Support national capacity to increase the proportion of children orphaned or made vulnerable by HIV and AIDS receiving quality family, community and government support. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $52.0 million 107. UNICEF is the co-chair of the UNAIDS outcome areas on social protection and the chair of the inter-agency task team (IATT) on children affected by AIDS; these bodies provide leadership on integrating the HIV response into a nationally defined social protection and/or welfare response. The IATT supported the Joint Learning Initiative on Children and AIDS, which aims to produce evaluations and other evidence to demonstrate that in situations of widespread poverty and conflict, helping all vulnerable children is a cost-effective and non-stigmatizing strategy. Recent research also revealed that cash transfers to poor families affected by AIDS have the potential to improve nutrition, thereby slowing the progression of AIDS and improving the effectiveness of ART. 108. In 2009, UNICEF and IATT partners published a guidance document on developing monitoring and evaluation systems for the national response for orphans and vulnerable children as part of broader social protection responses. The Better Care Network and UNICEF finalized a manual on the measurement of indicators for children in residential care. 109. National cash transfer programmes for caretakers of orphans and vulnerable children are expanding in eastern and southern Africa, due in part to UNICEF advocacy and support. Schemes continued to expand in Malawi and Kenya, while a new programme was launched in Lesotho and a pilot started in Zambia. Overall, in 2009, UNICEF supported initiatives that directly supported children affected by AIDS in 29 countries. 3. Key result area 3: Support reduction of adolescent risk and vulnerability to HIV and AIDS by increasing access to and use of gender-sensitive prevention information, skills and services. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $54.8 million 110. By the end of 2009, a total of 87 programme countries had integrated HIV and AIDS education into national secondary school curricula, up from 56 in 2005. The first-ever International Technical Guidance on Sexuality Education was issued in December 2009. 111. UNICEF support to peer-based awareness-raising programmes was stepped up in several countries, with a focus on reaching the most-at-risk adolescents. This support reached adolescents, including through street counselling, one-on-one advocacy in the Philippines, and voluntary counselling and testing among sex workers in Kenya. Elsewhere, extensive support to training for peer counselling built capacities among government and civil society partners. 112. Experiences from countries that made substantial progress in expanding coverage of PMTCT services have shown: (a) Decentralization is a necessary prerequisite. It can foster managerial, technical and financial efficiency, as well as accountability. It can promote innovation in service-delivery and improve equity in access; (b) Further expansion of PMTCT services depends on building capacity and harmonizing actions with MNCH services; (c) PMTCT programmes are particularly dependent on external funding for drugs and other commodities. For most resource-limited countries, there is an urgency to determine the actual cost and impact of national PMTCT programmes in order to guide fiscal policies. While impressive efforts are taking place to ensure that less costly, age-appropriate drugs and services are available, investments will not have the desired impact if children in need do not use them. Countries are beginning to direct their attention to developing systems to ensure better follow-up, including inclusion of HIV-specific information on child health cards. 113. A clear understanding of adolescent sexual relations and gender dynamics is necessary to shape and fine-tune preventions interventions: (a) Implementation of youth-oriented interventions at scale, tailored to local settings, is the exception rather than the rule; (b) Young people living with HIV have particular challenges related to treatment and adherence, and it is important to address safer sex behaviours; (c) Combination HIV prevention is absolutely essential; the full complement of prevention interventions should address biological and behavioural risks, as well as legal and policy barriers and social norms; (d) The AIDS epidemic will not be halted until prevention services reach marginalized groups as a priority, without discrimination, and confront the realities of adolescent sexuality; (e) HIV prevention also needs to be better integrated into responses to emergencies, based on IASC guidelines, and in initiatives to reduce gender-based and sexual violence. The UNICEF approach to HIV prevention in adolescents will focus on strengthening the capacity of service providers in the education and health sectors to deliver quality information and support to adolescents and through complementary initiatives to support social mobilization; (f) Partnerships with adolescents will promote their engagement in the analysis of the epidemic as well as service and programme delivery, and in identifying barriers and opportunities. 114. Direct support to families is a key intervention to reaching children affected by AIDS. An inclusive, child-sensitive approach to social protection can increase the effectiveness of investments in health, education and water and sanitation, as part of an essential package of services for families. It can also reach children outside the family environment, including through civil society and faith-based partners. D. Focus area 4: Child protection from violence, exploitation and abuse 115. Cut off from social networks, children who leave their homes and communities can become easy prey to exploiters. They run a particular risk of entering in conflict with the law. In addition, as a result of crises, children may be pulled out of school and put to work to help their families. The vulnerability of children to abuse and exploitation is often exacerbated by disasters. Significant parental stress and decreased social support are evident in crisis situations. There is also a need for research on how new information and communication technologies affect children's attitudes and behaviours and the risks of violence, abuse and exploitation associated with these. 116. The strengthening of child protection systems -- a main pillar of the UNICEF Child Protection Strategy (E/ICEF/2008/5/Rev.1) approved by the Executive Board -- is under way in all regions. As a result of ongoing learning, technical and policy resources have been produced, including clear definitions of a "systems approach" to child protection and systems mapping and assessment tools. These initiatives have resulted in the identification of further requirements to strengthen child protection systems and the necessary resources to address capacity gaps. The period since 2008 has seen a growing consensus relating to childcare and appropriate alternative support systems. Through a series of consultations and other developments, including most notably the adoption of the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children by the United Nations General Assembly on 20 November 2009, there has also been growing recognition that all types of social protection need to be child-sensitive. There has been increased focus by countries on developing standards of care. 117. There has also been a positive shift of emphasis from a focus on juvenile justice to the broader area of justice for children, which recognizes the need to protect children who are victims and witnesses of crime. This shift has been evident through the establishment of child-friendly courts and police procedures, victim support units, toll-free lines and legal support and counselling. Progress has been made in the implementation of the Secretary-General's Guidance Note on the United Nations common approach to justice for children (2008). Reducing the numbers of children in detention has remained a priority through the setting up of mechanisms for diversion from judicial proceedings and alternatives to deprivation of liberty. 118. Significant steps have been made in strengthening partnerships and broadening consensus on social norms and social change, as they relate to child protection concerns. Research and evaluations on harmful practices produced by the UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre and partners, and the 2008 UNICEF Working Paper "Long-term Evaluation of the Tostan Programme in Senegal: Kolda, This and Fatick regions" provide important insights. A key finding has been the importance of human rights education, including the opportunity for communities to discuss rights and relate them to existing social practices. 119. Recognizing the need to address the underlying factors that lead to violence, exploitation and abuse, UNICEF has supported activities such as education and awareness-raising campaigns to sensitize communities, teachers, families, and children on prevention, as well as mobilization of the travel and tourism sector. Data collection and studies on different forms of violence and exploitation have been conducted and disseminated. UNICEF joined the Clinton Global Initiative and others in a new partnership to address sexual violence against girls in several African and Asian countries. The UNICEF leadership role in the child protection network on small arms and light weapons has also led to positive change. New knowledge on landmines and small arms has contributed to the development of international standards and replication of good practices. 120. With respect to child protection in emergencies, agencies are increasingly adopting joint strategies and initiatives in the field. Since taking on leadership of Child Protection in Emergencies as part of the humanitarian reform process, UNICEF has aimed to ensure that initiatives benefit from the expertise of all actors. In 2009, the Inter-Agency Child Protection Information Management System was upgraded and has been used in 15 countries for preparedness and response to cases of children separated from their families. 121. With the adoption of Security Council resolutions 1882 and 1888, the scope of UNICEF work on the monitoring and reporting mechanism (MRM) and response to grave violations of children's and women's rights in conflict situations has been expanded from child recruitment to include sexual violence against children and killing and maiming of children, on which UNICEF has less experience. In addition, the new mandate by UNICEF as the co-lead of the gender-based violence area of responsibility under the protection cluster requires it to address this issue more systematically. Finding experienced staff with expertise on these emerging areas continues to be challenging. Promising efforts to ensure sustained recovery and reintegration of conflict-affected children continue to be constrained by lack of sufficient and longer-term funding. 1. Key result area 1: Better national laws, policies, regulations and services across sectors to improve child protection outcomes, in particular justice for children, social protection systems, and services in place to protect, reach and serve all children, notably those identified as vulnerable to harm, marginalized, or in contact with the law. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $108.0 million 122. In 2009, marked progress was made on the development of a systems approach to child protection. Countries are adopting strategic interventions for policy, services and system strengthening, based on the development of an initial conceptual framework. During 2009, approximately 19 countries began to map and assess their existing systems. 123. With respect to prevention and response to family separation, UNICEF provided technical assistance to 114 governments for policy development and to strengthen direct care support. As a result of the Guidelines for Alternative Care, the focus has increased on developing and improving standards of care. UNICEF also supported national institutions in 125 countries in the area of justice for children, with greater focus on policy advocacy and legal reforms based on global guidance for juvenile justice legislation and alternatives to deprivation of liberty. New tools for policymakers and professionals, such as a model law on child victims and witnesses of crime and an implementation handbook developed with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, has supported the shift from juvenile justice to justice for children, including child victims and witnesses of crime. 124. UNICEF contributed to national efforts in 68 countries in the areas of trafficking and migration, mindful of gender considerations. UNICEF efforts in combating child trafficking continue to focus strongly on policy advocacy and support for legal frameworks, and illustrate the adoption of a new plan of action by Indonesia on the Eradication of Trafficking in Persons and Sexual Exploitation of Children. At the global level, UNICEF co-authored, with 13 other organizations, the International Framework for Action to Implement the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. 125. Although UNICEF supported birth registration activities in over 65 countries in 2009, low levels of registration prevail in many cases, exacerbated by high mobility and migration. 126. Following the international adoption of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, over 60 programme countries are now conducting activities relating to children with disabilities, as compared to some 30 countries in 2007. UNICEF continued raising awareness on disability issues using a child-friendly version of the Convention ("It's About Ability") and also piloted a training programme in Guyana. 2. Key result area 2: Support development and implementation of social conventions, norms and values that favour the prevention of violence, exploitation, abuse and unnecessary separation for all children, while ensuring respect for their views and building on young people's resilience. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $42.8 million 127. The number of programme countries that implement gender-sensitive programmes addressing social conventions and norms that contribute to violence, exploitation and abuse increased, from 55 in 2008 to 66 in 2009. In many cases UNICEF contributes to these national programmes. Working with UNFPA, Tostan, religious leaders, women's organizations and other partners, UNICEF supported programmes to end female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) in 20 countries in 2009. Results of this work include advocacy breakthroughs (in Burkina Faso, a national "zero tolerance" action plan was launched), major awareness-raising campaigns (in Sudan, 7 million people were reached), and significant numbers of households and communities declaring abandonment of the practice (such as in Egypt and Senegal), Results include the acceleration of abandonment of FGM/C and child marriage in many countries. 128. The capacity of government countries and civil society stakeholders in the area of child labour was strengthened in programme countries' training, technical assistance, and reintegration activities. In Burkina Faso, UNICEF-supported partners created new opportunities for 1,786 child mine workers. UNICEF also sponsored studies and surveys, and helped develop new national plans and legislative instruments in several countries, including Argentina, Ghana and Rwanda. Joint research findings in the field are paving the way for greater interagency collaboration on the worst forms of child labour. Major findings include significantly increased child labour rates in Africa and a significant threat to gains in Latin America and the Caribbean posed by economic recession. 129. In line with the Child Protection Strategy's commitment to working with the private sector as an agent of social change, technical advice was provided to corporate partners, including Telenor, IKEA and the Norwegian Investment Fund for Developing Countries, to support change in sourcing, supply chain and investment patterns, particularly in the area of child labour. Addressing gender-based violence and other forms of exploitation of children, particularly sexual exploitation, in the travel and tourism industry were emphasized during the year. 3. Key result area 3: Better protection of children from the immediate and long-term impact of armed conflict and natural disasters. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $89.6 million 130. UNICEF provided direct assistance and helped to coordinate a number of large-scale child protection interventions in Gaza, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Zimbabwe and elsewhere. In the 36 programme countries reporting specific emergency child protection interventions in 2009, 1.53 million children were reached. With the support of UNICEF, 49 programme countries have incorporated child protection into national emergency preparedness and response planning. 131. UNICEF expanded its programme of building emergency response capacity of national partners on child protection in emergencies to 41 countries in 2009, compared to 29 in 2008. The pre-positioning of protection-related supplies included post-exposure prophylaxis kits, recreational kits, materials for separated children, and identification and registry books. UNICEF supported programmes in over 25 countries and engaged in advocacy activities at the global and national levels in relation to the Convention on Cluster Munitions, Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 132. In 2009, UNICEF support to capacity strengthening included the establishment of a global inter-agency online networking and resource website for practitioners on psychosocial support in crises, and, in partnership with the office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the launch of CAACnet, an interactive web-based platform for practitioners of the MRM on children and armed conflict. 133. Countries in Africa that are implementing MRM exchanged lessons on conflict-related cross-border child protection issues at an all-Africa workshop in Senegal. As of December 2009, 14 country MRM Task Forces had been formally established and three additional countries of concern had established MRM working groups. Seven country annual reports on children and armed conflict were reviewed by the Working Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict in 2009, which subsequently issued four country-specific conclusions to the parties of conflict. Lastly, a global assessment on database and information management for the MRM was conducted, and a macro-monitoring methodology developed in partnership with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Columbia University was piloted. 134. UNICEF continued to support the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of child soldiers in a number of countries, including Burundi, Central African Republic, Philippines and Democratic Republic of the Congo, where 6,630 children were reintegrated into communities through a mixed system of transit centres and foster families. In Darfur a child DDR programme was launched in 2009 after a two-year delay. 4. Key result area 4: Government decisions influenced by increased awareness of child protection rights and improved monitoring, data and analysis on child protection. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $89.4 million 135. The Progress for Children report released by UNICEF in September 2009 was the first comprehensive global resource of child protection statistics. Indicators have been developed on juvenile justice and formal care, training has been carried out on psychosocial monitoring and evaluation, and cutting-edge "macro-monitoring" methodologies for situations of armed conflict are being piloted in collaboration with leading research institutions. Support has also been provided to the strengthening of national and subnational monitoring systems for children protection. 136. Continued efforts were made throughout 2009 to enhance the evidence base, with approximately 250 evaluations and studies being carried out on child protection. The number of countries conducting gender analysis of key child protection issues during the country programme cycle rose to 43 from 35 in 2008. Examples from programmes of support for new or improved child protection monitoring systems included the establishment in Bangladesh of a national Child Protection Information Management System, and the development of a monitoring and evaluation framework for the Caribbean Community Regional Action Plan for Children. 137. Experience has shown that child protection issues, such as justice for children, child labour and trafficking, can be used as entry points to strengthen systems, including laws, policies, regulations and services that protect children from violence, exploitation and abuse. The Clinton Global Initiative to end sexual violence against girls provides an important opportunity to strengthen both systems and social change approaches and will also facilitate follow-up work to the United Nations Study on Violence against Children. 138. A recent inter-agency review of community mechanisms has highlighted the importance of linkages between informal and formal systems. Further field research in 2010-2011 will identify how these linkages are influencing child protection outcomes and how mechanisms can be strengthened. Increased understanding of social norms has pointed to the importance of measuring the prevalence of harmful practices, such as FGM/C and child marriage, as well as changes in underlying values and attitudes. UNICEF will strengthen its work on the application of the social norms perspective to violence against children beyond harmful practices. 139. Haiti offers a clear example of how important a strong child protection system is for disaster preparedness and response. The evaluation of child protection programmes in tsunami-affected countries stressed that the recovery phase is an opportunity to pave the way for a strengthened child protection system. Lessons from the tsunami and from Haiti will enable advocacy for the systemic and social change approaches to child protection in all contexts. 140. UNICEF has galvanized a wide range of partners around the systems approach, has used its leveraging power to promote the social change approach, and has partnered with academic institutions, NGOs and United Nations agencies to produce cutting edge research that is feeding into programme and policy design. The potential for more effectively engaging with the private sector is also shown by successful collaboration thus far on child labour and sexual exploitation and abuse. 141. There is need for even greater attention to monitoring, evaluation and research in order to inform work under all key result areas. This will include making better use of multiple indicator cluster surveys, further development of indicators, improving internal capacity and strengthening the role of the Innocenti Research Centre. Improved forms of knowledge sharing will also be developed, including South-South exchanges. 142. Child protection programming, constrained by limited resources, also has to overcome hurdles with respect to scaling-up. While there are many successful initiatives which have produced results, linking these successful examples with systems, formal and informal, and ensuring widespread coverage, is challenging. 143. While there have been important strides forward, there are still major challenges to establishing robust data and monitoring systems and linking these to the prevention of and response to child protection violations, including in humanitarian crises. E. Focus area 5: Policy advocacy and partnerships for children's rights 144. Since 2008, UNICEF has intensified its support to initiatives of governments, the United Nations and other partners to strengthen the design and effectiveness of social protection systems, national planning and budgeting in favour of poor families, and monitoring the situation of children and women. These efforts have assumed even greater urgency in the wake of recent financial and economic shocks. UNICEF has been supporting these initiatives by providing data from household surveys and field reports, child poverty studies and situation analysis, and by contributing to the review and piloting of social protection systems for poor and vulnerable populations. UNICEF will further enhance partnerships to explore policy options to mitigate the impact of economic downturns on marginalized and vulnerable populations, and to address the structural challenges of child poverty. 145. Significant achievements have been realized in collecting and analysing information on the situation of children and women, including from Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS). These surveys provide data for 21 of 53 MDG indicators, and together with the USAID-supported Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), are the largest single source of MDG information. In the first three rounds of surveys nearly 200 MICS surveys were conducted in 100 countries worldwide. The fourth round of MICS was launched in 2009. The lack of medium-term funding however, continues to hobble efforts to support data dissemination and building national statistical capacities. 146. A comprehensive evaluation of UNICEF work in relation to adolescents and child participation is under way. Some of the preliminary findings show that civic engagement, critical for advocacy, needs to be more fully mainstreamed in UNICEF work. Existing data provide very little information about the quality of adolescent-related programmes, particularly regarding participation. 1. Key result area 1: Support national capacity to collect and analyse strategic information on the situation of children and women. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $187.2 million 147. In 2009, UNICEF provided support to data collection and analysis of the situation of children and women in 73 countries, compared to 58 in 2005. About two thirds (64 per cent) of national development plans or poverty reduction strategies of reporting countries now address key challenges for children, and just over half (54 per cent) address key challenges for women. At the global level, UNICEF has taken a leading role in conducting in-depth statistical analyses on a range of issues, contributing to a series of sector-specific reports including those on diarrhoeal disease, malaria, child and maternal nutrition, access to safe drinking water and sanitation, and HIV/AIDS. 148. The fourth round of MICS (MICS 4) was launched in 2009, with 26 countries having confirmed participation, and approximately 24 more expected to participate. Several countries have moved to a triennial survey cycle to obtain more frequent coverage and impact estimates. The MICS 4 maintains new indicators on child protection introduced in MICS 3 and includes new data collection modules on early childhood development, early child-bearing and hand-washing. A global partnership was established with the Demographic and Health Surveys, in order to harmonize survey tools. 149. The UNICEF-supported DevInfo has been adopted worldwide as a tool to organize, display and analyse standardized human development data. DevInfo 6.0 was rolled out in 2009, introducing new data presentation methods, enhanced web collaboration and extended mapping. Twenty partner agencies and 132 national statistical offices have now adapted the technology. An evaluation completed in 2009 highlights the role of DevInfo in establishing national repositories of human development data and its contribution to data standardization. 150. UNICEF collaborated with Columbia University to develop Rapid SMS, a system that uses text messages to collect quality data from field locations. The system is being piloted by Malawi to facilitate early warning on famine and for monitoring undernutrition in children. 2. Key result area 2: Research and policy analysis on children and women, with special consideration of child poverty and disparities, social budgeting, social protection, decentralization, migration, and legislative reform for implementation of the Conventions. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $44.3 million 151. In-depth research and policy analysis continued to be central to developing a good evidence base for protecting the rights of children. UNICEF produced working papers in 2009 on topics such as responding to the global economic situation, reconstructing well-being in China following the earthquake in 2008, moving towards free primary education, and scaling up cash transfer programmes in Kenya. 152. In 2009, UNICEF issued a special edition of its flagship publication, The State of the World's Children: Celebrating 20 Years of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. UNICEF also supported situation analyses on the rights of children and women in 18 countries, in support of the evidence base for national planning and poverty reduction strategies. In addition, UNICEF sponsored 96 major thematic studies related to children and women in 2009, compared to 76 in 2008. Roughly two thirds of these studies explicitly used a human rights framework, and almost half used a gender analysis framework. 153. The UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre continued to generate knowledge and research on social and economic policies and the implementation of international standards to protect children. In 2009, the Centre produced major publications on child well-being, early childhood education, implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, violence against girls, and child trafficking. 154. UNICEF continued to facilitate the Global Study on Child Poverty and Disparities, with the participation of 48 countries. Six national reports were completed in 2009. Findings from these studies on the multiple dimensions of child poverty have informed national planning and budgeting and influenced social protection initiatives and policy reform. 155. In 2009, the Child Poverty Network managed by UNICEF grew to over 900 members, representing United Nations agencies, governments and research institutions, and generated exchange of experiences on a number of issues, including advocacy strategies to promote child-friendly policies, monitoring the impact of the economic crisis, and on deprivation indicators. 3. Key result area 3: Policy advocacy, dialogue and leveraging. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $51.1 million 156. During 2009, the UNICEF regional offices and networks took forward the organization's policy advocacy agenda in response to rapidly changing conditions. The East Asia and Pacific regional office, for example, organized a high-level regional conference with the Government and National University of Singapore on the "Impact of the Economic Crisis on Children in East Asia and the Pacific Islands". Following the conference, a number of Governments, such as China, have organized further initiatives to assess the impact of economic trends on children. The regional office for South Asia organized a conference on "Achieving Child Well-being and Equity in South Asia", which examined ways of tackling child poverty and disparities using results from country studies. 157. Almost two thirds of UNICEF offices provided specific advice to governments on regulatory, legal, institutional or financing reform, in areas such as juvenile justice, public finance transparency, and social protection. Several offices supported government reviews of the national legislative framework in the context of norms and principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 158. UNICEF participation in sector-wide approaches (SWAps) continued to leverage results for children. In Bangladesh, a successful pilot on decentralized school improvement planning leveraged both SWAp pool and government funds to benefit an estimated 10 million children. In the United Republic of Tanzania, UNICEF advocacy within the health SWAp led to an increase in basket fund allocations for vitamin A supplementation. During 2009, UNICEF participated in SWAps in 41 countries, involving a total of 80 different SWAps in health, education, WASH and other sectors. 159. UNICEF is currently supporting 124 social protection programmes in 65 countries, and is supporting national partners to ensure that stable social protection schemes replace temporary responses to the economic shocks. UNICEF raised the visibility of children's issues in governmental and civil society discussions on migration, including the 2009 Global Forum on Migration and Development, in Athens. At country level, surveys and studies on migration issues affecting children and adolescents have been conducted in more than 60 countries. 160. UNICEF has supported more than 90 countries in public expenditure reviews/ analysis and budget formulation. Nearly 60 countries have now established a government/civil society joint mechanism that monitors and analyses the national budget as a way of promoting improved resource allocations for children and women. UNICEF convened, jointly with the Overseas Development Institute, an international conference entitled, "The Global Economic Crisis -- Including Children in the Policy Response". This resulted in 20 presentations being disseminated on the UNICEF website and the creation of Crisis Watch, a global network monitoring the impact of economic shocks. 4. Key result area 4: Enhanced participation by children and young people. Estimated 2009 programme assistance: $37.7 million 161. The number of programme countries in which opinion polls or other tools are systematically used to gauge children's views continues to rise (31 countries in 2009, compared to 17 in 2005). In Namibia, 20,000 young people used a phone-based interactive system to voice their opinions, while the Speak Africa initiative has enabled young people to express their views through a multi-media platform. In 39 programme countries (29 in 2005), adolescent girls and boys participated meaningfully in the most recent reporting process on the Convention on the Rights of the Child. A range of guidance and tools was prepared to develop partners' capacities for promoting meaningful child participation. 162. UNICEF facilitated child and adolescent participation at key global advocacy events, including the Children's Climate Forum and the Junior 8 Summit. A total of 160 youth delegates from 40 countries participated at the Children's Climate Forum, organized by UNICEF and the City of Copenhagen. 163. Also among the significant achievements at the global level in support of child participation in 2009 were the adoption of the General comment on Article 12 (Right to be Heard) by the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the adoption of an Omnibus Resolution by the United Nations General Assembly on child participation. A joint Inter-Agency Framework Strategy for marginalized adolescent girls was launched in 2009. UNICEF helped to further partnerships among the United Nations agencies responsible for this initiative and to provide technical support for its development. 164. UNICEF efforts in promoting evidence-based analysis and policy engagement through building national capacities and ownership are yielding increasingly promising results. Responding to recent economic shocks and post-crisis adjustments as they affect children and women is an urgent priority. The deterioration of the economic environment and the further erosion in the purchasing power of the poor widen the scope of the challenges. 165. "Recovery with a Human Face" is an approach to promoting pro-poor social and economic recovery policies through which countries can also meet their obligations to children under the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Its first aim is to counter regression in the realization of children's rights, and its second is to promote policies that help to ensure that recovery benefits the most-excluded children and families, rather than accentuating disparities. This approach will involve UNICEF in working closely with the wider UNCTs and Bretton Woods agencies to assist governments, including their finance ministries, to: (a) Analyse and prioritize budgets to provide immediate and adequate support to children and women, by scaling up social protection; maintaining or increasing core social expenditures for achieving the Goals; and protecting pro-poor expenditures aimed at livelihood and nutritional recovery; (b) Identify sources of fiscal space (including policy support and more resources for children); (c) Conduct rapid assessments of the social impacts of different policy options; (d) Identify alternative policy options for recovery that can be used in national dialogue. 166. At the same time, UNICEF will continue to deepen its support to country and global analysis on multidimensional poverty, social exclusion and pro-poor policies, including support to the design of child-sensitive social protection systems that reflect each country's context. 167. Trends in demography call for more attention to be paid to youth issues and, in partnership with the International Labour Organization, Bretton Woods agencies and others, to policies for preparing young people with skills to gain employment. UNICEF will also further support adolescent participation in national policy processes. Emphasis will be placed on supporting leadership skills through the participation of adolescent girls in particular. 168. Greater consideration will be accorded to the impact of governance on the realization of children's rights, building upon areas of UNICEF experience such as legislative reform. With enhanced emphasis on issues of governance and national capacity development, together with strengthened support for civic engagement, UNICEF will seek to promote stronger results for children and women. One immediate step will be the production of a module on governance for children's rights as part of the European Community-funded Child Rights Toolkit for development practitioners. 169. UNICEF will increase its focus on children and women in urban areas, working to enhance the capacities of national research institutions, municipalities, and civil society partners working on vulnerability to climate change and other threats faced by children in poor communities and slum dwellings. UNICEF will also support countries to implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities by promoting the prioritization of issues related to children with disabilities in all relevant sectors and through enhanced partnerships at all levels. 170. In middle-income countries, UNICEF will seek to leverage the financial capacity, and often-extensive technical skills, of national partners for children and women, including through: support to monitoring and situation analysis; strengthening capacities in key institutions promoting children's rights; advocating for pro-child and gender-sensitive policies, laws and budgets; enhancing partnerships for children; facilitating the exchange of knowledge and experience; and promoting attention to disparities, exclusion and discrimination, where these remain major issues. Special focus: humanitarian action and post-crisis recovery 171. Guided by the Core Commitments for Children (CCC), and following the direction and principles of humanitarian reform, UNICEF humanitarian action and post-crisis recovery support in 2009 spanned more than 79 countries, many of which experienced multiple crises. UNICEF continued to rely heavily on the deployment of internal and standby surge capacity. This capacity included 259 people mobilized through internal redeployments, and additional capacity through external deployments and standby partner arrangements with NGOs, governmental organizations and private companies. 172. The various funding modalities continued to support an efficient response. The internal Emergency Programme Fund (EPF) released more than $123 million in 2008-2009 to assist 44 country offices to implement the CCC, including $40.3 million in 2009. This significantly exceeded the allocations made in previous years, largely due to the number and severity of crises that affected all regions. Assistance was also provided in the 36 countries covered in the Humanitarian Action Report. This assistance included 15 Consolidated Appeal Processes, and 9 Flash Appeals. Through the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), UNICEF received $94 million in grants in 2009, both for rapid response and under-funded crises. 173. Emergency preparedness remained a central strategy to ensure an effective response in all humanitarian crises. UNICEF continued to co-chair the Sub-Working Group on Preparedness of the IASC, leading inter-agency efforts to institutionalize preparedness in Humanitarian Country Teams through the timely use of contingency planning, early warning systems and scenario simulations. The Harmonized Emergency Risk Management initiative, which has been piloted in four countries, aims to streamline various risk-based planning processes into regular office planning. An updated Early Warning Early Action system, which was launched in April 2009, serves as an online tool to support and monitor UNICEF emergency preparedness. A Business Continuity Management system is in place to ensure that office operations can continue to operate in the event of a crisis. 174. UNICEF has been a major contributor to humanitarian reform, most notably as global lead for the nutrition and the water, sanitation and hygiene clusters and as colead (with the Save the Children Alliance) for education. UNICEF is the focal point agency for the child protection and gender-based violence (with UNFPA) "areas of responsibility" under the broader protection cluster. UNICEF also serves as chair of the cross-cutting Mental Health and Psychosocial Reference Group and plays a strong role in the Health and Logistics clusters and the Cluster Working Group on Early Recovery. UNICEF has also contributed to developments in other aspects of humanitarian reform: humanitarian financing, especially through CERF, and partnerships, through improvements to the UNICEF Programme Cooperation Agreements with partners. 175. Nearing completion, the revised Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action reflect changes in the broader humanitarian context in which UNICEF works. These changes include the role of UNICEF as a cluster lead and partner under humanitarian reform; the growing and increasing challenge of the effects of climate change; and the growing influence of the policy and security environment on humanitarian action. The strategies and approaches necessary to achieve the CCC have been adjusted based on new evidence, developments in global humanitarian environments, and new emerging threats to affected populations and humanitarian agencies themselves. Recent studies have shown that effective support to capacity development remains central to fulfilling the CCC and to early recovery, and requires harmonization of efforts across development and humanitarian contexts. 176. Most of the countries making the least progress in achieving the Goals are facing fragile situations, experiencing or recovering from emergencies. These require context-specific, simplified and more flexible inter-agency and UNICEF approaches and tools that respond to the transition from humanitarian to development contexts. 177. Two other trends affect the work of UNICEF and its partners. The first is the role of armed forces in delivering both relief and development aid in certain situations, which can blur the line between armed forces and humanitarian actors. The second is the constraint to humanitarian access resulting from the tendency of some governments to limit the activities of NGOs and to disallow or discourage UNICEF from partnering with NGOs. 178. Advocacy in humanitarian and post-crisis situations requires coordination across all levels of the organization. A key, strategic challenge involves ensuring that human resource-related policies and procedures enable the organization to respond rapidly, effectively and consistently. Policies and procedures need to be adapted so that they ensure the commitments of UNICEF to the cluster approach, effective approaches to security, and appropriate incentives for staff serving in emergency duty stations. The ongoing response to the 2010 earthquake in Haiti illustrates the kinds of adapted policies and procedures needed. 179. An effort to strengthen gender equality in humanitarian action showed progress in the pilot countries, including increased capacity of staff and partners to apply gender analysis to the design and assessment of emergency programmes. Learning from the pilot countries will inform the development of a broader organizational gender mainstreaming strategy during 2010. * Decisions of the Secretary-General -- 25 June meeting of the Policy Committee, 2008. 180. UNICEF contributed to the drafting of the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict (A/63/881-S/2009/304) and has been actively involved in the follow-up to the report, including revisions to the Peacebuilding Fund and elaboration of a Post-Conflict Needs Assessment process including the operational frameworks at country level. While including various stakeholders in the dialogue for peacebuilding at the country level can strengthen the work of the United Nations in crisis and post-crisis countries, it is vital that humanitarian action, is based on principles of neutrality and impartiality. UNICEF helped to develop inter-agency and UNICEF-specific guidance on engagement with stakeholders and other "integrated presences" to ensure that processes "take full account of recognized humanitarian principles".* 181. With respect for humanitarian principles and subsequently "humanitarian space" coming under increasing attack, the perceived lack of neutrality of United Nations agencies by parties to conflict in certain contexts has been a contributing factor in the deliberate targeting of aid workers. In 2009, more than 30 United Nations staff members, including some working for UNICEF, were killed in the line of duty during attacks. Expanding access to insecure environments will require deeper understanding of local realities, community-based interventions and local ownership in a broader risk management framework. This will ensure that the humanitarian response of UNICEF reaches the most vulnerable. UNICEF has played a leading role in improving the United Nations Security Risk Management framework. II. Cross-cutting strategies of the medium-term strategic plan A. Human rights-based approach to cooperation 182. Since the midterm review of the MTSP, a number of successes have moved the human rights approach forward. The explicit recognition of human rights as the objective of development assistance in article 13(c) of the Accra Agenda for Action represented a reaffirmation by the development community of the centrality of the human rights agenda. New global monitoring mechanisms, such as the Universal Periodic Review, have also been effective in promoting respect for human rights. Increased attention has been paid to disparity, in terms of how the most vulnerable are affected by global crises and how the Millennium Development Goals can be achieved with equity. 183. UNICEF-assisted country programmes consistently report on support to capacity development, to policy formulation, advocacy and partnerships for the rights of children and women, and, to a less systematic degree, to participation of children and young people. Special attention has been paid to children from minority groups and to children with disabilities. However, country office reports suggest that performance has improved in general but varies by focus area. Ensuring consistent application of the human rights-based approach in all focus areas continues to be a priority. One way this will be supported is through the widespread dissemination of the new Child Rights Toolkit for development practitioners. For the remainder of the MTSP period, emphasis will be placed on strengthening the monitoring of the application of a human rights-based approach, together with gender mainstreaming, as part of an enhanced system for assessing the quality of programming. 184. Another priority will be to create mechanisms to facilitate exchange of knowledge among regions and countries, currently identified as an area of weakness. More attention will also be given to indigenous and minority children and children with disabilities. UNICEF will continue its high level of engagement with the Committee on the Rights of the Child and will undertake an organizational evaluation in 2010/11 of its performance under this cross-cutting MTSP strategy. B. Gender equality and mainstreaming 185. The approach of UNICEF to gender mainstreaming and gender equality continues to focus on supporting initiatives aimed at empowering women and girls to effectively act as agents of change and to strengthen their capacity to participate fully in political, civic, economic, social and cultural life. The period since the MTR has also seen some progress in increasing attention to the role of men and boys in the attainment of gender equality. 186. The intensification of focus on gender equality by UNICEF has been in the context of the follow-up to the TCPR, the Evaluation of the Implementation of the UNICEF Gender Policy, and also the Secretary-General's stated commitment to making progress on women's rights through, inter alia, the UNiTE campaign on violence against women. Progress on gender during 2009 is described in detail in the accompanying Executive Board Report (E/ICEF/2010/10). As described in earlier sections, there is evidence of enhanced attention to gender mainstreaming in all focus areas. 187. A notable follow-up action was a special allocation in 2009 of $4.25 million by the Executive Director to support the follow-up to the gender policy evaluation, which has enabled increased activity at all levels of the organization. While many of the resulting investments will take time to be reflected in changes in practice and results, the initial indications are that they will have a significant impact. An enhanced monitoring and accountability system will be used to ensure that programme standards related to gender are met. 188. To improve performance in this area, a new guide for UNICEF on supporting the reporting process on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women was issued in 2009. At the global level, UNICEF has strengthened its relationship with the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, including through facilitating a joint meeting of the Committee and with the Committee on the Rights of the Child. UNICEF has played a central role in promoting UNCT joint reports to that the latter Committee, together with UNDP, UNFPA and UNIFEM. C. Communication for Development 189. Since the MTSP was developed, Communication for Development (C4D) has been increasingly prioritized within the development community and by UNICEF. There is greater clarity on the scope, role and function of work related to C4D. UNICEF will continue working with practitioners to develop standards for use by development professionals. These standards will also inform partnerships with the private sector, where use of social marketing techniques has inspired practitioners to adapt a variety of methodologies for greater community participation and empowerment. 190. In the 2008 midterm review, C4D was clearly positioned in the MTSP as a core organizational cross-cutting strategy, including for policy advocacy and humanitarian response. C4D approaches are now increasingly used within sectoral programmes to support national governments to empower individuals to understand and adopt practices -- such as breastfeeding, oral rehydration, prevention of HIV and influenza transmission, and hand-washing with soap -- that will save and improve the lives of children. Correspondingly, community perspectives have been brought to the attention of duty-bearers for policy reform and better programme implementation. 191. Greater attention will now be accorded in UNICEF cooperation to strengthening the evidence base related to C4D through the better articulation and measurement of results and evaluation of effectiveness. An expanded set of indicators to measure behaviour and social change will also be developed. At the same time, UNICEF will increase its emphasis on promoting a common approach among United Nations organizations and through external partnerships. D. Results-based management and performance monitoring 192. Results-based management (RBM) has continued to be a central strategy for achieving results together with partners. Tools have been improved, particularly in conjunction with the introduction of One ERP. The emphasis on RBM also responds to recommendations of the TCPR, the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action for enhancing the practice of RBM by development partners. United Nations organizations have developed guidance and tools on RBM and have improved training, planning, budgeting, and the measuring and reporting on results achieved. 193. While there has been an improvement in the articulation of expected results, developing the monitoring and evaluation systems in key areas such as capacity development, behaviour change, policy engagement and knowledge-based advocacy continues to be a challenge. The shift towards strategy-level contributions and social change will necessitate a change in the performance monitoring system, including evaluations and a focus on decisions and partnerships at the strategy level. Indicators related to the process of development, including participation, will be included in the RBM system, and data will be disaggregated to the extent possible. 194. As UNICEF-supported country programmes contribute to the achievement of nationally defined results, there has been greater emphasis on strengthening the programme monitoring capacities of national partners, including in the use of disaggregated information to analyse results achieved. Likewise, the role of our partners in achieving results is being increasingly recognized, including through joint evaluations and sector-wide reviews undertaken under the leadership of governments. 195. Progress has been made in strengthening the monitoring "dashboard" assessing the performance of country offices, enabling additional support and corrective action as required. The emphasis of the monitoring systems and performance indicators continues to be on implementation and management indicators, with further work now being accorded to assessing strategic performance. The use of recently piloted programme performance assessments and programme evaluations will be expanded. Client feedback will also be used more widely to help assess performance, document lessons learned and enhance the accountability of the organization. E. Evaluation 196. Since 2008, an increasing number of evaluations have explicitly addressed United Nations system-wide coherence. The following examples represent accomplishments against each of the evaluation objectives of the MTSP: (a) Country-led evaluation approaches have been piloted on a common United Nations basis in support of the evaluation led by the Government of South Africa-led on the effectiveness of United Nations involvement in that country; (b) United Nations Evaluation Group task forces have delivered guidance on impact evaluations, human rights-based and gender equality evaluation approaches, experience exchange, and report analysis; (c) UNICEF has partnered in systemic humanitarian sector capacity evaluations (e.g., on the cluster approach); (d) An approach to assessing strategic effectiveness at country level has been successfully piloted; (e) Field offices are increasingly obtaining external technical support under contracts with academic institutions or consulting firms; (f) Guidance on the management response to evaluations has been developed to assist UNICEF managers in complying with obligations under the 2008 UNICEF Evaluation Policy (E/ICEF/2008/4) and 2009 Executive Directive on Evaluation (CR/EXD/2009/004). 197. UNICEF still faces challenges in strengthening the prioritization of evaluations at all levels of the organization. There is also a need to find new ways of providing quality assurance and technical support for evaluations, often through outsourcing. It is a priority to ensure adequate resources, especially human resources, in order to overcome the challenge UNICEF faces in filling monitoring and evaluation positions with qualified candidates. UNICEF needs to hire qualified evaluators for development of evaluation designs and ensure that technical skills are available in areas such as policy advocacy and C4D. 198. The revised Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Framework and corresponding regional exercises will promote better alignment of strategic evaluations with MTSP objectives, including in middle-income countries. The commitment to higher-quality evidence will be achieved in part by informing staff and partners on better evaluation designs and prompting managers to ensure adequate resourcing of the evaluation function. UNICEF will continue the rapid transition to a more networked evaluation function. Special emphasis will be placed on a common United Nations approach to national capacity-building for evaluation that draws on United Nations system strengths, while making optimal use of national resources and developing South-South links. F. Knowledge for children's rights 199. The MTSP highlights research as a critical tool in fulfilling the knowledge mandate of UNICEF, recognizing that it is carried out across the breadth of the organization, including at the Innocenti Research Centre. The rapidly changing external environment and the shift of UNICEF towards more upstream work continue to require greater attention to the full spectrum of knowledge-related activities including: generation/acquisition; management; and dissemination and use of knowledge. 200. The earlier stages of the MTSP emphasized bridging gaps in knowledge creation and acquisition, and subsequently on activities to strengthen UNICEF internal knowledge management. Emphasis will now be placed on promoting greater engagement with partners to ensure that UNICEF understands and responds to their needs for knowledge through (a) identifying opportunities to make knowledge known and relevant; (b) keeping abreast of state-of-the art external knowledge on children and acting as a knowledge broker, including through support for South-South exchange, (c) developing collaborative relationships with key stakeholders to support the sharing of knowledge; and (d) working with stakeholders to develop their capacity for effective generation/acquisition and use of knowledge. 201. UNICEF will further emphasize the development of knowledge networks to support innovation, learning from experience, knowledge sharing and collaborative knowledge creation, as well as new approaches to the organization and presentation of knowledge. G. Partnerships for shared success United Nations system-wide coherence 202. During 2009, UNICEF continued its efforts to increase the capacity of the United Nations to deliver more effectively at the country level. UNICEF participated in 231 joint programmes (an increase of 22 per cent over 2008) in 79 countries with a total expenditure of at approximately $123 million (a 4 per cent increase over 2008). While there is some evidence to suggest these initiatives led to reduced transaction costs for governments and more systematic collaboration among United Nations agencies, UNICEF together with other agencies will be undertaking a study on transaction costs in 2010. 203. UNICEF, as a part of the United Nations Development Group (UNDG), has updated or issued new guidance and support material on simplified programme processes for the next generation of UNDAFs as well as for support to the resident coordinator system. UNICEF in 2009 contributed 12 staff members and $2.6 million to the system. In addition, 20 UNICEF staff functioned as acting resident coordinators during the year. In terms of staff time, UNICEF contributed the equivalent of 42 full-time staff members. 204. Transaction costs from the point of view of governments and other partners are being rationalized through the use of the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT), which is seeing greater implementation throughout the system, including in specialized agencies. Elements of HACT are being implemented in 114 countries, and full implementation of HACT is taking place in 19 countries. More effort is needed in this area, and UNDG will look into the bottlenecks in implementing HACT. 205. UNICEF translated the TCPR resolution into an organizational action plan containing 90 key actions, 96 per cent of which are either completed, ongoing or continual. Major results include: (a) Improved management and accountability framework for the United Nations development system and resident coordinators; (b) Simplified UNDAF guidelines, together with guidelines for voluntary adoption of UNDAF Action Plans in lieu of agency-specific Country Programme Action Plans; (c) Strengthened and expanded Regional Directors' Teams (RDTs) with clear roles and responsibilities for oversight and support to improved country-level results; (d) Integration of UNDG into the Chief Executives Board for Coordination and streamlining of the UNDG working groups, resulting in improved focus; (e) Implementation of recommendations from the consultative meetings as well as the TCPR, contributing to progress in harmonized business processes, notably in the areas of information and communication technology, and procurement; (f) Contributions by UNICEF to the interactive discussions with the General Assembly, which resulted in clear proposals on the creation of the United Nation composite gender entity and agreements on United Nations system-wide coherence. 206. UNICEF is also providing direct technical and financial assistance to the resident coordinator system and support to the Delivering as One Pilots, including strategic funding and development of a web-based help desk. 207. Over the next few years, UNICEF will give greater emphasis to the following key issues: (a) Strengthening of global and regional systems for enhanced country-level support; (b) Using the roll-out of the 90 new UNDAFs expected over the next three years to reinforce the use of the programming principles and implementation of the management and accountability system of UNICEF; (c) Using the lessons learned from the country-led and independent evaluations to further strengthen joint programming and coherence; (d) Accelerating progress in simplification and harmonization of business processes; (e) Strengthening coherent efforts to focus on MDG achievement through engagement in upstream dialogue on policies and budgets, institutional capacity development and building of South-South cooperation; (f) Further emphasizing the distillation and implementation of lessons learned from humanitarian disasters such as the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami and the 2010 earthquake in Haiti. Global programme partnerships 208. In order to ensure the effectiveness of the contribution of UNICEF to global programme partnerships, greater rigour will be applied in evaluating the risks and benefits of each partnership. UNICEF will ensure an alignment between the strategic goal of its engagement and the organizational resources devoted to achieve it. The combination of a global mandate and an extensive country presence give UNICEF a powerful voice in partnerships. UNICEF will work with its global partners to raise the standards of setting priorities, coordination, governance, management and evaluation in these partnerships. Partnerships with civil society organizations (CSOs) 209. Civil society continues to grow and diversify at the global, regional, and national levels. New technologies are enabling civil society groups from different regions to coalesce around shared agendas, broadening the scope and scale of collective action on children's and women's rights. 210. With the economic slowdown and mounting pressure on public sector services, CSOs increasingly represent an important social safety net for vulnerable children and women. To effectively fill this role, CSOs require the support and cooperation of governments and international agencies. 211. UNICEF has continued to collaborate with a large and diverse group of CSOs to strengthen results for children, including faith-based, sports, community-based and non-governmental organizations. These partnerships have been complemented by recent successes in developing an institutional partnership with parliamentary bodies. 212. UNICEF will continue to focus on strategically integrating civil society partnerships within country programmes. The increasing emphasis on upstream policy engagement calls for a sound analysis of CSO actors that can participate in and support mobilization for children's rights. Among the many such actors are universities, professional associations and social movements. Specialized tools will strengthen the ability of UNICEF to assess the effectiveness of different types of collaborations, as well as the associated costs. Regular randomized client surveys of major partner organizations will help to support the continuous improvement of the performance of UNICEF partnerships. III. Implications for management and operations A. Strengthening human resource management and staff learning 213. Since the MTR of the MTSP, the human resource function has implemented various key organizational initiatives under the "Implement 360" organizational improvement umbrella. The human resources function continues to strengthen its strategic positioning. In the remaining period of the MTSP, the function will continue the process of improvement and the re-profiling of roles to enable effective and comprehensive support across all functional areas in development, humanitarian and post-crisis recovery contexts. 214. The launch of UNICEF Employment (e-Recruitment system) and implementation of evidence-based improvements have shortened the time it takes to recruit staff. Revision of the Staff Selection Policy and the establishment of Central Review Bodies further streamlined this process. In 2009, 43 per cent of recruitments were completed within the 90-day target, and this represented a significant improvement over 2008. 215. The annual Senior Staff Rotation and Review Exercise covering the rotation of representatives and other senior staff, in its fifth successful year, has been further streamlined. Effective response to emergency staffing and deployment has continued. 216. The New and Emerging Talent Initiative aims to meet the current and future staffing needs of UNICEF by attracting, developing and retaining external talent, from entry- to mid-career levels. The initiative has entered its third cycle with 21 staff members beginning their assignments. 217. The learning strategy is aligned to current and emerging organizational needs. Its programmes cover many areas, including management and leadership, at all levels. The aim is to develop the knowledge and skills of UNICEF staff members so that they more effectively contribute to results for children. The management and leadership curriculum is being redesigned to reflect the strategic agenda and new business processes of UNICEF. A "New Representatives Induction" programme was launched as part of as part of a larger programme to orient staff who are new or are taking on new positions. A leadership assessment methodology has been established in the form of Management Assessment and Development Centres. The Leadership Development Initiative, which is designed to identify mid-level staff and develop a cadre of UNICEF future leaders, is now implemented globally. The participation of staff across these programmes consistently exceeds targets. 218. UNICEF also began implementation of the revised staff Competency Framework, which outlines core skills and abilities required for UNICEF staff members so that they can to deliver on the strategic aims of the organization, demonstrate leadership, and remain on the cutting edge in their disciplines. The framework is integrated throughout human resources processes, including recruitment and managing for performance. 219. An electronic performance appraisal system (e-PAS) has been launched. The ePAS system will enable online performance reviews and streamline performance management, which will be aligned with United Nations system-wide processes. The system will improve the accountability of staff and supervisors and allow for better auditing of the performance management process. The new system addresses many of the recommendations on performance management contained in the Organizational Review of UNICEF and the Strategic Review of Human Resource Management, and is a key part of the UNICEF Talent Management Initiative, along with e-recruitment, leadership development and learning. B. Finance and administration 220. UNICEF continues to contribute substantively to various ongoing initiatives promoting greater United Nations coherence. These initiatives include the harmonization of Financial Regulations and Rules; implementation of International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS); development of Results-Based Budgeting; common premises and services; cost recovery policies and the interagency travel and facilities management networks. Progress has been achieved in each one of these initiatives through the High-level Committee on Management, working groups, and other inter-organizational forums. 221. In its decision 2009/20, the Executive Board requested UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF to further harmonize and improve their methods of budgeting, with the aim of having each organization present a single, integrated budget. The single, integrated budget of UNICEF will include all its budget categories and complement the MTSP. At the first regular session of 2010, the three organizations submitted to their Executive Boards a "joint road map" indicating specific milestones towards this process, including informal and formal consultations. This process will lead to the submission of a strategic plan and an integrated budget at the second regular session of 2013. 222. In its decision 2009/7, the Executive Board requested that the Executive Director present IPSAS-compliant financial statements by the second regular session of 2013. During 2009, an implementation road map was developed and communicated to the Executive Board outlining four key areas of change: (i) policy development; (ii) change activities, including field office preparation, communication and training; (iii) systems adaptation; and (iv) changes in reporting. The policy development process has been completed, enabling UNICEF to move forward into implementation with a stable platform of policy; and systems changes have been introduced into the prototype of the new VISION-One ERP system. These two activities are enabling UNICEF to move forward into change activities, begun through an implementation planning and impact analysis exercise. Significant challenges remain in introducing the ambitious scope of change through IPSAS compliance. However, the current rate of progress indicates that the 2012 deadline for IPSAS compliance will be achieved. C. Supply 223. The strategies for supply outlined during the MTR of the MTSP are relevant for the remainder of the Plan. Market-shaping approaches have been implemented for a number of "strategic" products that have the biggest impact on achievement of the MDGs. These strategies include extending the qualified supplier base to include local producers, decreasing prices, and establishing transparent standards. As a result, a much healthier market situation exists for products such as ready-to-use therapeutic foods, insecticide-treated mosquito nets, antimalarials and the pentavalent vaccine. 224. Major investment has been given to improving staff competencies in supply chain components, including by staff themselves. As a result, effectiveness continues to improve, including on-time delivery, throughput per staff, and successful in-country logistics for major health campaigns. Moreover, strategic partnerships have been established with the private sector and academia on supply chain issues. Relationships with United Nations have been strengthened to the point where over 80 per cent of procurement is made in collaboration with another United Nations organization. UNICEF has also increased its cooperation with governments to help strengthen their supply systems, and this will be a major focus for the years to come. 225. Governments and partners are requesting UNICEF to procure products and services on their behalf at a rapidly increasing rate: in 2009, procurement services throughput exceeded $1 billion, helped by market-shaping strategies related to key products. As a means of reducing the transaction burden for non-strategic supplies, UNICEF is using the category-management approach to find outsourcing partners or alternative means of acquisition. Overall, more than 80 per cent of UNICEF expenditure on supplies is for strategic products. 226. Ensuring that essential commodities are available at global and national levels from affordable, quality and multiple sources remains a priority. To help ensure that these essential commodities reach the communities in need, UNICEF is intensifying support to strengthening procurement and supply management systems, including as a part of overall health system strengthening. 227. Supply also takes a central role in support to emergencies, as reflected in the CCC. The capacity and systems necessary to ensure that life-saving supplies are made available rapidly during a humanitarian response will continue to be a priority. D. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 228. Emphasis has been directed towards ensuring alignment between the strategic ICT objectives and corresponding initiatives, including outlining a portfolio of projects with intended outcome and related performance indicators. The Information Technology Solutions and Services (ITSS) of UNICEF continues to manage systems development related to Information technology (IT), including in relation to the development and roll-out of VISION-One ERP. Key technologies have been identified to promote knowledge management. Despite the increased demands in connectivity, the global cost per transaction has been reduced, and this trend is expected to continue. 229. The overall scope of reporting, including Business Intelligence, analytics and dashboards, has increased exponentially (for example, an increase from 171 user accounts in 2007 to 1,246 accounts in 2009, and 650 from GB capacity to more than 900 GB). Those tools have provided particular benefits by delivering programmatic and operational information available to the managers of the organization, across all locations. The complexity of reports is also increasing, and delivery of available information is requested in various presentation methods, such as dashboards, depending on the end-user. 230. There has been a substantial increase in the volume of data and user traffic to the UNICEF website and intranet. The www.unicef.org website is currently experiencing a daily average access of 268,000. Several new tools have been developed to make this content more widely available, organized, and searched and accessed. 231. ITSS established five Long-term Agreements for the provision of professional services in four areas: IT Security Services, Systems Development and Integration Services, Systems Engineering, and Project and Portfolio Management Services. The use of Long-term Agreements improved organizational performance through strategic sourcing and facilitated the implementation of ITSS and Change Management key initiatives. 232. In emergency work, The Emergency Telecoms Cluster coordination of data communications and fulfilment of duties as provider-of-last-resort was turned over to WFP in 2009. UNICEF, through its field presence of trained ICT staff, continues to play a significant role in cluster activities. 233. Key enterprise services have been developed to improve risk-prone areas. Improvements include an increase of email capacity to 1GB, expansion of network storage space for users and groups in New York headquarters, the installation of SPAM filters, and automated monitoring of global messaging, which has further enhanced capacity to detect unusual traffic patterns. A new backup and recovery system has also been installed. E. Audit and risk management 234. The Office of Internal Audit (OIA) is on track in meeting MTSP objectives. OIA continues to provide high-quality internal audit services to UNICEF, with good coverage of all key issues. In 2008 the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) certified that OIA generally conforms to the IIA International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal Auditing and the IIA Code of Ethics, the highest rating given for such a review. OIA maintained those standards in 2009. Together with reporting to the Executive Board, this provided independent assurance to senior UNICEF management, as well as to Member States, on the effectiveness of risk management, control and governance processes. 235. One of the highlights of 2009 was the introduction of a new approach to audit of country offices focusing more on high-level strategic issues. This new approach is reflected in new audit guidelines and supports the upstream approach to programme implementation. The new approach focuses on the ability of offices to manage risks and provide effective governance and oversight, examines quality assurance mechanisms and focuses on high-level risks. 236. Advisory services were provided on key issues. OIA participated in a number of organization-wide development initiatives, such as the reviews of the accountability and regulatory frameworks and of the MTSP. In support of the implementation of the Enterprise Risk Management policy issued in 2009, OIA developed a module on Risk and Control Self-Assessment and facilitated training. In line with IIA standards and upon the request of management, and endorsement from the UNICEF Audit Advisory Committee, OIA will take on a more direct role in supporting the implementation of Enterprise Risk Management throughout the organization. 237. The investigation function of OIA became fully operational in 2009 with the recruitment and staffing of the newly established investigation unit. A secure database for evidence, investigation reports and related sensitive material was established. This will enable OIA to better analyse fraud and harassment issues, and may eventually suggest indicators to predict and prevent such cases. F. Change Management initiatives 238. Three changes are being rolled out to all UNICEF locations in 2010-2011 that will enhance managing for results, simplifying business processes, and reducing transactions and related costs. The first is the introduction of a flexible and simplified programme results structure and multi-year/rolling workplans. The benefits of the simplified results structure will include a strengthened UNICEF focus on the achievement of strategy-level results for children as well as greater alignment to national priorities. The multi-year/rolling workplans will allow for greater flexibility in developing workplans to align to specific country needs. Twenty-six country programmes are piloting these changes in 2010. 239. The second key change is the roll-out of VISION, made up of a single application system to serve the organization and a performance management information system that will profile the performance status of all offices. VISION will allow full alignment of business processes and tools in both headquarters and field locations, and increase system capacity to support results-based programming and management, as well as simplified business processes. A phased roll-out of VISION-One ERP will be made to all locations throughout 2011. 240. The third key change is the implementation of IPSAS, which will affect the way the organization reports on revenue and expenditures. 241. Training materials and a timeline have been developed to ensure that UNICEF staff is ready to implement these changes. IV. Organizational performance 242. Steady progress has been made towards the achievement of planned MTSP targets on organizational performance, with positive trends in several of the programme management key performance indicators (see table 1). An independent review of the quality of the 17 country programme documents submitted to the Executive Board in 2009 indicated that 75 per cent fully or adequately met organizational standards on key parameters, including alignment to UNDAF results, application of a human rights-based approach, gender mainstreaming, results-based management and communication for development. Table 1 Key programme management performance indicators Indicator In Programme oversight % country offices with annually updated Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan % new CPDs referring to Observations of Committee on the Rights of the Child and/or Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women % new CPDs approved by the Executive Board that meet organizational standards for application of human rights-based approach n.a. % new CPDs approved by the Executive Board that meet organizational standards for application of Gender mainstreaming % country programmes for which a gender review and self- assessment was undertaken % CPDs approved by the Executive Board that meet organizational standards for Results-Based Management % CPDs that include a clearly articulated strategy for use of Communication for Development, with a focus on behaviour and social change to achieve results for children Knowledge management: (i) Number of lessons learned, vetted and accessed (ii) Number of "communities of practice" created as per established guidance Not applicable Country offices reporting documented examples of UNICEF support to South-South cooperation Number of countries using UNICEF procurement services to procure supplies for children and their families Programme funding - % donor reports submitted on time % of total income that is thematic funding UN Coherence % CPDs with result matrices aligned to UNDAF results matrix Number of UNICEF staff serving as Resident Coordinator % programme funds expended on annual work plans that are jointly funded by at least one other United Nations agency n.a Evaluation % programme evaluations rated satisfactory or better based on United Nations standards % evaluations with a formal management response 50%a n.a.: Data not yet available. a Based on 10 reports only; 4 were finalized towards the end of 2009 with management response due in early 2010. 243. Key operations management indicators also remained largely on trend (see table 2). Significant improvement was seen in the timeliness of recruitment actions. Strategic progress has been made towards adoption of IPSAS in policy development (14 policy positions), change management (awareness raised), systems adaptation (high-level changes incorporated into ERP and report preparation. The IPSAS implementation plan is now available on the UNICEF website, in accordance with Executive Board decision 2009/7. 244. UNICEF supply throughput of goods and services and warehouse deliveries continued to increase, in terms of both value and quantities. The total global value of goods procured in 2009 was $1.75 billion, an increase of 20 per cent over 2008. UNICEF provided procurement services to 100 governments, including with funding from a number of global partnerships (such as GAVI, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, UNITAID and the World Bank), resulting in delivery of $1.031 billion worth of supplies to countries -- a 40 per cent increase in value. Table 2 Key operations management performance indicators Finance Management/administration/programme support costs to total regular resources and other resources % of allocated regular resources for programme expended at end of year % outstanding direct cash transfer to national partners over nine months Risk management practice % of audit observations closed by 1 July of following year General compliance with Institute of Internal Auditors standards based on periodic independent quality reviews of internal audit function Partial General compliance % complaints investigated and closed within six months Number of offices/divisions with audit recommendations outstanding for over 18 months Supply Value of country procurement services (millions of United States dollars) No. of programme countries in which UNICEF supports Governments to produce a plan to address shortages of essential commodities (including % Least Developed Countries [LDCs]) No. of programme countries with updated logistics capacity assessment % orders delivered at port of entry at or within agreed arrival dates % rapid response orders shipped within 48 hours of sales order release Human resources % recruitment actions completed within 90 days for established international Professional posts % requests for surge capacity support met within 56 days % staff identifying themselves as satisfied with the UNICEF workplace, as per global staff survey Not surveyed % performance assessment reports signed by all 3 parties by end of February the following year % of total staff costs (support budget and regular resources) spent on learning and staff development % of staff who spent more than 10 days on planned learning Number of staff successfully completing learning programmes at following levels: basic programme excellence leadership and management % women staff at P/L 5 levels and above, globally Information and communication technologya % increase in UNICEF staff productivity through use of modern Enterprise Content Management system The number of Lotus Notes email accounts increased to 12,500 in 2009 (including consultants). This target to be further refined in 2010. % of emergencies in which information technology services requested are provided as per standards established in the proposed revision of CCCs % of Service Level Agreement targets met or exceeded a The ICT key performance indicators are undergoing review and will be refined to reflect the effectiveness and efficiencies better. V. Income, expenditure and resource mobilization Income  Figures in the tables and graphs may differ slightly from those in the text due to rounding. 245. Total income to UNICEF decreased by 4 per cent, from $3,390 million in 2008 to $3,256 million in 2009 (see tables 3 and 4). This is primarily due to decreased contributions to other resources, both regular and emergency, reflecting the negative impact of the global economic downturn on development assistance. Total income exceeded the financial plan for 2009 by $332 million. Table 3 UNICEF income by resource type and source for 2008 and 2009 (In millions of United States dollars) Source of Income Comparison to 2008 Comparison to Plan Actual Planned $m Regular resources Government (gross)* Private sector Other Total - regular resources Other resources - regular Government Inter-organizational arrangements Subtotal Other resources - emergency Total - other resources Total * Gross regular resources income from governments includes income taxes paid by UNICEF on behalf of the citizens of a government that contributes to UNICEF regular resources, reported in the expenditure table. Table 4 UNICEF income by source for 2008 and 2009 Source of income Private sector/ non-government 246. Compared to 2008, total income to regular resources decreased by 2 per cent to $1,066 million in 2009 and exceeded the 2009 plan by $109 million, or 11 per cent. The $22 million decrease in regular resources from governments was offset by the increase in regular resources from the private sector. Contributions to other resources decreased by 5 per cent to $2,190 million, exceeding the plan by $223 million, or 11 per cent. 247. As a result, regular resources accounted for 33 per cent of total income to UNICEF in 2009, a slight increase from 32 per cent in 2008 but much lower than the 37 per cent level of 2007. 248. Other income during 2009 was $89 million, the majority of which was generated from interest income. Despite the crisis in world financial markets, UNICEF was able to protect its investment portfolio. 249. Receipts of $1,244 million and disbursements of $1,050 million were administered and accounted for under various trust funds, including procurement services, during 2009. Expenditure 250. Total expenditure increased by 6 per cent, from $3,098 million in 2008 to $3,298 million in 2009 (see table 5). Expenditure on programme assistance increased by $135 million (5 per cent) to $2,943 million. Combined expenditure on programme support ($198 million), management and administration ($100 million) and centrally shared security costs ($23 million) amounted to $321 million, an increase of $70 million compared to 2008. Table 5 UNICEF expenditure for 2008 and 2009 Nature of expenditure Programme assistance Net programme support and management and administration Write-offs* Support budget costs/reimbursement** * write-offs are primarily related to uncollectible receivables from old expired contributions. ** support budget transfers that represents income taxes paid by UNICEF on behalf of the citizens of a government that contributes to UNICEF regular resources. 251. Tables 6 through 9 summarize UNICEF direct programme assistance (net of programme support) in 2009 by MTSP focus areas and by geographical regions, disaggregated by funding source. Focus area 1 saw a slight decrease in overall direct programme assistance compared to 2008, leading to a 4 per cent fall in its overall share, partly due to a decrease in emergency-related expenditures (ORE). Focus areas 2, 3 and 4 maintained nearly identical shares, while that of focus area 5 increased significantly, reflecting the greater emphasis of UNICEF in supporting analysis and advocacy as well as responses to economic shocks affecting children. Allocations by the Executive Director from the Regular Resource Set-Aside totalled $53.5 million, 49 per cent of which supported nutritional and other responses to economic slowdown and volatile food prices; 26 per cent to increase the availability of insecticide-treated mosquito nets in malaria-endemic countries; and 25 per cent to support the development of communication activities against the H1N1 flu in 90 countries. ORE ORR RR Young child survival and development Basic education and gender equality HIV/AIDS and children Child protection from violence, exploitation and abuse Policy advocacy and partnerships for children's rights ORE = other resources emergency. ORR = other resources regular. RR = regular resources. Table 7 Direct programme assistance by focus area, as a percentage of total programme expenditure, 2009 252. The share of total direct programme assistance of sub-Saharan Africa maintained its level, reached in 2008, of about 55 per cent, while Asia and all other regions maintained constant shares. Least developed countries accounted for 51 per cent of the total, and countries with high U5MR for 57 per cent (see annex). Table 8 Direct programme assistance by region, 2009 Region CEE/CIS Asia Sub-Saharan Africaa Inter-regional Middle East and North Africa Americas and the Caribbean a Includes Sudan and Djibouti. Table 9 Direct programme assistance by region, as a percentage of total programme expenditure, 2009 Resource mobilization 253. Donor governments continued to support UNICEF in 2009 despite the economic slowdown (see figures I and II). Income from government donors dropped slightly in 2009, with 102 governments contributing. In all, contributions from government and inter-governmental sources decreased by 4 per cent over 2008 levels, while contributions from inter-organizational arrangements (also originating from government donors) increased by 16 per cent. Private sector contributions, comprising income from private sector fundraising and contributions from nongovernmental organizations, decreased by 7 per cent. 254. UNICEF core resources are critical for long-term investments in national priority goals and capacities for children's rights in programme countries. The declining ratio of core resources to overall income is of great concern, as the UNICEF global presence and its capacity to provide continued leadership on child-related issues largely depend on a strong and reliable core income base. While governments have tried to sustain their support to UNICEF in 2009, the impact of the global economic downturn is likely to have a negative impact on income in 2010. NC = National Committee for UNICEF. 255. Partnerships with foundations, non-governmental organizations and global programmes expanded again in 2009. These partnerships not only brought valuable financial resources for UNICEF-assisted programmes but also provided opportunities to leverage further funding for children worldwide. Among the major contributors to UNICEF were Rotary International ($48 million), Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation ($45 million), GAVI Global Fund for Children's Vaccines ($14 million), Canadian Micronutrient Initiative ($11 million) and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria ($6.2 million). 256. As shown in table 10, the United States Government remains the largest government donor to UNICEF, with a contribution of $299 million, followed by Norway ($199 million), the Netherlands ($191 million), the United Kingdom ($182 million), Sweden ($171 million), Japan ($164 million), Canada ($128 million), Spain ($113 million), Australia ($70 million) and Denmark ($63 million). Rank Donor Total ($ Million) United States Norway Netherlands United Kingdom Sweden Japan Japan NC European Commission UNDP* Canada Spain UNOCHA* Germany NC Netherlands NC Australia US Fund Denmark Italy NC Sweden NC France NC Rotary International United Kingdom NC Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Spain NC Belgium * Contributions received through UNDP and UNOCHA originate mostly from the same major government and intergovernmental donors. 257. Thematic funds are the best alternative to regular resources, as they are the most flexible of the restricted funds. Thematic funds directly support the achievement of the MTSP key results and targets by allowing long-term planning and sustainability and savings in transaction costs for both UNICEF and donors. In 2009 overall thematic funding decreased significantly, by 14 per cent, mainly due to a steep fall in thematic humanitarian funding. Thematic funding for the five MTSP focus areas increased by 13 per cent over 2008 levels, from $203 million to $230 million (see table 11). The largest increase was for Child Protection. UNICEF remains committed to improving all processes related to thematic funding, including more transparent allocation of global thematic pools and improved results-based and financial utilization reporting, to meet donor expectations and increase flows. (In United States dollars) Thematic Area Policy, advocacy and partnership Child protection HIV and AIDS and children Humanitarian assistance 258. Norway, Spain and Sweden continued to be the top three contributors to thematic funds in 2009. In addition to 22 governments and 30 National Committees, the European Commission and private donors also provided thematic funding in 2009. Child Protection received a boost in funding from major government donors, including Sweden, the United Kingdom, Spain, Germany and Norway, among others. UNICEF National Committees played a crucial role in funding, especially for Focus Area 1, and their contributions to thematic humanitarian constituted 71 per cent of the total. The percentage of MTSP thematic funds dedicated to each sector is shown in figure III. Figure III Distribution of thematic funds by focus areas, 2009 259. Income from public sector donors accounted for nearly 88 per cent of total humanitarian funding (see top 20 donors in table 12). This enabled UNICEF to request funding for 65 emergency situations. Table 12 Top 20 donors and sources of humanitarian funding (ORE) in 2009 Amount Italy Finland Republic of Korea * Contributions received through UNOCHA and UNDP originate mostly from the same major government and intergovernmental donors. Income includes $94 million from CERF (UNOCHA) and $95 million from MDTF (UNDP). 260. In 2009 the European Commission increased its humanitarian contribution by nearly 44 per cent, while the Central Emergency Response Fund was the largest source of ORE. Among Government donors, the United States was the largest contributor for overall emergency funding, while contributions from the Government of Belgium and the German National Committee showed rapid growth. 261. Humanitarian funding was also received from other pooled funding mechanisms, including the Common Humanitarian Funds, Humanitarian Response Funds and World Bank-administered Multi-Donor Trust Funds (MDTFs). 262. UNICEF continued to expand its participation in United Nations coherence and inter-organizational partnership arrangements through a variety of pooled funds and MDTFs. Income from pooled funds and MDTFs increased by 16 per cent, from $256 million in 2008 to $296 million in 2009. Of this, $156 million was allocated for humanitarian assistance and $140 million for development programmes. Funding from the One UN Fund rose to $26.7 million, compared to $10.7 million in 2008. Income from the MDG Achievement Fund thematic window also increased rapidly, from $4.3 million in 2008 to $30 million in 2009. VI. Draft decision 263. It is recommended that the Executive Board adopt the following draft decision: The Executive Board 1. Welcomes the annual report of the Executive Director and the report on the in-depth review of the medium-term strategic plan, 2006-2013 (E/ICEF/2010/9), and its companion document on the revised annexes to the medium-term strategic plan (E/ICEF/2010/10), and commends the process, including the analysis of results and revisions based on the review; 2. Endorses the general conclusions of the review, including the adjustments envisaged for the remaining period of the current medium-term strategic plan; 3. Looks forward to a discussion on the end-of-cycle review of the extended medium-term strategic plan and the process of planning the next medium-term strategic plan at the first regular session 2012. Programme expenditure in 2009 for countries classified according to gross national income and under-5 mortality ratesa Child population in 2008 (In millions) (Percentage of total) Numberb of countries Resources available (In millions of US dollars) Cents per child (US cents) (Percentage) Country grouping based on 2006 GNI Low income, total Lower middle income (Lower middle income, excluding China and India) Upper middle income High income Total for countries Total for global and other regional funds Grand Total Country grouping based on 2006 U5MR Very high U5MR High U5MR, total (High U5MR, excluding India) Middle U5MR, total (Middle U5MR, excluding China) Low U5MR (of which LDCs) a Low income = GNI per capita of $935 or less. Lower middle-income = GNI per capita between $936 and $3,595. Upper middle-income = GNI per capita between $3,706 and $11,455. High income = GNI per capita of $11,906 or more Very high U5MR = over 140 under-5 deaths per 1,000 live births. High U5MR = 71-140 under-5 deaths per 1,000 live births. Middle U5MR = 21-70 under-5 deaths per 1,000 live births. Low U5MR = less than 21 under-5 deaths per 1,000 live births. LDCs = least developed countries. b Pacific, Caribbean and CEE/CIS multi-country programmes were counted as one each, except countries in emergency situations within the multi-country programme that have separate expenditure and available indicators. 