%%%DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/9 30 June 2010 Original: English AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON LONG-TERM COOPERATIVE ACTION UNDER THE CONVENTION Eleventh session Bonn, 2 - 6 August 2010 Item 2 (a) of the provisional agenda Organizational matters Adoption of the agenda Provisional agenda and annotations Note by the Executive Secretary* Provisional agenda Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Adoption of the agenda; Organization of the work of the session. 3. Preparation of an outcome to be presented to the Conference of the Parties for adoption at its sixteenth session to enable the full, effective and sustained implementation of the Convention through long-term cooperative action now, up to and beyond 2012. 4. Other matters. 5. Report on the session. Background By its decision 1/CP.13 (the Bali Action Plan), the Conference of the Parties (COP) launched a comprehensive process to enable the full, effective and sustained implementation of the Convention through long-term cooperative action, now, up to and beyond 2012, in order to reach an agreed outcome and adopt a decision at its fifteenth session. It decided that the process shall be conducted under a subsidiary body under the Convention, the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention (AWG-LCA). The COP, by its decision 1/CP.15, extended the mandate of the AWG-LCA to enable it to continue its work with a view to presenting the outcome of its work to the COP for adoption at its sixteenth session. At the same session, the COP requested the AWG-LCA to continue its work, drawing on the report of the AWG-LCA presented to the COP at its fifteenth session, as well as work undertaken by the COP on the basis of that report. At its ninth session, the AWG-LCA agreed that its sessions would be held in conjunction with those of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (AWG-KP). At its meeting on 17 May 2010, the Bureau of the COP decided that the eleventh session of the AWG-LCA would be held in Bonn from 2 to 6 August 2010, in conjunction with the thirteenth session of the AWG-KP. Annotations to the provisional agenda Opening of the session The eleventh session of the AWG-LCA will be opened by the Chair on Monday, 2 August 2010, at the Maritim Hotel in Bonn, Germany. The provisional agenda for the session will be presented for adoption. Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary Organization of the work of the session Background: The Chair of the AWG-LCA has prepared a note (FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/10) on the scenario for the eleventh session, taking account of the invitation received from the AWG-LCA at its ninth session to propose, through her scenario notes, an indicative roadmap. Delegates are invited to consult this scenario note for further information and proposals on the organization of work. The AWG-LCA will meet in an opening plenary on Monday, 2 August. The Chair will invite statements, starting with statements on behalf of groups of Parties. Delegations are requested to keep their oral statements as brief as possible and to provide a hard copy to the conference officers in advance to facilitate the work of the interpreters. Those wishing to make a written statement available to all delegates should bring copies for distribution. Parties are invited to refer to the overview of the session posted on the UNFCCC website and to consult the Daily Programme, published during the session, for a detailed and up-to-date schedule of the work of the AWG-LCA. The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), at its thirty-second session, recommended that the secretariat, in organizing future sessional periods, follow the practice of holding no more than two meetings of plenary and/or contact groups concurrently, with the total number of meetings held concurrently, including informals, not exceeding six, to the extent possible. It also recommended that the secretariat continue to take into consideration, when scheduling meetings, the constraints of delegations and avoid clashes on similar issues to the extent possible. At the same session, the SBI further recalled its recommendation in previous conclusions that all meetings end by 6 p.m., particularly to give Parties and regional groups sufficient time to prepare for daily meetings, but may, in exceptional circumstances, and on a case by case basis, continue for two to three hours. This session of the AWG-LCA will be organized according to the aforementioned recommendations. Action: The AWG-LCA will be invited to agree on the organization of work for the session. FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/10 Scenario note on the eleventh session. Note by the Chair Preparation of an outcome to be presented to the Conference of the Parties for adoption at its sixteenth session to enable the full, effective and sustained implementation of the Convention through long-term cooperative action now, up to and beyond 2012 Background: The AWG-LCA, at its ninth session, invited its Chair to prepare, under her own responsibility, a text to facilitate negotiations among Parties, drawing on the report of the AWG-LCA presented to the COP at its fifteenth session, as well as work undertaken by the COP on the basis of that report, and to make this text available two weeks in advance of the tenth session of the AWG-LCA. The text was issued as document FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/6. The AWG-LCA, at its tenth session, considered the text to facilitate negotiations referred to in paragraph 14 above. To further facilitate negotiations among Parties, the Chair has prepared a second iteration of that text, reflecting her sense of how the text could be advanced based on the work undertaken by the AWG-LCA at its tenth session. This text is contained in document FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/8. Action: The AWG-LCA will be invited to continue its negotiations of the outcome to be presented to the COP for adoption at its sixteenth session. FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/8 Text to facilitate negotiations among Parties. Note by the Chair Other matters Any other matters arising during the session will be taken up under this item. Report on the session Background: A draft report on the work of the session will be prepared for adoption by the AWG-LCA. Action: The AWG-LCA will be invited to adopt the draft report and authorize the Rapporteur to complete the report, under the guidance of the Chair and with the assistance of the secretariat. Documents prepared for the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention at its eleventh session Documents prepared for the session Other documents before the session FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/7 Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention on its tenth session, held in Bonn from 1 to 11 June 2010 FCCC/AWGLCA/2009/17 Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention on its eighth session, held in Copenhagen from 7 to 15 December 2009 FCCC/CP/2010/2 Work undertaken by the Conference of the Parties at its fifteenth session on the basis of the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention FCCC/CP/2009/11 and Add.1 Report of the Conference of the Parties on its fifteenth session, held in Copenhagen from 7 to 19 December 2009 