%%%EMISSION INVENTORIES|CLIMATE CHANGE|DOCUMENTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/3 23 April 2010 Original: English AD HOC WORKING GROUP ON FURTHER COMMITMENTS FOR ANNEX I PARTIES UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol on its eleventh session, held in Bonn from 9 to 11 April 2010 CONTENTS Paragraph Page Annex Documents prepared for the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session 6 Opening of the session (Agenda item 1) The eleventh session of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (AWG-KP) was held at the Maritim Hotel in Bonn, Germany, from 9 to 11 April 2010. The Chair of the AWG-KP, Mr. John Ashe (Antigua and Barbuda), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. He welcomed Mr. Harald Dovland (Norway) as Vice-Chair of the AWG-KP and Mr. Miroslav Spasojevic (Serbia) as Rapporteur. The Chair reminded delegates that the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP), by its decision 1/CMP.5, requested the AWG-KP to deliver the results of its work pursuant to decision 1/CMP.1 for adoption by the CMP at its sixth session. The Chair further recalled that the first session of the AWG-KP in 2010 would be devoted to further advancing its work and to determining the work plan for the remainder of 2010. Organizational matters (Agenda item 2) Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2 (a)) At its 1st meeting, on 9 April, the AWG-KP considered a note by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations (FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/1). At the same meeting, the agenda was adopted as follows: Opening of the session. Organizational matters: Adoption of the agenda; Organization of the work of the session; Election of officers. Consideration of further commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol. Work programme for 2010. Other matters. Report on the session. Organization of the work of the session (Agenda item 2 (b)) The AWG-KP considered this sub-item at its 1st meeting, on 9 April. The Chair made a proposal for the organization of the work of the eleventh session, as outlined in the scenario note. The AWG-KP agreed to the proposed organization of work. At the same meeting, statements were made by representatives of 16 Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the Umbrella Group, one on behalf of the European Union and its member States, one on behalf of the Environmental Integrity Group, one on behalf of the African Group, one on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States and one on behalf of the least developed countries. Election of officers (Agenda item 2 (c)) The AWG-KP considered this sub-item at its 1st and 2nd meetings, on 9 and 11 April respectively. At the 1st meeting, the Chair informed the AWG-KP that the President of the fifth session of the CMP, Ms. Lykke Friis (Denmark), had invited Mr. Andrej Kranjc (Slovenia), Rapporteur of the CMP, to conduct consultations on the nomination of officers of the AWG-KP on her behalf. Mr. Kranjc provided an update on the consultations at the 2nd meeting and informed delegates that agreement had not been reached among the regional groups on the nominees for Chair, Vice-Chair and Rapporteur of the AWG-KP. At the same meeting, the AWG-KP Chair informed delegates that, in accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2 of the draft rules of procedure being applied. The current officers of the AWG-KP, namely Mr. John Ashe as Chair, Mr. Harald Dovland as Vice Chair and Mr. Miroslav Spasojevic as Rapporteur, will remain in office until their successors are elected at the next ordinary session of the AWG-KP. Consideration of further commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 3) Work programme for 2010 (Agenda item 4) Proceedings The AWG-KP considered these items at its 1st and 2nd meetings, on 9 and 11 April respectively. It had before it documents FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/17 and FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/MISC.1 - FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/MISC.1. At its 1st meeting, the AWG-KP agreed to establish a contact group to be chaired by the Chair of the AWG-KP. The contact group was established to prepare draft conclusions on agenda items 3 and 4, addressing the issues identified in the scenario note. The Chair asked Ms. Stephanie Lee (New Zealand) and Mr. Marcelo Rocha (Brazil) to conduct informal consultations on these matters on his behalf. At the same meeting, the AWG-KP agreed to a proposal by the Chair to consider the question of the number and duration of meetings to be held in 2010 in informal consultations convened jointly with the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention (AWG-LCA) and facilitated by Mr. Robert Owen-Jones (Australia), Chair of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) and member of the Bureau of the Conference of the Parties (COP) and the CMP. Also at the 1st meeting a statement was made by Mr. Richard Kinley, Deputy Executive Secretary of the UNFCCC secretariat, to inform delegates about the outcomes of the meeting of the Bureau of the COP and the CMP held on 8 April 2010 and to provide them with information relating to possible additional sessions of the Ad Hoc Working Groups presented by the secretariat to the Bureau of the COP and the CMP. At its 2nd meeting, the Chair invited the co-facilitators to provide oral reports on the informal consultations referred to in paragraphs 13 and 14 above. Statements were made by representatives of nine Parties, including one speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, one on behalf of the African Group and one on behalf of the European Union and its member States. At the same meeting, the AWG-KP considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair as amended during the course of the plenary meeting. Conclusions The AWG-KP recalled decision 1/CMP.5 and reiterated that it will deliver the results of its work pursuant to decision 1/CMP.1 for adoption by the CMP at its sixth session. The AWG-KP took note of the views of Parties on the need for additional meeting time in 2010 contained in document FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/MISC.1 - FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/MISC.1, as well as views expressed by Parties during its eleventh session. The AWG-KP agreed to continue its work in 2010 in accordance with its work programme. It further agreed to focus its work on the issues identified in paragraph 49 (a) ("consideration of the scale of emission reductions to be achieved by Annex I Parties in aggregate") and (b) ("consideration of the contribution of Annex I Parties, individually or jointly, consistent with Article 4 of the Kyoto Protocol, to the scale of emission reductions to be achieved by Annex I Parties in aggregate") of document FCCC/KP/AWG/2008/8, and to continue to work on the issues identified in paragraph 49 (c) ("other issues arising from the implementation of the work programme, with due attention to improving the environmental integrity of the Kyoto Protocol") of the same document. The AWG-KP agreed that its twelfth session would be held in conjunction with the thirty-second sessions of the SBI and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA), as well as to hold its fifteenth session in conjunction with the sixth session of the CMP for as long as necessary. The AWG-KP further agreed that its sessions would be held in conjunction with those of the AWG-LCA. The AWG-KP agreed that in order to conclude its work it would need to hold two sessions between its twelfth session and the sixth session of the CMP, of a duration of at least one week each, while ensuring sufficient negotiating time as well as allowing sufficient time between sessions to enable Parties to consult and prepare in order to enable the AWG-KP to continue its work and to deliver the results of its work pursuant to decision 1/CMP.1 for adoption by the CMP at its sixth session. The AWG-KP requested the secretariat to make the necessary arrangements. The AWG-KP took note of a proposal for the SBI to consider the option that a high-level session be held between the thirty-second sessions of the SBI and the SBSTA and the sixth session of the CMP to provide guidance. The AWG-KP invited Parties in a position to do so to offer, as soon as possible, to host such sessions. The AWG-KP expressed appreciation for the contributions received from Parties for the work of the AWG-KP and strongly urged Parties in a position to do so to provide contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities in order to ensure the widest possible participation in the negotiations, aimed at funding two delegates from each eligible Party and a third delegate from the least developed countries and small island developing States. The AWG-KP acknowledged that financial contributions or firm pledges should preferably be made by 26 April 2010 for its thirteenth session and by 9 June 2010 for the fourteenth and subsequent sessions, to allow the secretariat to make the necessary arrangements. The AWG-KP requested its Chair: To prepare documentation to facilitate negotiations on the basis of the annex to the report of the AWG-KP on its tenth session, taking into consideration the work undertaken and decisions adopted by the CMP at its fifth session on the basis of the report of the AWG-KP on its tenth session, for consideration by the AWG-KP at its twelfth session, and to make this documentation available at least two weeks before that session; To make proposals on the scheduling of the issues referred to in paragraph 20 above in his scenario note prepared for each of its sessions in 2010, bearing in mind the focus specified in that paragraph. In order to make progress in its work under paragraph 20 above, the AWG-KP requested the secretariat to prepare for consideration by the AWG-KP at its twelfth session: A paper compiling pledges for emission reductions and related assumptions provided by the Parties to date and the associated emission reductions; A technical paper laying out issues relating to the transformation of pledges for emission reductions into quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives. The AWG-KP noted that taking fully into account the mandate of the AWG-KP, the Chair of the AWG-KP has undertaken, under his own initiative, to meet with the Chair of the AWG-LCA to identify information on commitments of Annex I Parties which is to be made available to Parties. Other matters (Agenda item 5) No other matters were raised or considered. Report on the session (Agenda item 6) At its 2nd meeting, on 11 April, the AWG-KP considered the draft report on its eleventh session (FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/L.1). At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the AWG-KP authorized the Rapporteur to complete the report on the session, under the guidance of the Chair and with the assistance of the secretariat. Closure of the session At the 2nd meeting, the Chair thanked the Vice-Chair and the Rapporteur for their work and thanked delegates for their contributions. Statements were made on behalf of the environmental non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the business and industry NGOs, and the youth. Documents prepared for the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol at its eleventh session Documents prepared for the session FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/1 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/2 Scenario note on the eleventh session. Note by the Chair FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/MISC.1 - FCCC/AWGLCA/2010/MISC.1 Views on the need for additional meeting time for the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol and the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention, and on organization of work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention. Submissions from Parties FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/L.1 Draft report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol on its eleventh session FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/L.2 Draft conclusions by the Chair on agenda items 3 and 4 FCCC/KP/AWG/2009/17 Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol on its tenth session, held in Copenhagen from 7 to 15 December 2009 FCCC/KP/CMP/2009/21 and Add.1 Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on its fifth session, held in Copenhagen from 7 to 15 December 2009 