%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|REGIONAL COOPERATION|ASIA AND THE PACIFIC|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL FCCC/SBI/2010/3 6 April 2010 Original: English SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION Thirty-second session Bonn, 31 May to 9 June 2010 Item 6 of the provisional agenda Article 6 of the Convention Report on the regional workshop on the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention in Asia and the Pacific Note by the secretariat Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction Mandate The Conference of the Parties (COP), at its eighth session, adopted the New Delhi work programme on Article 6 of the Convention, a five-year work programme on the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention (hereinafter referred to as Article 6). The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), at its twenty-seventh session, recognized that the five-year New Delhi work programme proved to be a good framework for action, and that the regional workshops on Article 6 held within the five-year period had helped to advance the New Delhi work programme by providing useful inputs at the country level and identifying possible follow-up action at the national, subregional and regional levels. The COP, at its thirteenth session, decided to adopt the amended New Delhi work programme and to extend it for five years. The secretariat was requested to organize thematic regional and subregional workshops, prior to the intermediate review of the work programme in 2010, to share lessons learned and best practices. The secretariat started this process by holding a regional workshop for the European region on 18 - 20 May 2009 in Stockholm, Sweden. Possible action by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation The SBI may use the information in this report to identify matters for further consideration, and to make recommendations on further action to advance the implementation of the amended New Delhi work programme. Background The New Delhi work programme sets out the scope of and provides the basis for action on activities related to Article 6, in accordance with the provisions of the Convention. It serves as a flexible framework for country-driven actions to address the specific needs and circumstances of Parties, while reflecting their national priorities and initiatives. Within this five-year framework, Parties have agreed on a list of activities that could be undertaken at the national and regional levels to enhance climate-focused education and training programmes. Parties have also agreed to increase the availability of information on climate change in order to improve public understanding and participation in addressing climate change issues. In developing and implementing Article 6 activities, Parties should seek to enhance cooperation and coordination at international and regional levels, including the identification of partners and networks with other Parties, intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the private sector, state and local governments, and community-based organizations. Parties should also promote and facilitate the exchange of information and material, and the sharing of experience and good practices. Proceedings The regional workshop on the implementation of Article 6 of the Convention in Asia and the Pacific was held in Bali, Indonesia, on 14 - 16 October 2009. It was organized by the secretariat in cooperation with the Ministry of Environment of Indonesia. Over 50 participants, representing 31 countries in Asia and the Pacific, IGOs such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR), and national and regional experts from NGOs, participated in the workshop. The workshop was chaired by Ms. Liana Bratasida, the Chair of the SBI. Ms. Bratasida opened the workshop by addressing the need to improve capacity-building delivery mechanisms for climate change, emphasizing the need for a country-driven process. This was followed by welcoming remarks by a representative of the secretariat, who stressed that the purpose of the workshop was to share experiences and develop tangible approaches to enhance the implementation of Article 6 in the region. Mr. Henry Bastaman from the Ministry of Environment of Indonesia explained the work of Indonesia on activities to raise awareness of climate change and its consequences. The workshop was structured around five sessions that took place over two and a half days. The first session provided an outline for the workshop and an introduction to Article 6 and the New Delhi work programme, including an invitation for Parties to prepare reports, as part of their national communications, on their efforts to implement Article 6, and to share best practices for the purpose of reviewing the implementation of the programme in 2010 and 2012. The second session included presentations by the secretariat and the primary focal point for the youth constituency (YOUNGO) on their work to enhance the understanding of climate change among children and young people and increase their participation in climate change issues. Participants at the third session learned about the online information network clearing house (CC:iNet). The final session on the first day was framed as a dialogue between high school students and an expert panel to discuss the challenges and opportunities in integrating climate education in schools, as well as the role of students in mitigating the risk of and adapting to climate change. The expert panel included Mr. Bastaman, Ms. Bratasida, Ms. Amanda Katili Niode from the National Council on Climate Change in Indonesia and Ms. Alla Metelitsa of the secretariat. They provided comments on the following issues: the importance of climate change education in the implementation of Article 6; the role of their respective entities in such implementation; and the existing legal framework in Indonesia supporting climate change education. The second day of the workshop was divided into panel discussions on best practices in the implementation of Article 6 and the amended New Delhi work programme. The first panel discussed examples of public awareness in China, Indonesia, Lebanon and the Philippines. This was followed by a presentation by a representative of the secretariat on the results of a survey of the workshop participants on national and regional priorities in the implementation of Article 6 and the amended New Delhi work programme. This was accompanied by a presentation by another representative of the secretariat on an evaluation of the user-friendliness of CC:iNet and next steps for its development and implementation. A summary of the presentations made during the first panel is presented in chapter III. The day continued with a second panel that presented public participation and access to information on climate change issues in Singapore. This was complemented by a presentation on the Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters (Aarhus Convention). The third panel on education and training provided national case studies from Indonesia, Malaysia, Seychelles, UNESCO and UNITAR. The final panel on regional and international cooperation discussed climate change educational activities undertaken by Indonesia, Japan and the British Council. A summary of the presentations made during these panels is presented in chapter III. Towards the end of the second day and throughout the third day of the workshop, participants broke into smaller groups to define good practices in the implementation of Article 6 in Asia and the Pacific, focusing on key target groups, existing gaps and possible areas for improvement. At the sixth and final session on the last day, participants presented the outcomes of the breakout groups and outlined a number of recommendations for possible ways forward, which are contained in chapter V. All available presentations can be found on the UNFCCC website. Summary of presentations Setting the scene: introduction to Article 6 of the Convention and the New Delhi work programme The amended New Delhi work progamme focuses on six distinct but related areas of work. The first is education, which aims at making profound and long-term changes in habits by sensitizing young people and promoting early awareness of and action on climate change. The second is training, which is directed at a targeted audience of professionals and aims at imparting specific skills that have an immediate practical application. The third is public awareness, which is often achieved by using media outlets to reach a broad audience commonly called `the public'. The Convention does not specify who this public might be, but depending on national circumstances it may be divided into a number of distinct groups, from policymakers to individual consumers and from local authorities to business. The fourth area of work is public access to information, which focuses on stimulating and facilitating participation in decision-making. The fifth area is public participation, which suggests public involvement in the decision-making process and aims at ensuring transparency of policies, engaging all stakeholders and encouraging debate and partnership. The final area of work is international cooperation, which attempts to enhance capacity-building through financial and technical support by developing networking activities and promoting exchange of experiences and best practices. A representative of the secretariat provided an overview of the status of the implementation of Article 6 in Asia and the Pacific based on a survey of the workshop participants. The profile of the respondents was as follows: 58 per cent of respondents were responsible for developing and/or implementing national programmes on Article 6; 24 per cent of respondents were active in activities related to Article 6; and 18 per cent of respondents were interested in learning more about Article 6 activities. Overall, the three most important issues regarding Article 6 according to the respondents were: education, public awareness and access to information, and public participation. With regard to public awareness and access to information, the respondents stated that less than 50 per cent of the citizens of their respective countries were aware of issues related to climate change. Most awareness-raising activities are carried out by governments, NGOs and the press. Key target audiences for Parties include the general public and policymakers, the press, the private sector, NGOs, academia, children, women and indigenous peoples. The key messages used by Parties to promote awareness of climate change issues are: climate change is taking place and poses real threats, and there are specific actions that citizens can take to reduce emissions and to adapt to the adverse effects of climate change. The respondents stated that they primarly use television, radio and newspapers as their main means of dissemination, while focusing the least on local leaders and the Internet. The respondents found that the main barriers to implementing awareness-raising activities include inadequate funding, inadequate expertise, the lack of human resources and political support, and the low level of priority given to climate change in the development agenda of their countries. In order to improve awareness-raising efforts, the respondents primarily seek training for staff, guidelines and best practices, assistance from international organizations with expertise in Article 6 activities and access to information and communication technologies (ICTs). The respondents indicated that governments and higher education institutions take the lead in implementing training activities on climate change issues. The main training priorities focus on conducting vulnerability studies, screening and selecting adaptation strategies, implementing adaptation efforts and reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Most training activities take the form of training workshops, training of trainers programmes, grants to attend training abroad and on-the-job training. The main barriers to providing training activities include the lack of funding and required expertise, unavailability of trainers, inadequate facilities and inadequate political or institutional support. With regard to education, it was noted that most curricula on environmental issues target primary and higher education, with less emphasis on secondary education. Most non-institution based educational activities take place through non-formal education programmes by IGOs and NGOs. The respondents stated that the main barriers to the implementation of educational activities include inadequate educational materials and their unavailability, inadequate funding, inexperienced staff, weak academic and research institutions, and competition with other subjects in an already overcrowded educational curriculum. According to the respondents, information on climate change issues is available to the public in their countries. Ninety per cent of respondents stated that their countries have a national focal point who can be contacted when seeking climate change information; 66 per cent of these countries have an official national climate change website. It was noted that parlamenterians and local communities have a high level of involvement in climate change policymaking, while indigenous peoples are the least involved. Regarding international cooperation, 60 per cent of the respondents acknowledged that financial support was received to undertake activities related to Article 6. Eighty-one per cent of the countries that submitted national communications received support from the Global Environment Facility (GEF). Ninety per cent of those receiving support from the GEF noted that they could allocate some funds for public outreach activities. The respondents noted that United Nations bodies, multilateral donors and developed countries offered the greatest potential for strengthening international cooperation. The five-year New Delhi work programme, addressing specific needs and circumstances of Parties, serves as a flexible framework for country-driven action and reflects national priorities and initiatives. Under the New Delhi work programme, Parties are encouraged to engage all stakeholders, such as local governments, IGOs, NGOs, and the private sector, in undertaking activities targeting the six elements of Article 6. Parties are also encouraged to designate a national focal point for Article 6 activities, prepare an assessment of needs, enhance climate-focused education and training programmes, increase the availability and dissemination of information on climate change and build active networks among stakeholders. A representative of the secretariat explained that there is not a specific mechanism for providing funding for activities under the New Delhi work programme, but that existing financial resources from the GEF and other multilateral and bilateral financial institutions could be accessed. Based on the results of the survey questionnaire, the workshop participants identified areas that needed to be addressed in order to improve the implementation of the New Delhi work programme. These included: Greater linkages between Article 6 activities, implementation of policies and measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change, and other commitments under the Convention; An increase in the availability of copyright-free and translated climate change materials; The creation of a directory of organizations and individuals involved in the implementation of these activities with a view to building active networks; An increased level of awareness-raising activities to inform the public about causes of climate change and sources of greenhouse gas emissions, as well as action that can be taken at all levels to address climate change; The sharing of findings contained in national communications and national action plans on climate change with the general public and all relevant stakeholders. Good practices at the international level: enhancing awareness of climate change among children and young people and increasing their participation in climate change issues A representative of the secretariat presented a survey carried out by the United Nations Environment Progamme (UNEP) that targeted 12 - 18 year olds in five countries (Brazil, India, Russian Federation, South Africa and the United States of America). One of the findings of this survey was that nine in ten young people agreed that "world leaders should do whatever it takes to tackle climate change". Four in five young people surveyed believe that they can make a difference on climate for our future. A representative of the secretariat provided an overview of the participation of young people in sessions of the COP, starting with the eleventh session of the COP in Montreal, Canada, when a youth movement on climate change was launched with support from hundreds of grass-roots initiatives and national campaigns taking place in countries around the world. YOUNGO leaders now meet daily during international events to focus their agenda and activities and create flexible governance structures that allow them to divide their work into three areas: media outreach, policy and activism. Furthermore, YOUNGO created a coordinating body that monitors progress by establishing goals and issuing policy statements to be read at high-level meetings. During these events, young delegates stayed connected with young people outside the talks by blogging in real time and posting photos and videos on social networking sites. It was estimated that 200 young people participated in COP 13 in Bali, Indonesia; some 500 young people attended COP 14 in Poznan, Poland; and over 1,500 attended COP 15 in Copenhagen, Denmark. A representative of the secretariat provided an overview of the UNEP TUNZA conference held in August 2009 in the Republic of Korea. The conference was organized as part of a long-term strategy for engaging young people in environmental activities and in the work of UNEP. The theme of the conference was "Climate Change: Our Challenge". It included two high profile events: a `Seal the Deal Global Townhall' meeting and a `Global Debate'. The outcomes of this conference included a declaration titled `Listen to Our Voices: The Future Needs Strong Vision and Leadership' and a series of awareness-raising and advocacy activities in the lead-up to COP 15 undertaken by children and youth organizations. The primary focal point for YOUNGO gave an overview on the structure of the youth constituency, which includes a steering group, regional and national networks, and operational committees focusing on media and communications, capacity-building, outreach, policy and administration. The vision of YOUNGO was defined as a world with a safe and stable climate. The YOUNGO primary focal point also provided details on activities such as rallies, days of action and capacity-building activities for youth delegates planning to attend COP 15. Sharing best practices on the information network clearing house (CC:iNet) and the One UN Training Service Platform for Climate Change (UN CC:Learn) A representative of the secretariat presented CC:iNet. This web-based platform established under the New Delhi work programme has been designed as a clearing house for information sources on public information, education and training in the field of climate change. It is designed to help governments, organizations and individuals gain rapid and easy access to ideas, strategies, contacts, a database of experts and materials that can be used to motivate and empower people to take effective action on climate change. It includes various indexed textual and relational databases, search features and links to partners, including Parties, United Nations agencies, IGOs and NGOs engaged in the implementation of Article 6. The presentation on CC:iNet illustrated the two-phase implementation approach: current features and functionality, and the planned progression to enhance the system and its information, in order to best accommodate the needs of its current users and engage a broader audience. This enhancement will involve improvements in the functionality of the system, the quality and type of information, layout and organization of materials. The presentation concluded with a short guide to the website, demonstrating how to enter and retrieve information from the perspective of a registered user. The representative of the secretariat went on to present the results of a short evaluation by workshop participants on the usability of CC:iNet and suggestions for its improvement. Sixty per cent of the respondents used the UNFCCC website as the primary access point for CC:iNet, while 32 per cent of the respondents were not aware that CC:iNet existed. Most respondents who access CC:iNet tend to use it once or twice a month and were unaware of the option of submitting data. Most respondents use CC:iNet for browsing and searching for information related to climate change. The main suggestions for improving CC:iNet were: To enhance the content of the platform; To enhance efforts to promote CC:iNet through other websites; To enhance its functionality and user-friendliness; To provide contact information for national focal points for Article 6 activities; To provide training for new users. The Associate Director for Training at the Environment Unit in UNITAR presented the development of the One UN Training Service Platform for Climate Change (UN CC:Learn). The presenter explained that the objectives of UN CC:Learn are to become a comprehensive tool for accessing and sharing climate change training materials, foster the development of a One UN Climate Change Training Package, support national processes to strengthen human resource and skills development for climate change through cooperation in the United Nations system, and facilitate knowledge sharing on the design, delivery and evaluation of the climate change training of United Nations agencies. The presenter emphasized that UN CC:Learn complements CC:iNet by focusing on services available through United Nations agencies and their operational activities. The main areas of activity for UN CC:Learn involve: Knowledge management and networking, which includes a searchable inventory of United Nations learning and training resources, information on climate change training activities promoted by the United Nations and sharing of experiences of good training practices; The development of a One UN Climate Change Training Package, which includes core United Nations learning materials and thematic learning kits; Pilot projects at a country level to strengthen human resource and skills development on climate change. Good practices on public awareness and communication The representative of Indonesia provided an overview of the work of the National Council on Climate Change as a model for coordinating public awareness and communication activities in Asia and the Pacific. The Council is coordinated by the President of Indonesia and has a mandate to develop national policies and strategies and provide resources to carry out activities on climate change. It provides sectoral coordination on climate change activities and coordinates carbon trading mechanisms and procedures. The Council also developed a monitoring and evaluation system to keep track of all climate change related activities. The results are reported to the secretariat through a national focal point for Article 6 activities. The representative of Lebanon stated that the Government of Lebanon raised awareness of climate change by organizing exhibitions, workshops and rallies; drafting informative publications; and undertaking media outreach activities. The exhibitions presented efforts by the Government of Lebanon and local NGOs to tackle climate change. The workshops focused on sharing information on the effects of climate change on industries such as tourism and agriculture, and strategic areas such as water and energy sources. Rallies included the launch of the `Kick the Habit' campaign on World Environment Day in 2008. Media outreach activities included radio and television interviews, newspaper articles about climate change, information dissemination through short message services and multimedia message services and the creation of an interactive website for the Ministry of the Environment. The representative of China provided an overview of the efforts to enhance public awareness of climate change issues in China. He emphasized that China is one of the most vulnerable developing countries to the effects of climate change, and great importance has been placed on education and awareness-raising concerning the environment. China focused on raising awareness among policymakers and the public by using training programmes and activities such as a National Energy Conservation Week and a National Tree Day as well as educational materials and media outreach. The presenter highlighted challenges in implementing these activities, such as: the lack of a comprehensive policy and a plan for raising public awareness of climate change in China; current efforts mostly target cities and not rural areas; and the lack of skilled human resources to carry out public awareness initiatives. The Philippines started implementing public awareness initiatives involving key stakeholders such as central and local government agencies, media outlets, NGOs, the private sector and research institutions. Government agencies carried out activities such as round-table discussions for decision makers, lectures and training workshops, exhibitions, media outreach activities; developed training materials; and organized special events targeting young people. Government agencies also increased the promotion of clean development mechanism (CDM) activities among the business community by producing informative materials and creating an online CDM clearing house. The Department of Energy organized the `Earth Hour Manila' initiative and launched an energy conservation programme, while the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration organized climate change forums and published informative materials. Local governments such as the Province of Albay organized educational conferences on issues relating to climate change adaptation, while media outlets started covering stories and producing documentaries on local manifestations of climate change in the Philippines. Public participation and access to information on climate change The environmental education strategy of Singapore has three aspects: it raises awareness through communication, builds capacity through engagement and catalyses action through empowerment. Formal education arrangements are coordinated by the Ministry of Education, which introduced climate change education into the formal school curriculum. Concrete examples of such education include lessons on recycling, energy and water conservation in formal curricula on subjects such as geography, social studies and science. Informal education efforts are led by the National Environmental Agency, which encourages teachers and students to develop their own environmental initiatives. It also trains young people to plan and implement environmental projects. A representative from Singapore emphasized that a key aspect to this approach lies in a collaborative arrangement with the private sector and NGOs. There is also an established monitoring and evaluation system, which encourages regular dialogue through focus groups for major stakeholders and includes surveys of the general population and partners. Feedback from these sources is used to `fine-tune' the environmental education programmes and partnership strategies of Singapore. A representative of the secretariat, on behalf of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, delivered a presentation on the Aarhus Convention, focusing on its linkages with Article 6. The Aarhus Convention is presently ratified by countries in the European region; however, it can be ratified by any country in the world and provides a model for other regions to ensure the more effective implementation of Article 6, notably the implementation of those elements relating to access to information and public participation. The Kiev Protocol on Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers (PRTR) was also mentioned as a tool used in the European region, which could be replicated to promote greater transparency and public accountability with respect to greenhouse gas emissions. The PRTR complements and supports reporting mechanisms under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Adopted in May 2003, the PRTR entered into force at the end of 2009. It requires annual mandatory facility-specific reporting by the operators of facilities that potentially emit a wide range of pollutants, including the main greenhouse gases. A key component of the PRTR is the provision of public access to the reported data through a web-based national registry. A representative of UNITAR presented the development of national profiles and action plans to implement Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration, with a focus on climate change. The objectives of these activities are to raise awareness of Principle 10; take stock of existing capacities for participatory environmental governance at national levels; identify areas for priority action and capacity development; strengthen intersectoral collaboration concerning public participation in environmental decision-making; and enhance collaboration between governments and stakeholders. The national profiles are further expected to provide a comprehensive and systematic baseline document that records national capacities related to the implementatin of Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration. They also need to cover related activities such as legislation, public policies and public participation practices, while providing a starting point for priority setting and action plan development to strengthen participatory governance. The key phases for these activities are the planning of meetings, the preparation of a national profile, the organization of a workshop to set national priorities and the creation of a national action plan. The presenter emphasized that the national profiles and action plans are effective tools to support advancement of mitigation and adaptation goals under the Convention. The presenter also stated that UNITAR would like to further explore collaboration with Parties and the secretariat in order to support national profiles and action plans, with a special focus on climate change governance. Education and training UNESCO actively contributed to building a knowledge base on climate change at the international level through fostering climate science and promoting education, capacity-building, public awareness and access to information. As task manager of chapter 36 of Agenda 21, which relates to the promotion of education, public awareness and training, and as the lead agency for the United Nations Decade for Education for Sustainable Development (2005 - 2014), UNESCO plays a key role in promoting education for sustainable development. Climate change is one of the main action themes of the Decade, as was reaffirmed at the World Conference on Education for Sustainable Development held in Bonn, Germany, from 31 March to 2 April 2009. Education is also a major strategic objective of the UNESCO Enhanced Plan of Action for the Strategy for Action on Climate Change. Climate change education was the topic of a three-day expert seminar organized by UNESCO in Paris, France, on 27 - 29 July 2009. Designed to reach and involve key stakeholders engaged in climate change education, the event brought together a multidisciplinary and diverse group of more than 60 educators, scientists and educational planners, many of whom were from small island developing States (SIDS), as well as IGOs and NGOs, to discuss and make recommendations on the role of and potential for education in addressing global climate change. Its specific objectives were to: Promote the effective integration of climate change education into educational programmes and school curricula; Mobilize support for teacher training on climate change education; Enhance the exchange of experiences and good practices on climate change education among ministries, teachers, practitioners and young people; Identify opportunities for using various networks to encourage local field-based education on climate change; Identify learning materials and good practices on climate change education and enhance their dissemination using ICTs. There was general consensus at the UNESCO seminar mentioned in paragraph 45 above that there is an urgent need for climate change education, and that this education should be interdisciplinary and holistic, integrating scientific, social, gender, economic, cultural and ethical dimensions and incorporating local, traditional and indigenous knowledge perspectives and practices. As a practical first step to address these immediate concerns, participants recommended the development of a climate change education knowledge hub to be coordinated by UNESCO in close cooperation with the secretariat, engaging international policy actors such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; UNEP; governments; youth, indigenous and women's groups; and community-level organizations. The primary purpose of the hub would then be to serve as a coordinating mechanism to review existing climate change education resources including curricula, prepare new materials and promote field activities and networking mechanisms at the local level. The British Council in Indonesia is implementing the `Climate4Classrooms' initiative, which focuses on bringing science-based, innovative climate change educational resources to teachers of students aged 11 and above. The initiative is currently being piloted in China, Indonesia, Mexico and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Partners involved in the initiative include the Royal Geographical Society, the Royal Metereological Society, ministries of education and environment, and training facilities for teachers and environmental NGOs. In Indonesia, a collaboration between the British Council and the Ministry of Education has been key in producing climate change teaching materials and online resources for children. This initiative is being expanded to other countries, while further materials and tools for international school exchanges and online discussions are being developed. A representative of Seychelles explained the importance of climate change education in SIDS. The presenter stressed that since SIDS are the most vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change, education plays an essential role in building more resilient populations. The presenter also emphasized that climate change education has to take into consideration local contexts, especially when discussing risks of natural disasters. From a pedagogical perspective, the presenter stated that climate change education needs to be child-centered and participatory, promote critical thinking and problem-solving skills, and develop adaptive capacities and resilience. The environmental education programmes of Malaysia rely on strong collaboration with educational institutions, industry and the general public. When working with educational institutions, the Government of Malaysia initiated debates on environmental issues, awards for sustainable schools and environmental education camps. In terms of working with industry, Malaysia promoted cleaner methods of production through awareness-raising seminars and advanced clean development projects by offering a sustainable city award to local communities. Finally, the approach of Malaysia when engaging the general public in climate change education includes awareness-raising events, clean-up projects, tree planting activities, essay competitions and special radio programming. A representative of UNITAR outlined a human resource and skills development strategy for climate change. This strategy is based on a systematic country-driven process to strengthen enabling conditions and determine the required learning and training needs to address climate change challenges. It seeks to identify short, medium and long-term action for specific target sectors and groups. It also attempts to help mobilize resources for training and skills development, with the ultimate goal of enhancing the knowledge and skills of individuals implementing the Convention. UNITAR seeks feedback from Parties, especially those interested in becoming pilot countries, and expects to share preliminary results through the second comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building. International and regional cooperation A representative of Indonesia presented the work of the regional thematic working group on climate change, ozone depletion and ecosystem changes. The working group consists of representatives of 14 countries in Asia and the Pacific and includes representatives of regional and international partners such as the World Health Organization, the UNEP Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific and the International Council for Science. The objectives of the working group are to: Enhance regional knowledge management and technical support for emerging and re-emerging infectious and non-infectious diseases associated with climate change, ozone depletion and ecosystem changes through information sharing and regional cooperation; Promote research and development in understanding the complex interrelationship between climate change, ozone depletion, ecosystem changes and human health; Promote effective management of the environment for the benefit of human health in the region; Establish a regional information centre from which member countries can access available sources of data related to the effects of climate change on human health, ozone depletion and other environmental changes. The next steps for the thematic working group are to enhance communication channels among its member countries and to improve the work in establishing linkages between health issues and climate change. A representative of Japan presented the approach of the country to ensure the effective implementation of Article 6. Japan is adopting a practical approach to addressing climate change, which links concepts to practical actions. The presenter provided an example of a campaign to reduce emissions from the residential sector in Japan, by providing financial incentives for consumers to switch to energy efficient appliances. Other domestic initiatives include the `Team Minus 6 per cent' campaign, which seeks to cut greenhouse gas emissions in Japan by 6 per cent; the `Cool Biz/Warm Biz' project that promotes energy efficiency among businesses; and the promotion of carbon offsetting among the general public. Regarding international cooperation, the presenter stated that Japan has provided an information dissemination network for CDM projects in China; a training workshop on developing a strategy to address climate change for 20 aid recipient countries; and a training session for the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration to address climate change at a local level. A representative of the British Council presented the International Climate Champions programme, which is designed to provide young people around the world with skills, training and access to resources to take action in addressing climate change issues. These `climate champions' come from diverse backgrounds and are leaders in their communities with the potential to influence others. They are expected to design and implement projects and campaigns, work with policymakers on climate change mitigation and adaptation policies, disseminate knowledge gained among their peers, and participate in national and international policy processes such as sessions of the COP. The climate champions start off as `climate networkers' and proceed through various levels of instruction and activities until they become `global ambassadors', who are recognized by governments and international organizations for their work to address climate change. Main outcomes of the discussions Public awareness, public participation and access to information Good practices in public awareness, public participation and access to information are those that are applicable, measurable, participatory, gender sensitive and sustainable. Such initiatives need to leverage ICTs, as well as social networks and local cultural practices that promote sustainability. The main challenges to attempts by Parties to raise awareness of climate change issues include inadequate funding; lack of access to technical support, especially when creating educational materials; and insuficient political will to advance effective policies. Policymakers, young people and the media were identified as key target groups to promote public awareness of climate change issues. Regarding the latter, participants suggested special training for journalists on environmental reporting and for NGOs interested in improving their outreach efforts to media outlets. Participants recommended the use of a wide range of communication channels, including press conferences, print advertisements, online media and short films. Such diversification would guarantee that a greater number of citizens from various strata of society become aware of and participate in mitigating climate change. Holistic solutions are required to improve climate change education, including approaches that are based on needs, country-driven and aim at making an impact by changing behavior. Climate change education should be integrated into the formal curriculum and across subjects. Participants further acknowledged the importance of both formal and non-formal education; formal education helps to give clear pedagogical guidelines, while non-formal education supports the formal setting. With regard to training, participants sought further opportunities, especially relating to access to funding avenues such as the CDM and the United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries. In many cases, non-domestic enterprises are the only ones with the capacity to access these resources. Participants were also interested in increased training opportunties on assessment and adaptation measures, especially those linked to managing effectively water resources and agricultural practices. International and regional cooperation is relevant to the implementation of Article 6, especially given the transboundary nature of climate change issues. Participants reaffirmed that such cooperation needs to be a country-driven and not a donor-determined process. Participants stated the need for a regional strategy on climate change that is flexible and adaptive, and complimented by subregional and country-level strategies. This regional strategy should be translated into practical applications such as an early warning system and a regional climate prediction modelling activity. Finally, participants provided examples of existing regional arrangements such as the Interstate Commission on Sustainable Development in the Central Asian region and the Asian Pacific Network, which could be used as vehicles to develop and implement regional strategies on climate change issues. Issues for further consideration Participants agreed on a number of recommendations that could further support the implementation of the amended New Delhi work programme in Asia and the Pacific. These include: Increasing the dissemination of the amended New Delhi work programme to promote wider recognition by the international community and to receive more prominence in the negotiation process; Encouraging Parties to map their needs and identify priorities in order to receive support from the international community; Promoting the role of national focal points for Article 6 activities and urging Parties to designate and support such focal points; Promoting the use of CC:iNet at a national level; Increasing the exchange of information at a regional level through the creation of a regional strategy to promote Article 6 in Asia and the Pacific; Strengthening climate change issues in educational programmes; Inviting Parties to nominate children and young people as members of national delegations at intergovernmental meetings; Identifying a financial mechanism to support the implementation of education, training and outreach activities in developing countries. 