%%%DESERTIFICATION|DATA ANALYSIS|DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|

United Nations ICCD/CRIC(9)/5 Convention to Combat Desertification Distr.: General 16 December 2010 Original: English Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention Ninth session Bonn, 21 - 25 February 2011 Item 3 (c) of the provisional agenda Assessment of implementation of the Convention against performance indicators Preliminary analysis of information contained in reports from affected and developed country Parties, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental organizations and the Global Environment Facility on operational objective 3 of The Strategy Note by the secretariat Summary This document contains a synthesis and preliminary analysis of information submitted by affected and developed country Parties, the Global Environment Facility and the Global Mechanism on operational objective 3 of The Strategy: science, technology and knowledge. It analyses three consolidated performance indicators from a global perspective and provides additional, more detailed, analysis from subregional and regional perspectives. The document offers some conclusions on the status of activities relating to operational objective 3 (baseline perspective) and some recommendations for consideration by the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention on the need to adjust, streamline and strengthen related activities in view of the achievement of this objective (target perspective). Due to the fact that Parties and other reporting entities submitted their first reports following an indicator-based approach, some considerations regarding the implementation of and reporting against indicators are also included in document ICCD/CRIC(9)/10 feeding the iterative process. Contents Paragraphs Page I. Introduction 1 - 3 3 II. Performance indicator CONS-O-8 for outcomes 3.1 and 3.2 4 - 29 3 Global analysis 4 - 8 3 Affected country Parties (subregional and regional analysis) 9 - 20 6 Developed country Parties 21 - 28 16 Global Environment Facility 29 19 Performance indicator CONS-O-10 for outcomes 3.3 and 3.4 30 - 33 20 Global analysis 31 - 33 20 Performance indicator CONS-O-11 for outcome 3.5 34 - 46 21 Global analysis 35 - 38 21 Affected country Parties (subregional and regional analysis) 39 - 43 22 Developed country Parties 44 22 Global Environment Facility 45 22 Global Mechanism 46 23 Conclusions 47 - 53 23 VI. Recommendations 54 23 1. The present document is a synthesis and preliminary analysis of information submitted by Parties and observers on operational objective 3 of The Strategy: science, technology and knowledge. 2. For each performance indicator pertaining to this operational objective (see chapters II, III and IV below), the section on global analysis discusses the state of affairs relating to that performance indicator from a global perspective, based on information provided by both affected and developed country Parties. More detailed information is provided in the adjacent sections on subregional and regional analysis for affected country Parties, as well as for developed country Parties, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Global Mechanism, where appropriate. 3. General conclusions on the status of activities relating to operational objective 3 are presented at the end of the report and capture important issues relating to baseline information for the performance indicators (baseline perspective). Some recommendations for consideration by the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC) have been drawn up on the need to adjust/streamline/strengthen activities in view of the achievement of the objectives of The Strategy (target perspective). Following a results-based framework, the CRIC may wish to provide actionable guidance to Parties and institutions of the Convention in order to allow follow-up on targeted recommendations to be put forward to the Conference of the Parties (COP) for its consideration. II. Performance indicator CONS-O-8 for outcomes 3.1 and 3.2 Number of affected country Parties, subregional and regional entities to have established and supported a national/subregional/regional monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (DLDD). (See CONS-O-8 in decision 13/COP.9, annex III.) A. Global analysis 1. Number of affected country Parties that established and supported a national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (DLDD) 4. Of the 89 affected country Parties, thirty-four countries (or 38 per cent of the total) already have a specific national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (DLDD) and in 22 countries (or 25 per cent of the total) the system is both functional and updated. Of the remaining 55 countries (or 62 per cent of the total) that do not have a DLDD-specific monitoring system, thirty-five countries (or 39 per cent of the total) have an environmental monitoring system that partially covers DLDD issues, while 10 (or 11 per cent of the total) stated that no environmental system covering DLDD has been established. 5. The situation in the Northern Mediterranean and in Central and Eastern Europe countries is very positive. Conversely, the number of established and functional monitoring systems in Africa (five DLDD-specific monitoring systems that are functional and updated and four that are not specific to DLDD) is low, in spite of the fact that the region is the most supported by developed country Parties (17 countries received support by developed country Parties, as well as 2 subregions and the region as a whole). Latin America and the Caribbean has not received much support so far and is relying predominantly on monitoring systems that are not DLDD-specific. 6. Altogether 33 affected countries, 3 subregions and 3 regions received support from developed countries for the establishment of monitoring systems, while three developed country Parties provided their support worldwide. While this figure cannot be directly compared with the number of monitoring systems of affected country Parties because of different statistical sets, it nevertheless represents a high level of commitment by developed country Parties to the establishment of national monitoring systems in affected country Parties. This is further supported by the fact that only one developed country reported that it did not provide support in the reporting period 2008 - 2009. Table 1 Number of affected country Parties that established and supported a national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (global) Region DLDD monitoring system established DLDD monitoring system functional DLDD monitoring system not functional DLDD monitoring system updated Monitoring system not updated No DLDD-specific monitoring system Environmental monitoring system partially covering DLDD No environmental monitoring system covering DLDD Africa Asia LAC NMED CEE Global (total) Figure 1 2. National contribution to the target By 2018, at least 60 per cent of affected country Parties, subregional and regional reporting entities have established and supported national monitoring systems for DLDD. (See decision 13/COP.9, annex III, performance indicator CONS-O-8, target.) 7. With 38 per cent of the total number of affected country Parties already having a DLDD-specific national monitoring system (and 25 per cent of the total with both functional and updated systems), and an additional 39 per cent of the total having an environmental monitoring system that partially covers DLDD matters, the current situation with regard to this target is relatively positive, taking into consideration also the wide support provided by developed country Parties. With only five countries which do not yet have a plan to establish a monitoring system, it should be possible to reach the 60 per cent target by the end of the time period covered by The Strategy (2018). In addition, three developed country Parties have expressed their intention to provide support in this respect. 8. While Northern Mediterranean and Central and Eastern European countries need only to invest effort in regularly maintaining their systems in order to be above the threshold in 2018, Asian and Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) country Parties will have to invest effort in the establishment of new DLDD-specific monitoring systems, and African countries will have to invest effort both in the establishment of new systems and in making existing ones functional and updated. The relatively high number of systems that are not functional and/or have not been updated is a matter of concern. Table 2 Monitoring systems for desertification, land degradation and drought - national contribution to the target (global) Subregion Planned for No plan Figure 2 B. Affected country Parties (subregional and regional analysis) 1. Number of affected country Parties that established and supported a national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought a. Africa 9. Twelve out of the 30 African countries (or 40 per cent) that have responded to this question have a monitoring system dedicated specifically to DLDD. Of those 18 countries (or 60 per cent) that do not have a DLDD-specific monitoring system, 4 countries (13 per cent of the total) have an environmental monitoring system in place that partially covers DLDD, 6 countries (or 20 per cent) have no system in place, while 8 countries (or 27 per cent) did not answer this question. 10. Northern Africa is the only subregion where more countries have a DLDD-specific monitoring system than not: 42 per cent of Central African countries, 40 per cent of Eastern African countries, 66 per cent of Northern African countries, 33 per cent of Southern African countries and 70 per cent of Western African countries have at least one type of monitoring system. Table 3 Number of affected country Parties that established and supported a national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (Africa) DLDD monitoring system not updated Central Africa Eastern Africa Northern Africa Southern Africa Western Africa Africa (total) Figure 3 b. Asia 11. Ten out of the 28 affected Asian country Parties (or 36 per cent) that have responded to this question have a DLDD-specific monitoring system and 16 other countries (or 57 per cent) have an environmental monitoring system that can be used for DLDD monitoring. Ninety-three per cent of affected Asian country Parties have at least one type of monitoring system and all of them are functional, albeit not always updated. Table 4 Number of affected country Parties that established and supported a national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (Asia) Central Asia East Asia Pacific South Asia South East Asia West Asia Asia (total) Figure 4 c. Latin America and the Caribbean 12. LAC is the region with the lowest proportion of DLDD-specific monitoring systems (24 per cent) but with the highest proportion of environmental systems partially used for DLDD monitoring (59 per cent). 13. All Andean, Mesoamerican and South Cone countries have at least one type of monitoring system in place. Table 5 Number of affected country Parties that established and supported a national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (LAC) Andean Caribbean Mesoamerica South Cone LAC (total) Figure 5 d. Northern Mediterranean 14. All Northern Mediterranean countries have at least one type of monitoring system in place. All DLDD-specific monitoring systems are both functional and updated. This makes the Northern Mediterranean region the absolute leader with regard to national monitoring systems. Table 6 Number of affected country Parties that established and supported a national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (NMED) NMED (total) Figure 6 e. Central and Eastern Europe 15. Five out of the nine (or 56 per cent) Central and Eastern European countries that have responded to this question have a DLDD-specific monitoring system. The system is both functional and updated in three countries (33 per cent of the total). Of the four countries, which have no DLDD-specific monitoring system, three have an environmental monitoring system partially covering DLDD. Table 7 Number of affected country Parties that established and supported a national monitoring system for desertification, land degradation and drought (CEE) CEE (total) Figure 7 16. The situation in Africa looks relatively good as 40 per cent of affected African country Parties have established DLDD-specific monitoring systems and a further 13 per cent have an environmental monitoring system partially covering DLDD. As only one country does not plan to establish a national monitoring system, this would imply that by 2018 nearly all affected African country Parties will have an established national monitoring system. However, special attention needs to be dedicated to the functioning and updating of these systems, as only 5 out of 12 African countries that have established DLDD monitoring systems (or 17 per cent of all affected African countries) currently have a national monitoring system that is both functional and updated. Table 8 Monitoring systems for desertification, land degradation and drought - national contribution to the target (Africa) Figure 8 17. Thirty-six per cent of affected Asian country Parties had a DLDD-specific national monitoring system in 2008 - 2009 and an additional 57 per cent currently have an environmental monitoring system that is partly used for DLDD matters. This means that nearly all Asian Parties now have a system that can be used for DLDD purposes. Only one country reported that it had no plans to establish a national monitoring system. With 8 out of 10 current DLDD monitoring systems being both functional and updated, Asia is in a good position with regard to the achievement of the 60 per cent threshold. Efforts could be undertaken in particular in Central Asia, in which no country currently has a DLDD-specific monitoring system. Table 9 Monitoring systems for desertification, land degradation and drought - national contribution to the target (Asia) Figure 9 18. In LAC, only four countries (or 24 per cent of affected countries) have a DLDD-specific national monitoring system, and in three of them it is both functional and updated. This is a relatively low percentage. However, 10 additional countries (or 59 per cent of the total) have a monitoring system that is partially serving the purposes of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). With only two countries without plans to establish a monitoring system, LAC should be in position to advance well in this respect over the coming years. Special efforts should be made in Mesoamerica where no country currently has a DLDD-specific national monitoring system. Table 10 Monitoring systems for desertification, land degradation and drought - national contribution to the target (LAC) Figure 10 Monitoring systems for DLDD - National contribution to the target (LAC) 19. The Northern Mediterranean region has effectively already reached the threshold. Three out of five countries (or 60 per cent of the total) already have a DLDD-specific national monitoring system and all of them are functional and updated. The remaining two countries have systems which can be used for UNCCD reporting purposes. Table 11 Monitoring systems for desertification, land degradation and drought - national contribution to the target (NMED) Figure 11 20. Central and Eastern Europe is in quite a good position with regard to national monitoring systems, as five out of nine countries (or 55 per cent) have a DLDD-specific national monitoring system. An additional three countries (or 33 per cent) have a system partially covering DLDD. As all countries in the region have a plan to establish a monitoring system, it should not be a problem for Central and Eastern Europe to reach the threshold by 2018. Table 12 Monitoring systems for DLDD - National contribution to the target (CEE) Figure 12 C. Developed country Parties 1. Number of monitoring systems established in affected country Parties and/or UNCCD subregions/regions with the technical and/or financial support of developed country Parties 21. Nine out of 12 developed countries answered this question, and 3 did not. One country reported that it did not provide any support to national DLDD monitoring systems in affected country Parties. The data shows that environmental monitoring systems not specific to DLDD but useful for UNCCD reporting enjoyed much more support than DLDD-specific systems. The number of systems supported remained basically stable from 2008 to 2009. The constant level of support is also shown by the fact that a high proportion of developed country Parties providing support (five out of nine, with two not answering) reported that they had been supporting such systems before 2008, and the list of beneficiary countries before and after 2008 reveals that many affected country Parties have received support over a number of years. In addition, developed country Parties stated that, to the best of their knowledge, 33 supported systems are still functional and regularly updated. 22. Taking into consideration the fact that there were altogether 42 supported monitoring systems in 2008 and 45 in 2009, and that 2 countries did not reply to this question, it can be said that many developed country Parties are providing long-term support to the monitoring systems of affected developing country Parties and that this support in most cases has resulted in sustainable and functioning monitoring systems. Table 13 Number of monitoring systems established in affected country Parties and/or UNCCD subregions/regions with the technical and/or financial support of developed country Parties Monitoring systems for DLDD supported in 2008 Monitoring systems for DLDD supported in 2009 Environmental monitoring systems not specific to DLDD but that may contribute to UNCCD reporting supported in 2008 Environmental monitoring systems not specific to DLDD but that may contribute to UNCCD reporting supported in 2009 Developed country Parties (total) Figure 13 23. The geographic distribution of support is presented in Table 14. Before 2008, 34 countries were supported - all but one of them by one developed country Party each. Two regions were supported (Africa by three developed country Parties) and three developed country Parties stated that they provided support worldwide. In the reporting period 2008 - 2009, 33 countries were supported -- 27 of them by one developed country Party, 4 of them by 2 developed country Parties and 2 of them by 3 developed country Parties. Two African subregions and one Asian subregion were also supported, as well as three regions (out of which one (Africa) was supported by three developed country Parties. Table 14 Geographic distribution of assistance provided by developed country Parties to monitoring systems of affected country Parties Entity Number of entities supported before 2008 Number of entities supported in 18 countries and region 17 countries and 2 subregions and region 2 and subregion 9 and subregion 10 countries 14 countries and 1 subregion Latin America and the Caribbean 5 countries Northern Mediterranean Central and Eastern Europe 1 country and region Support provided worldwide Total 34 countries, 2 regions and worldwide 33 countries, 3 subregions, 3 regions and worldwide 24. Given that developed country Parties provided much more support to monitoring systems that are not DLDD-specific than to those that are, it is worth noting that the majority of that assistance was provided in the framework of UNCCD-related initiatives. 25. Other initiatives were however undertaken as well: official development assistance (ODA), international research frameworks, or support for agro-meteorological and hydrological systems that partly provide DLDD-relevant information. 26. The support provided was mainly technical: in six cases out of seven, technical support was provided either alone or in combination with financial support. In four cases, the support was either exclusively financial or in combination with technical support. Table 15 Framework and type of support provided to monitoring systems of affected country Parties by developed country Parties Framework of support Type of support UNCCD-related initiative CBD-related initiative UNFCCC-related initiative Other Mainly technical Mainly financial Both 27. Developed country Parties were asked whether, at the time of reporting, they planned to provide support to one or more affected country Parties and/or subregions/regions for the establishment of monitoring systems dedicated to DLDD. 28. Six countries provided answers to this question and six did not answer. Three countries out of the six which answered, expressed their intention to provide support to national DLDD monitoring systems of affected country Parties and three stated that they were not planning such support. For two countries, this support is planned for 2010 - 2011 and for one in 2012 - 2013. The only country that already knows which area will be the beneficiary of its support in the future reported that it would support the Central African subregion. D. Global Environment Facility 29. The GEF did not provide answers relating to this performance indicator. Following an exchange between the GEF and UNCCD secretariats, the GEF stated that, due to issues relating to internal data collection and data availability, it would not be in a position to report against all performance indicators. Feedback on constraints to data availability from the GEF will be integrated into the iterative process in order to enable it to provide relevant information to the CRIC in the next reporting cycles. Number of revised NAPs/SRAPs/RAPs reflecting knowledge of DLDD drivers and their interactions, and of the interaction of DLDD with climate change and biodiversity. (See CONS-O-10 in decision 13/COP.9, annex III.) 30. Only affected country Parties having their National Action Programme (NAP) aligned to The Strategy were requested to report on this performance indicator. In the reporting period (2008 - 2009), only two affected country Parties had their NAP aligned to The Strategy, while for some, the status of NAP alignment was unclear. The analysis here is therefore limited to the answers provided by these two countries. Global analysis 1. Number of revised NAPs/SRAPs/RAPs reflecting knowledge of DLDD drivers and their interactions, and of the interaction of DLDD with climate change and biodiversity 31. Both countries that had their NAPs aligned to The Strategy in 2008 - 2009 (one of which is in Latin America and the Caribbean and the other one in Central and Eastern Europe) stated that in their NAPs, the identification of biophysical and socio-economic drivers, and of their interaction, is knowledge-based. Both countries specified that this identification is based on expert knowledge and traditional knowledge. 32. Both countries also reported that in their NAPs, the analysis of interaction between drought mitigation and restoration of degraded land and climate change mitigation/adaptation and biodiversity conservation is based on expert knowledge and traditional knowledge. Finally, both countries further stated that drought mitigation is analysed and/or reflected in some of the actions outlined in the NAP. By 2018, at least 70 per cent of revised NAPs/SRAPs/RAPs have successfully gone through a quality self-assessment. (See decision 13/COP.9, annex III, performance indicator CONS-O-10, target.) 33. Since both countries that had their NAP aligned to The Strategy in 2008 - 2009 successfully went through a self-assessment process, achievement of this target is nominally 100 per cent. However, given such a small number of countries with an aligned NAP in the reporting period, this percentage cannot be used as a statistically sound indication of achievement of this target. IV. Performance indicator CONS-O-11 for outcome 3.5 Type, number and users of DLDD-relevant knowledge-sharing systems at the global, regional, subregional and national levels described on the Convention website. (See CONS-O-11 in decision 13/COP.9, annex III.) 34. The knowledge-sharing system is defined as "a web-based system comprising structured information provided by diverse sources or a network facilitating knowledge sharing among members, including the compilation of best practices and success stories". Parties were asked to list any DLDD-relevant knowledge-sharing systems at the country level and to provide an Internet link and estimated number of users per year. It should be noted that some of the data provided does not match the definition of knowledge-sharing systems as described above, and some does not reflect a knowledge-sharing system at country level. However, all the information provided by country Parties is included in the analysis below, except for data relating to the estimated number of users of the systems, as in many cases this was either not provided or was incoherent. Once the Convention website includes a thematic database on knowledge-sharing systems as reported by Parties within the reporting process, more detailed and classified information on knowledge-sharing systems will be provided. 1. Type, number and users of DLDD-relevant knowledge-sharing systems at the global, regional, subregional and national levels described on the Convention website 35. Altogether, 308 knowledge-sharing systems and 326 web links were reported by the Parties and 3 by the Global Mechanism. 36. Affected country Parties reported 242 knowledge-sharing systems (84 from Africa, 105 from Asia, 28 from LAC, 11 from the Northern Mediterranean and 14 from Central and Eastern Europe) and developed country Parties reported 66 such systems. 37. Affected country Parties provided 263 web links (74 from Africa, 117 from Asia, 23 from LAC, 9 from the Northern Mediterranean and 40 from Central and Eastern Europe) and developed country Parties provided 63 web links. 2. Overall target By 2010 the Convention website has been restructured and includes a thematic database on knowledge-sharing systems as part of the PRAIS. (See decision 13/COP.9, annex III, performance indicator CONS-O-11, target.) 38. Given the very short time period between the deadline for submission of reports (12 November 2010) and the time of preparation of the present report (early December 2010), and given that information provided by the Parties needed further processing, the Convention website does not at present have a thematic database on knowledge-sharing systems as part of the performance review and assessment of implementation system (PRAIS). It is planned that this database will be established and placed on the Convention website in 2011. Type, number and users of DLDD-relevant knowledge-sharing systems at the global, regional, subregional and national levels described on the Convention website 39. Altogether 84 systems and 74 web links were reported by African country Parties. Central African country Parties reported 4 systems and 1 web link, Eastern African Parties 11 systems and 9 web links, Northern African countries 8 systems and 6 web links, Southern African countries 26 systems and 23 web links, and in the Western African subregion 35 systems and 35 web links were mentioned. 40. Asian country Parties listed 105 systems and 117 web links. Central Asian countries reported 28 systems and 28 web links, East Asian countries 6 systems and 6 web links, Pacific States 10 systems and 2 web links, South Asian countries 19 systems and 37 web links, South East Asian countries 20 systems and 23 web links and West Asian countries 22 systems and 21 web links. 41. Twenty-eight systems and 23 web links were reported by Latin American and Caribbean country Parties. Five systems and five links were reported from the Andean subregion, nine systems and seven web links from the Caribbean, nine systems and eight web links from Mesoamerica and five systems and three web links from the South Cone. 42. Northern Mediterranean countries provided information about 11 systems and 9 web links. 43. Central and Eastern European countries listed 14 systems and 40 web links. 44. Developed country Parties reported 66 systems and 63 web links. 45. The GEF did not provide answers relating to this performance indicator. Please refer to paragraph 29 for information regarding the GEF submission. E. Global Mechanism 46. The Global Mechanism reported three knowledge-sharing systems put in place: the Global Mechanism website itself, the Financial Information Engine on Land Degradation (FIELD) that provides information on assistance provided, and web-based interactive forums that have been created by the Global Mechanism. These will be duly reflected on the UNCCD website in 2011. V. Conclusions 47. A relatively optimistic picture can be drawn of the use of science, technology and knowledge by the Parties in their efforts to implement the Convention as it relates to the operational objective under consideration. Both affected and developed country Parties realize the importance of a scientifically based approach to DLDD and knowledge sharing among the Parties and organizations active in combating it. 48. The usefulness of national monitoring systems for DLDD can be read from the fact that reports submitted by affected country Parties in this reporting cycle were 93 per cent complete, which reflects the fact that affected country Parties had a solid base of information upon which to draw for the purposes of UNCCD reporting. 49. Thirty-eight per cent of affected country Parties already have a DLDD-specific national monitoring system, which is both functional and updated in 25 per cent of affected countries. Of the remaining 62 per cent of affected countries that do not have a DLDD-specific monitoring system, 39 per cent have an environmental monitoring system that partially covers DLDD issues. This means that 77 per cent of affected country Parties currently have at least one type of monitoring system. 50. Africa currently has the lowest percentage of both DLDD-specific systems that are both updated and functional and of those environmental monitoring systems that are not DLDD-specific but can provide information about DLDD matters. This is in spite of the fact that Africa has received the largest share of support from developed country Parties. 51. Generally, developed country Parties have provided high levels of support to the establishment of monitoring systems over a number of years, mainly oriented to non-DLDD-specific systems. 52. Altogether, 308 knowledge-sharing systems and 326 web links were reported by the Parties. 53. Given that very few countries aligned their NAPs in 2008 - 2009, and that many countries are planning to do so in the coming years, it is anticipated that the use of knowledge in the self-assessment process for alignment will gain in importance in the future. VI. Recommendations 54. The following are preliminary recommendations that may be considered by the Parties at CRIC 9, taking into consideration the preliminary analysis provided in this document, with a view to initiating early consultations on draft decisions to be forwarded to COP 10 for consideration: Affected country Parties are invited to increase their efforts in establishing DLDD-specific national monitoring systems or further improving existing monitoring systems. Special attention should also be given to the Mesoamerican and Central Asian subregions since affected country Parties belonging to those regions reported that no such system is currently in place; Developed country Parties and relevant organizations are invited to provide additional support to African country Parties for the establishment and maintenance of national monitoring systems, through both financial and technical means; The UNCCD secretariat is requested to use the information submitted by the Parties in this reporting process to develop a knowledge-sharing database as part of the performance review and assessment of implementation system (PRAIS) on the Convention website, with a view to making this database available in 2011; The Committee on Science and Technology is invited to provide advice to the Parties on how best to carry out knowledge-based self-assessment in the process of aligning their NAPs with The Strategy and to deliberate on the inclusion of reported knowledge-management systems into the scientific networks and related knowledge-management brokering systems; The UNCCD secretariat and the Global Mechanism are requested to take into consideration issues such as data quality and relevant methodologies for collecting information, in order to feed the iterative process and eventually enhance reporting outputs provided by the Parties and other reporting entities; The UNCCD secretariat is also requested to pursue consultations with the GEF in order to enable it to provide information on performance indicators as required and as data availability within the GEF allows; Following the results-based approach, subsidiary bodies and the institutions of the Convention are urged to include consideration of these recommendations in their respective 2012 - 2013 work programmes, with a view to providing the required assistance to affected country Parties in achieving operational objective 3 of The Strategy, in accordance with their respective mandates. 