%%%STAFF ROTATION|OCCUPATIONAL MOBILITY|WORK LIFE BALANCE|INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|

JIU/REP/2010/8 INTER-AGENCY STAFF MOBILITY AND WORK/LIFE BALANCE IN THE ORGANIZATIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM Prepared by Enrique Roman-Morey Even Fontaine Ortiz Joint Inspection Unit Geneva 2010 United Nations Original: ENGLISH United Nations, Geneva 2010 Inter-agency staff mobility and work/life balance in the organizations of the United Nations system The objective of the review is to assess the policies and mechanisms regulating staff mobility and work/life balance from a system-wide perspective, providing participating organizations and their respective governing organs with an independent, external assessment of relevant issues. The report contains recommendations and a set of proposals to harmonize and enhance staff mobility and work/life balance across the United Nations system. This is not a review of the individual mobility policies currently in place within the respective organizations of the United Nations common system, nor of their respective implementation; nevertheless, the report refers to certain individual cases to illustrate examples or to draw conclusions from best practices and lessons learned. Main findings and conclusions Common system, diverse mobility needs The United Nations system is formed of very diverse international organizations. The mandates, size, operational needs and activities undertaken by them are very different; there are highly mobile entities coexisting with others where staff mobility is not a major concern. Given the considerable differences among system organizations, there is no "one mobility scheme fits all organizations". The Inspectors concur with this notion and stress that the ultimate end of mobility is to better meet the respective goals of each organization, thus if the goals are different for different organizations, individual mobility policies should also be different and adapted to the specific needs of each organization. However, inter-agency mobility can be promoted focusing on commonalities and values shared by all the international organizations belonging to the United Nations common system. Staff-management dialogue: matching organizational needs with staff needs The Inspectors believe that there is a real need for improved dialogue between staff and management, and that staff should be formally represented and participate in the discussions of the Human Resources Network. The exclusion of staff from the talks leading to the development of comprehensive human resources management policies, including staff mobility, can only point towards failure, as the experience in several organizations has shown. Mobility mechanisms in the United Nations system In 2005, the CEB issued the Inter-Agency Mobility Accord. The Accord was intended to replace the former Inter-organization Agreement, concerning transfer, secondment or loan of staff among the organizations applying the United Nations common system of salaries and allowances. The Inter-Agency Mobility Accord is the legal framework where the staff member, the releasing and the receiving organizations, which have adopted the Accord, agree and define their respective responsibilities. However, after five years since the Accord was launched, organizations have not yet reached a consensus on its use; some organizations use it, while others have not accepted it and continue to use the former Agreement. This confusing situation does not facilitate system-wide mobility, and makes each individual case an exception and, depending on the specific circumstances of each transaction, a made-to-order contract is finalized. The Inspectors wish to draw the attention of system organizations to the potential legal implications of using two different legal instruments for the same purpose, thus creating different conditions that could lead to a perceived potential discrimination of some staff. They believe that it is time to reach consensus and urge organizations to agree on the use of just one legal instrument. Inter-agency mobility data In order to assess the relevance of inter-agency mobility and to quantify the degree of success of mobility policies and initiatives, it is fundamental to establish meaningful indicators of achievement and the subsequent monitoring mechanisms. However, relevant data necessary to analyze the dimension and trends on inter-agency mobility are not easily available. Data provided by organizations show that inter-agency mobility is insignificant: the number of staff having moved between organizations, within the whole United Nations system, is below 300, or less than 1 per cent on average. Inter-agency mobility is driven by the needs of individual staff members; it is not the consequence of a planned strategy, nor of proactive actions taken by organizations, but a consequence of individual staff members' efforts aimed at obtaining a promotion, a more interesting job, or simply a desire to relocate. Inter-agency mobility is administered by organizations but it is not managed by them. Harmonization of business practices within the United Nations system The harmonization of business practices is a must to facilitate inter-agency mobility. The Inspectors are pleased to note that organizations are well aware of this important issue, and support their current efforts to further harmonize business practices. Furthermore, they encourage the advancement towards a common set of staff regulations and rules for the whole United Nations system. A common system deserves common regulations and rules. Delivering as one: one common system, one common system staff In the view of the Inspectors, it is evident that "delivering as one" implies one common system staff, ideally administered under the same set of regulations and rules, which unquestionably would facilitate system-wide mobility. This extent has been confirmed by experience. The evaluations undertaken of the "Delivering as One" pilot projects have concluded that further harmonization in the area of human resources management is needed. The lessons learned from these pilot projects demand enhanced harmonization and call for "one common system staff". Developing a United Nations common system culture The United Nations common system is a complex structure formed by different international organizations, owners of very different organizational cultures individually crafted through years. This complex structure does not facilitate the development of a common culture. However, there are some cultural elements common to all the organizations, which in the view of the Inspectors should be the foundation for the further development of an as yet incipient common system culture. Focusing on commonalities and shared goals is the only way to successfully promote a common United Nations culture. There is still much to do to integrate the concept of mobility into a common system culture yet to be developed. However, there are many opportunities to introduce inter-agency mobility as an important element of an enhanced common system culture; in order to enhance it, particular attention should be paid to areas, such us disaster recovery, humanitarian assistance, peacekeeping and peacebuilding and broad technical cooperation, where society at large expects a coordinated and efficient response of the United Nations system. Inter-agency initiatives, thinking forward Inter-agency mobility currently happens spontaneously based on staff initiative; it is not the consequence of a planned strategy, nor of proactive actions taken by organizations. Thus, the Inspectors encourage organizations to think "out of the box" and be creative. New inter-agency mobility initiatives could and should be built. This section includes some staff proposals and ideas gathered during the interviews undertaken by the Inspectors in their field missions. They hope that these ideas could serve as "food for thought" in the relevant discussions undertaken by organizations in the context of the CEB. Dual career and staff mobility The difficulty of accompanying expatriate spouses being able to continue their professional careers is one of the most important hurdles to overcome in order to recruit highly qualified staff, as well as to promote staff mobility. This is mainly due to the legal restrictions imposed by host countries to access their respective local labour markets. It is a long-standing concern and the Inspectors regret that after repeated recommendations and General Assembly resolutions the issue has not yet been resolved. They reiterate the recommendation included in previous reports of the JIU, advising of the need to find a solution to this crucial concern. They call on organizations to continue their coordinated efforts. It is advisable to introduce this matter in negotiations of any new host country agreement and in future renegotiations of current ones. Work/life balance in the United Nations system: current status and challenges Work/life balance in the United Nations system is understood as a set of different work arrangements aimed at achieving a more flexible work environment, with the final objectives of finding the optimum balance between professional and personal life, while contributing to enhance organizational efficiency. Some of the most popular work/life balance options provided by all organizations of the United Nations common system are flexi-time, maternity, paternity and family leave. The Inspectors consider that the number of work/life balance options available across the system cover reasonably well the needs of staff for enhanced flexibility at work. The issue, in their view, is not the choice of options but rather how these are implemented. Medical and staff health considerations Staff health considerations should be an integral part of staff mobility policies. The Inspectors believe that there is a need for higher participation of the medical services in the development and implementation of relevant human resources management policies, including at the system-wide level. Medical services can help human resources management to make better and more informed decisions regarding staff mobility. Medical services have also a major role to play in supporting work/life balance programs. Unfortunately, health related services in the United Nations system, including counselling services, are not managed according to any cohesive policy, or management structure. The Inspectors adhere to the views of the Medical Directors Working Group which has expressed growing concern regarding the current capacity of the United Nations system to protect, manage, and monitor the health of its staff. This is of particular relevance to those staff deployed at hardship duty stations, and in the context of the United Nation's strategic movement towards mobility and increased field presence. Recommendations for consideration by legislative organs and/or executive heads Recommendation 1 The Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB), through its High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM), should agree urgently on the contents and uniform use across the United Nations system of one legal instrument to regulate staff mobility among organizations of the United Nations common system. It should also define, inter alia, the respective responsibilities of organizations with regard to the allocation of financial liabilities related to the different types of staff movements. Recommendation 2 The Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB), through its High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM), should develop system-wide standards for the systematic collection, monitoring and consistent reporting of staff mobility relevant data, including inter-agency mobility and mobility internal to the respective organizations. Recommendation 3 The Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB), through its High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM), should elaborate a plan of action, including specific deadlines and responsibilities, for the development of one set of common staff regulations and rules applicable to the whole United Nations common system. Recommendation 4 The executive heads of the organizations of the United Nations common system should review their internal staff mobility and/or staff rotation schemes from a system-wide perspective, in order to make them supportive, consistent and coherent with inter-agency mobility initiatives. Recommendation 5 In the context of the CEB, the executive heads of the organizations of the United Nations common system should review their internal relevant rules, with a view to granting that all vacant posts within their respective organizations are open to all United Nations staff members, including those working in other system organizations on an equal basis as those established for their own staff. Recommendation 6 The Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB), through its High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM), should elaborate an inter-agency common system policy, including its legal framework, for new contracts and the subsequent induction of new staff joining any organization of the common system with a view to developing a common system culture. Recommendation 7 The Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) should consider introducing new staff rotational/mobility schemes at a system-wide level and with a view to facilitating the voluntary participation of staff in humanitarian and/or peacekeeping activities. Recommendation 8 The Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) should consider introducing new inter-agency staff mobility initiatives at a system-wide level based on the concept of common and specific occupational networks. Recommendation 9 The legislative bodies of the organizations of the United Nations common system should bring to the attention of the host countries' authorities the need to facilitate the access to local labour markets for the spouses of staff members of international organizations, through, inter alia, the granting of work permits or similar arrangements. Recommendation 10 The executive heads of the organizations of the United Nations common system should systematically assess the performance of work/life balance programmes periodically and include, inter alia, a cost-benefit analysis of such programmes as part of their regular performance reporting. Page EXECUTIVE SUMMARY iii ABBREVIATIONS. x Chapter Paragraphs I. INTRODUCTION. II. INTER-AGENCY MOBILITY: STATE OF AFFAIRS. A. Common system, diverse mobility needs. B. C. D. III. INTER-AGENCY MOBILITY: THE WAY AHEAD. Delivering as One: one common system, one common system staff E. IV. WORK/LIFE BALANCE. Work/life balance in the United Nations system: current status and challenges. V. CONCLUSION. ANNEXES Staff mobility data for 2007, 2008 and 2009 Work/life balance programmes in the organizations of the United Nations common system (2008) Overview of action to be taken by participating organizations on JIU recommendations CCISUA Coordinating Committee for International Staff Unions and Associations of the United Nations System CEB Chief Executives Board for Coordination DC&SM Dual Career and Staff Mobility programme FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FICSA Federation of International Civil Servants' Associations GESA Global Expatriate Spouse Association HLCM High-Level Committee on Management (of the CEB) IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ICSC International Civil Service Commission IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development ILO International Labour Organization ITC International Trade Centre ITU International Telecommunication Union JIU Joint Inspection Unit LESA Local Expatriate Spouse Associations MIOE Memorandum of Inter-Organization Exchange PAHO Pan-American Health Organization UNECLAC United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean UNESCWA United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia UN United Nations UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFPA United Nations Population Fund UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization UNISERV United Nations International Civil Servants Federation UNOPS United Nations Office for Project Services UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees UNSC United Nations Staff College UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization UPU Universal Postal Union WHO World Health Organization WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization WMO World Meteorological Organization WFP World Food Programme WTO World Trade Organization I. INTRODUCTION The Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) conducted in 2009 a review of staff mobility and work/life balance in organizations of the United Nations common system. The review is the result of two different internal proposals originated within the JIU and included originally in its programme of work for 2008. The first proposal was related only to staff mobility, while the second referred to work/life balance. Subsequently, the JIU decided to merge both proposals into one. The decision to prepare only one report, merging both issues, was made after the Inspectors learned that the Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) secretariat had proceeded with the services of a consultant to look at work/life balance issues in the United Nations system. The analysis of the report prepared by the consultant showed that there was a high degree of overlapping between the two initiatives, consequently the Inspectors decided to focus mainly on staff mobility; however this review includes one chapter on work/life balance issues taking into consideration and building up on the conclusions and recommendations contained in the paper prepared by the CEB secretariat. The objective of the review is to assess the policies and mechanisms regulating staff mobility and work/life balance from a system-wide perspective, providing the participating organizations and their respective governing organs with an independent, external assessment of relevant issues with a view to recommending a set of proposals to harmonize and enhance staff mobility and work/life balance policies, procedures and related tools across the system. The JIU reviewed the mobility policy introduced by the United Nations Secretariat in 2002 and prepared a report, which recommended the basis for a sound development and implementation of a meaningful mobility scheme. However, this is the first time that a report of the JIU looks into staff mobility and work/life balance from a system-wide perspective. It should be noted that this is not a review of the individual policies currently in place within the respective organizations of the United Nations common system, nor of their respective implementations; nevertheless, the report may refer to certain individual cases to illustrate examples or to draw conclusions from best practices and lessons learned. This review does not examine mobility or movements of staff joining or leaving the United Nations common system. Staff mobility and work/life balance are two major components of human resources management strategies. In fact, several officials interviewed believe that staff mobility is just one part of a wider work/life balance concept, given that nothing could influence more staff work/life balance than a stringent mobility requirement. Most of the United Nations system organizations make a difference between both concepts and consider work/life balance, as a set of options that allow for more flexible working arrangements and related conditions, such as telecommuting, flexible work time schedules, etc.; while staff mobility, up to date, stands on its own as a separate issue and excluded from being grouped in work/life balance issues. This trend might change, given that the Human Resources Network of the CEB at its 18th session introduced a wider concept: Staff Wellbeing, which includes work/life balance, staff mobility and staff counselling. The United Nations system has evolved in the context of a fast changing environment and to new global challenges; technical cooperation, disaster recovery, humanitarian and peacekeeping related activities are increasingly in the agendas of the organizations of the common system, demanding organizations to do more and to do better, undertaking tasks everywhere in the world and through enhanced coordination between them, in particular at field level, with the ultimate objective of "Delivering as One". New demands from stakeholders have transformed organizational needs and several organizations have launched, inter alia, new staff mobility schemes in an attempt to respond to those new demands. The preparation of the review involved missions to several headquarters duty stations (New York, Geneva, Vienna, Rome and Paris); two regional commissions: the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC) and the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UNESCWA); and selected regional and country offices (Mexico and Panama). In accordance with the internal standards and guidelines of JIU and its internal working procedures, the methodology followed in preparing this report included a preliminary desk review, questionnaires, interviews, management and staff group meetings and in-depth analysis. Interview guidelines were sent to some participating organizations and the Inspectors conducted interviews in the above locations; they also sought the views of the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC) and of the CEB, including their respective secretariats. Comments from participating organizations on the draft report have been sought and taken into account in finalizing the report. In accordance with article 11.2 of the JIU statute, this report has been finalized after consultation among the Inspectors so as to test its conclusions and recommendations against the collective wisdom of the Unit. Its conclusions and recommendations therefore reflect the views of the Unit. To facilitate the handling of the report and the implementation of its recommendations and the monitoring thereof, annex III contains a table indicating whether the report is submitted to the organizations concerned for action or for information. The table identifies those recommendations relevant for each organization, specifying whether they require a decision by the organization's legislative or governing body or can be acted upon by the organization's executive head. The Inspectors wish to express their appreciation to all who assisted them in the preparation of this report, and particularly to those who participated in the interviews and so willingly shared their knowledge and expertise. A. Common system, diverse mobility needs The United Nations system is formed by international organizations, which have individually adapted through the years their structures and policies to global challenges and evolving demands from their stakeholders. The mandates, operational needs and activities undertaken by them are very diverse. In the common system, there are highly mobile entities coexisting with others where staff mobility is not a major concern. There are organizations with long-standing staff mobility schemes in place, while other organizations have not developed any formal staff mobility policy. Funds and programmes, such as UNICEF, UNDP, UNHCR or WFP are clear examples of highly mobile entities, while highly specialized organizations such as UPU, UNWTO, WMO or WIPO are illustrative cases of organizations with low mobility requirements. In between the extremes, there is another category of organizations with wide geographical coverage of field offices, such as ILO, WHO, UNESCO or most of the United Nations Secretariat, where mobility is relatively important but not as intensive as in those highly mobile entities mentioned above. Interviews showed that, given the considerable differences among system organizations, there is no "one mobility scheme fits all organizations". The Inspectors concur with this notion and stress that the ultimate end of mobility is to better meet the respective goals of each organization, thus if the goals are different for different organizations, mobility policies should also be different. Mobility schemes, internal to one entity, are referred to within this report as intra-organizational mobility, or internal mobility while mobility between organizations of the United Nations common system is defined as extra-organizational mobility, or inter-agency mobility. In addition to different organizational goals, there are other important elements that differentiate common system organizations. Organizations have evolved through time developing their own specific organizational cultures. The JIU in its report "Staff mobility in the United Nations" (JIU/REP/2006/7) referred to the importance of developing, promoting and supporting the right organizational culture for a sound implementation of mobility schemes. Entities like those referred above as highly mobile entities already have a "mobile culture", while other organizations have not introduced the concept of staff mobility in their own organizational cultures. Some organizations have sporadically sought to introduce stronger mobility requirements (e.g. UN Secretariat, UNESCO, OCHA) but have faced considerable internal resistance as well as rules that are not geared towards making mobility schemes work. However, from a system-wide perspective, the Inspectors conclude that more efforts need to be made to further develop and strengthen a United Nations common system culture supportive of mobility. The issue of a United Nations common system culture is further analysed later in this review. Another important element that differentiates organizations and to be considered in the context of inter-agency mobility is the highly specialized nature of the activities undertaken by organizations of the United Nations common system, which logically require very specialized human resources difficult to replace and also to redeploy to other entities. Mobility for these specialist categories of staff is costly and frequently inefficient. Most of the organizations recognize this difficulty within their own mobility policies, and limit the compulsory mobility requirements, if any at all, applicable to highly specialized jobs. Despite the existing differences, the Inspectors fully support the growing idea that system-wide mobility needs to be further encouraged and facilitated; this should be done focusing on commonality and shared interests. The reasons range from increased staff motivation, discussed in subsequent paragraphs, to an enhanced system response to global challenges. It is clear that no single organization can provide a comprehensive answer to global challenges or to high-scale disaster recovery situations. Partnerships of all types, whether between system organizations, public or private sectors, demand higher coordination and a better understanding of others' practice. System-wide mobility can contribute to this extent promoting a better "Delivering as One", thus enhancing system-wide efficiency. B. Staff-management dialogue: matching organizational needs with staff needs The matching of organizational and staff needs can only be achieved through staff-management dialogue mechanisms; at system level, this dialogue should be established through system-wide machinery and the formal participation of staff representatives in some of the activities and meetings of the High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM). The Inspectors are pleased to note the participation in HLCM discussions of the three staff federations: the Federation of International Civil Servants' Associations (FICSA), the Coordinating Committee for International Staff Unions and Associations of the United Nations System (CCISUA) and the United Nations International Civil Servants Federation (UNISERV). However, despite the fact that staff federations are invited to some of the meetings of the Human Resources Network and participate in many of its working groups, as well as in the HLCM Steering Committee on Staff Safety and Security, staff federations, during their participation at the eighteenth session of the HLCM, reiterated their requests for enhanced dialogue with management and expressed their dissatisfaction with the current level of involvement of staff representation in the relevant discussions held within the HLCM. The Inspectors believe that there is a real need for improved dialogue between staff and management and that staff should always be represented and participate, in particular, in the discussions of the Human Resources Network. The exclusion of staff from the talks leading to the development of comprehensive human resources management policies could only point towards failure, as experience in several organizations has shown. The need to further develop a "system-wide organizational culture" supportive of staff mobility is highlighted in different parts of this report. In the view of the Inspectors, a mobile organizational culture implies, inter alia, staff understanding, support and involvement in the development of mobility policies, as well as participating in the management of its subsequent implementation. C. Mobility mechanisms in the United Nations system In 2005, the CEB issued the Inter-Agency Mobility Accord (the Accord). The Accord was intended to replace the former Inter-organization Agreement (the Agreement) that was last updated in 2003, concerning transfer, secondment or loan of staff among the organizations applying the United Nations common system of salaries and allowances. The Inter-Agency Mobility Accord is the contract, or legal framework, where the staff member, the releasing and the receiving organizations agree and define the respective responsibilities, applicable rights and conditions of the transaction. The Accord was approved in October 2005 by the HLCM at its 10th session (see CEB/2005/5, paras. 55-57 and Annex V). In the Accord, the mobility concepts of "secondment" and "loan", as foreseen in the previous Agreement, have been replaced by a broader concept of "exchange", which is to be further customized by a specific Memorandum of Inter-Organization Exchange (MIOE). The Accord offers staff, in agreement with the receiving and the releasing organizations, the possibility to move to another system entity with (staff exchange) or without return rights (staff transfer). The JIU, in its report on staff mobility in the Secretariat, welcomed the launch of the Accord "as a major development towards the enhancement of staff mobility across the United Nations common system"; however, the Inspectors could ascertain during the interviews held with human resources officials that there is no uniformity in its use and application; some organizations use it, while others have not accepted it and continue to use the former Agreement, a third group of organizations are open to the use of any of the two. In this regard, it is important to note than "since some 16 organizations are implementing the Accord, it would be difficult for those implementing the Accord to go back to the previous Agreement". This lack of consensus among system organizations has created confusion resulting in administrative inefficiency, "as some Organizations have not implemented the Accord, the only option to release a staff member from a non-compliant Organization to a compliant Organization is on a transfer arrangement. Similarly when a staff member from a compliant Organization is released to noncompliant Organizations, there is an operational necessity on the receiving end for utilization of the old Agreement making transfer arrangements non reciprocal. This imbalance has caused managerial and administrative difficulties and slowed the efficient movements of some staff". However, it should be noted that agreements for temporary staff movements (secondments and loans) between organizations that apply different agreements have nevertheless been concluded. Not all organizations having implemented the Accord have experienced problems and some are satisfied with it, while those having experienced problems consider that "the Accord is complex and its implementation is time-consuming and cumbersome". The Inspectors wish to draw the attention of common system organizations to the potential legal implications of using two different legal instruments for the same purpose, thus creating different conditions that could lead to a perceived potential discrimination of some staff. The existence of two agreements is problematic and efforts should be made to ensure that the same accord is adopted and applied by all organizations. The Accord has been under revision for the past five years, since it was issued in 2005, and still there is no consensus on its use. Three years after it was issued, only 17 organizations had implemented the Accord, while six organizations had not implemented it. These figures have not changed substantially. The Human Resources Network of the CEB established a working group on inter-agency mobility, in charge, inter alia, of the revision of the Accord, and during 2009 a legal opinion was requested of the Legal Network: however, the Legal Network has not been able to reach consensus regarding the Accord and its implementation. The Human Resources Network has noted at its recently concluded 20th session, held in July 2010, that 17 out of 23 organizations are applying the Accord, and has recommended that a single instrument be used by all organizations for the inter-agency mobility of staff. This confusing situation does not facilitate system-wide mobility and makes each individual case an exception, and depending on the specific circumstances of each transaction, a made-to-order contract is finalized. The reasons for the lack of consensus are mainly the slightly different rules, regulations and entitlements, sometimes the different interpretation of the same rules; though the Inspectors believe that there is also a certain degree of protectionism and reservation within certain entities which believe that the Accord allows too much flexibility for the staff. The Inspectors have noticed some reluctance to staff transfers within some organizations, in particular to receiving staff with high seniority from other organizations, due to the financial liabilities associated. Furthermore, they have been informed that some agencies have forced staff to give up seniority accrued in a given entity to accept a position in another. This is a serious and critical issue given that staff forced to ask for full termination from their original entity to join as a "new" staff member another organization, risk job security while also losing potential benefits/safety nets obtained through years of service. This practice should be avoided as it does not promote mobility; it is unfair and ethically questionable. The rights of staff acquired along the years should be preserved while taking into due consideration the issue of financial liabilities. A cost-compensation mechanism, though in a very basic form, is contemplated in several clauses of the Agreement concerning transfer, secondment or loan of staff among the organizations applying the United Nations Common System of salaries and allowances. The Inspectors propose exploring new system-wide compensatory mechanisms that could allocate staff termination indemnities among system organizations according to, inter alia, the proportional length of service within each organization. The Accord also allows for the sharing of termination indemnities through a negotiated MIOE. "All financial liabilities for transfers and inter-organization exchanges shall be borne by the Receiving Organization, unless otherwise agreed in a particular case between the organizations concerned and stipulated in the MIOE." However, without a system-wide agreed framework for the sharing of costs, some organizations have individually developed their own "clauses", which in certain cases might seem discriminatory from a system-wide perspective. To illustrate this point, the Inspectors learned that one organization, when acting as receiving organization, has decided to request from the releasing organization, prorated terminal payments due to staff, in the event that separation of the staff member occurs within six years from the date of transfer to the receiving organization. This is just an example of an arbitrary clause applied by a given organization. A similar staff movement between different organizations might not include this specific requirement; this example serves also to illustrate the administrative complexity of individual tailor-made contracts, where many elements are open to individual and repeated negotiations. Despite the fact that the Inspectors understand the reservations about the Accord, considered too flexible, thus open to negotiations and cumbersome to implement; they believe that the reservations against its use should have been discussed and solved before it was launched; now, after five years of discussions, an urgent decision needs to be made regarding its use. The Accord is just a tool; policies and tools are a prerequisite and should be in place first, if staff mobility is to be promoted effectively. The Inspectors learned that a revised version of the Accord has been prepared with the collaboration of the FAO Legal Office; the revised text has been submitted to the Legal Network for comments and observations; however some organizations have expressed their concern about this attempt and believe that the previous Agreement should be updated. Once the legal instrument is agreed, the Inspectors propose that organizations develop specific contractual templates to be used across the system, following the example of some entities which have developed their own contractual templates for each different type of possible movement. The use of standard templates would facilitate staff movements and prevent the individual application by organizations of certain clauses perceived in some cases as unfair and partial. The implementation of the following recommendation is expected to enhance the coordination and cooperation between the organizations of the United Nations common system. D. Inter-agency mobility data In order to appropriately assess the relevance of inter-agency mobility and to quantify the degree of success of mobility policies and initiatives, it is fundamental to establish meaningful indicators of achievement and the subsequent monitoring mechanisms. Surprisingly and despite that mobility and system-wide mobility have been subjects of debate among common system organizations for a long time, relevant data necessary to analyze the dimension and trends on inter-agency mobility are not easily available. The ICSC kindly shared with the JIU the data collected from common system organizations through its 2009 questionnaire on inter-agency mobility. Subsequently, staff mobility data have been compiled by the JIU for the years 2007 and 2008 and additional data on staff movements for the year 2009 has been provided by organizations as reflected in annex I. The Inspectors are grateful to organizations for their cooperation in providing data, without which it would have been impossible to have a clear picture of the real dimension of the matter, including its financial implications. The Inspectors believe that staff mobility data should be systematically monitored and reported regularly by organizations, compiled at the CEB secretariat and included in relevant system-wide human resources statistics. This would undoubtedly benefit subsequent analysis, supporting the development of new policies and facilitating their consequent assessment and review. However, the Inspectors could not find comprehensive historical data that could be used to analyze mobility trends for long periods; this difficulty in obtaining relevant data was reflected by the secretariat of the ICSC already in 2003, "the data on the topic are scarce and may not be comprehensive but, such as they are, seem to indicate that mobility is still not widespread throughout the system; if anything, mobility between organizations may even be decreasing". The tables in annex I show figures, as reported by most organizations, for a three-year period (2007-2009). The Inspectors believe that a three-year period is too short to identify trends and to reach firm conclusions on staff mobility, which in their view could only be reached after the analysis of periods longer than 10 years. However, some basic conclusions can be drawn from the subject tables. In order to provide a wider picture, the tables include figures on mobility internal to the organizations, as well as on inter-agency mobility. In order to analyze mobility flows, movements of staff, internal to the organization, have been further broken down for each participating organization into three major groups: staff movements from headquarters to the field, from the field into headquarters and from a field location to another field location. Inter-agency mobility includes two major groups, these are: staff leaving to and staff coming from another organization of the United Nations system. It should be noted that some organizations did not provide any data; others only reported partially following their own criteria; some do not count staff transfers (a type of staff movement considered in the Accord not contemplating return rights to the releasing organization) as inter-agency mobility. Thus, despite the efforts made, data gathered might not be comprehensive. Additionally, some organizations indicated that their respective information management systems did not allow the direct reporting of the requested data, thus some organizations had to use "manual" procedures to consolidate data. As indicated in preceding paragraphs the ICSC secretariat concluded in 2003 that mobility is still not widespread throughout the system. The CEB conducted a survey among system organizations and also concluded in 2004 that "inter-agency mobility exists but its extent is very limited at the present time". Figures included in the tables confirm that inter-agency mobility continues to be insignificant. Internal mobility shows a significant number of staff movements within certain organizations (i.e. UNHCR, UN Secretariat, WFP, etc.). However, inter-agency mobility is marginal, the number of staff having moved between organizations, within the whole United Nations system, is below 300, or less than 1 per cent, for the highest of the years considered. This is not surprising, given that currently there are no effective inter-agency staff mobility policies in place; the small percentage of staff moving between organizations suggests that inter-agency mobility currently happens spontaneously; driven by individual staff members; it is not the consequence of a planned strategy, nor of proactive actions taken by organizations to promote it, but is a consequence of individual staff members' efforts, aimed at obtaining a promotion, a more interesting job or simply a desire to relocate. Inter-agency mobility is administered by organizations but it is not managed by them. A. Harmonization of business practices within the United Nations system The harmonization of business practices is a must to facilitate inter-agency mobility and also to put an end to certain unfair situations, where for example staff of the same grade but from different United Nations entities and working in the same field location might receive different allowances. The Inspectors could determine during their field missions that in some locations, United Nations entities compete for the same staff, who move from one entity to another, depending on the type of contract offered or on the entitlements available respectively, including different work/life balance options. The need for increased harmonization has been recognized by the General Assembly. Its resolution 63/311 on system-wide coherence "calls on the Secretary-General, in cooperation with members of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to continue progress in the simplification and harmonization of business practices within the United Nations development system, and requests the Secretary-General ... to regularly inform the Economic and Social Council about progress being made and challenges encountered in this regard". In 2007, the CEB endorsed the Plan of Action for the Harmonization of Business Practices developed by the HLCM with the active participation of the United Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes and specialized agencies. The plan contemplates initiatives in four different areas: human resources, financial, procurement and supply-chain initiatives, and information and communications technologies, including knowledge sharing initiatives. The plan is funded through voluntary contributions and 8, 805,493 USD have been received as of February 2010 from different donors. The human resources management component of the plan includes a comparative review of the staff regulations and rules of the organizations of the United Nations common system with particular attention to employment arrangements in non-Headquarters locations. The review is structured in two phases; phase I includes a review of the contractual arrangements pertaining to the field workforce as well as a review of staff rules and regulations, policies and practices relating to issues arising from "Delivering as One" pilot countries, such as: harmonized job descriptions, classification and grading systems, common performance and promotion systems and the management of internal vacancies. While phase II will include a review of all remaining issues, not covered under phase I. The Inspectors are convinced that such a review is necessary and that it should be comprehensive of all aspects related to recruitment and in particular to local employment conditions, including, inter alia, pension portability issues and differences in health insurance schemes, which in some cases make mobility unnecessarily difficult. For example, the Inspectors learned during their missions that two of the United Nations funds and programmes have outsourced their respective medical insurance coverage for local staff in a given location to different external providers. While there is nothing wrong with this practice, the result is that if local staff were to move from one programme to the other, entitlements and compensation ceilings for health related issues might differ considerably. These are in the view of the Inspectors the type of barriers that need to be overcome in order to facilitate and promote mobility. The Inspectors are pleased to note that organizations are well aware of this important issue and support the harmonization of business practices. Furthermore, they encourage the advancement towards a common set of staff regulations and rules for the whole United Nations system. A common system deserves common regulations and rules. However, this is not an easy task, it is a long-term project and a detailed road map should be elaborated in the context of the relevant harmonization of business practices project, including specific responsibilities and clear deadlines. Harmonizing business practices at system-wide level frequently implies harmonizing and reviewing also individual policies, including mobility schemes. Most of the mobility schemes currently in place within individual organizations were logically developed focusing on specific organizational needs without major consideration for system-wide issues and only now some organizations are beginning to revise certain clauses of their respective mobility schemes to accommodate and regulate inter-agency mobility. As indicated in the introduction, this review does not assess individual and specific mobility policies. However, the Inspectors believe than in addition to harmonizing business practices at a system-wide level certain mobility policies might require a review, in order to align and make them more coherent with generally accepted principles of good human resources management while taking into consideration system-wide issues related to mobility. The announcement of certain mobility requirements made by the United Nations Secretariat in 2009, such as the need to comply with geographical mobility in hardship duty stations for promotions to the P-5 and above levels serves to illustrate this point. The mobility requirement was applicable only to internal candidates and, paradoxically, it placed Secretariat staff at a disadvantage against external candidates or candidates from other organizations, who were not required to comply with the geographical mobility requirement. The Inspectors referred to this issue during the interviews held with officials of the Office for Human Resources Management (OHRM), pointing to a potential discrimination against internal candidates. The Inspectors are pleased to learn that such requirement was subsequently withdrawn; however, the example serves to illustrate how individual mobility policies can be inconsistent from a system-wide perspective. Another example of system-wide inconsistency is the fact that General Service staff of the Secretariat are not allowed to apply to Professional posts within the Secretariat, unless they resign and apply as an external candidate; however General Service staff from other common system organizations can apply to Professional posts within the Secretariat as external candidates but without resigning from their current jobs. A last example of elements of individual mobility schemes that have an impact on system-wide mobility is the practice of certain organizations which do not recognize promotions and/or experience gathered by their own staff while seconded, transferred of on loan in another system organization. Obviously, this approach does not contribute to enhance mobility. Again, there is no uniformity in this regard, given that there are organizations which do recognize promotions and/or experience gained when staff are on loan, secondment or exchange. One of the most distinctive elements of the common system, shared by all system organizations, is the current staff grading system and its corresponding Common System of Salaries and Allowances, which implies the acceptance and recognition, across the system, of common staff grades. Thus, it is difficult to understand the logic or legal basis for not recognizing the grade of a staff member when it has been obtained in another system organization using the same grade/salary scale. Furthermore, one of the major arguments used by most of the organizations encouraging mobility is that mobility contributes to enhancing the experience and skills of staff, thus it would seem inconsistent to encourage on one side the acquisition of experience through mobility, and on the other not to recognize it when concerned staff return to the releasing organization. However, the Inspectors understand that, in practice, there might be differences between job descriptions and that the criteria applied by different organizations to determine the grade of posts is not uniform, which makes it difficult to automatically recognize the grade of a staff member when obtained in a different organization. Nevertheless, these specific cases should be looked into carefully by human resources departments, who should finally decide if the experience obtained is enough to grant grade recognition or not. In this regard, the use of common job descriptions could help to alleviate this problem. The above are just examples of components of individual mobility policies that, when analysed from a system-wide perspective, show inconsistencies and have an impact on the development of system-wide mobility. The scope of this review does not allow for a comprehensive analysis of all individual mobility schemes in place within organizations. However, specific mobility policies, internal to organizations, should be supportive of inter-agency mobility. In this regard the Inspectors advice organizations to review their own internal and specific mobility policies from a system-wide perspective trying to identify and correct inconsistencies. B. Delivering as One: one common system, one common system staff In order to better serve stakeholders, the United Nations system is engaged in different pilot projects, known as "Delivering as One", which aim at achieving higher efficiency through better coordination of the activities undertaken in a given country by the different entities of the United Nations system. In the view of the Inspectors, it is evident that "delivering as one" implies one common system staff ideally administered under the same set of regulations and rules, which unquestionably would facilitate system-wide mobility. This has been confirmed by experience: "In the context of Delivering as One, pilot countries have requested further harmonization in the area of Human Resources and have identified a number of issues related to inter-agency mobility. ... Among these barriers are the different contractual arrangements, job classifications, grading, performance, promotion and recruitment". The lessons learned from these pilot projects, as well as initiatives mentioned in previous paragraphs, such as the harmonization of business practices, call for "one common system staff". Most organizations consider staff from other organizations of the United Nations common system only as external candidates when applying to posts within their organizations: however, some organizations have a reciprocity policy and consider candidates from a given organization as internal candidates, if that organization grants the same treatment to their staff. The Human Resources network of the CEB at its 2009 spring session agreed to conduct a survey on recruitment practices regarding the status of candidates from within the United Nations system as internal or external candidates. The survey concluded that only one organization considered both General Service and Professional staff from other organizations of the common system on the same basis as internal candidates. The survey also indicated that "Organizations were generally receptive to the idea of recognising each other's staff as internal candidates; however they reported a wide variety of practices leading to the conclusion that one size will not fit all". The Inspectors could ascertain during their missions that most of the officials interviewed favour the abolition of this barrier, considered unreasonable by many. They share this view and believe that all staff members working in any of the organizations of the United Nations common system should be considered internal candidates when applying to posts within the system, regardless of the organization, fund or programme they belong to. In this respect, the Inspectors would like to refer to the Charter of the United Nations which indicates the prevailing criteria for the selection of staff: "The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence, and integrity". Thus, the division of current staff members of the United Nations common system between internal and external candidates seems an artificial barrier that should be abolished if system-wide mobility is to be truly promoted. The secretariat of the ICSC expressed similar views indicating "All vacant posts throughout the common system should be open to all United Nations staff members. Furthermore, ... common system applicants should be considered on a par with other internal applicants and should be given priority over external candidates". C. Developing a United Nations common system culture The United Nations common system is a complex structure formed by different international organizations, owners of very different organizational cultures which have been individually crafted through years. This complex structure does not facilitate the development of a common culture. However, there are some cultural elements common to all the organizations, which in the view of the Inspectors should be the foundation for the further development of a still incipient common system culture. Focusing on commonalities and shared goals is the only way to successfully promote a common United Nations culture. An organizational culture is a shared set of values, the result of many interrelated elements, such as staff and management, rules and regulations, type of activities undertaken, funding, geographical coverage, etc interacting together for long periods of time within one organization; it is intangible yet easily recognizable and shared by all members of the organization. The Inspectors are pleased to note that some progress has been achieved by organizations towards the development of a common system culture. Initiatives launched in the context of the CEB, such as, inter alia, the harmonization of business practices at field level, contribute to the development of a common culture, even if not planned initially for this specific purpose. Projects included under the "Delivering as One" initiative are also representative to illustrate examples of interaction between organizations which contribute to the creation of a common system culture. Organizations, through their participation in system-wide mechanisms and/or jointly financed administrative activities, could further advance in the development of specific initiatives towards a "common system culture". The United Nations Staff College (UNSC), ICSC, CEB and JIU are key entities for the promotion and development of such a culture but organizations need also to make an individual effort to promote a common system culture within their own structures. Staff induction, training and development programmes should be used within organizations to, inter alia, promote a common system culture. Individual organizational cultures need and should be maintained; however, there is a need to find additional common ground and built stronger bridges between system organizations in order to strengthen a very incipient common system culture supportive of, inter alia, staff mobility. There is still much to do to integrate the concept of mobility into a common system culture yet to be developed. A report prepared by a consultant also identified this issue as a major one. "The major concern is that most of the United Nations system have no accepted culture of mobility". "This ... `culture of immobility' is reinforced by some elements of the United Nations structure and its inherent legalism". One of the main characteristics of the United Nations common system is its international nature. Even the smallest organizations share this feature; consequently and in order to promote a common culture, staff joining the system should be aware and informed of the potential mobility implications of an international career. The international civil servant's professional career implies mobility, and in the view of the Inspector it also implies the understanding that mobility is intrinsically necessary to obtain the experience required to access senior positions. Organizations should inform newcomers (e.g. through specific contractual clauses, induction training, etc.) of the importance of mobility for the development of their professional careers. However, this should be a system-wide coordinated effort, a common framework or protocol should be developed and implemented within each organization but shared by all of them, thus contributing to the further development of a common system culture. The implementation of the following recommendation is expected to enhance coordination and cooperation between the organizations of the United Nations common system. There are many opportunities to introduce inter-agency mobility as an important element of an enhanced common system culture, and particular attention should be paid to those areas, such us disaster recovery and humanitarian assistance, peacekeeping and peace building and broad technical cooperation where society at large expects a coordinated and efficient response of the organizations of the United Nations common system. D. Inter-agency initiatives, thinking forward Inter-agency mobility figures discussed in previous paragraphs do not show a clear trend and suggest that inter-agency mobility currently happens spontaneously based on staff initiative; it is not the consequence of a planned strategy, nor of proactive actions taken by organizations. Thus, the Inspectors encourage organizations to think "out of the box" and be creative. In this regard, new inter-agency mobility initiatives could and should be built. The following paragraphs include some ideas gathered during the interviews undertaken by the Inspectors in their field missions. Several staff members, including experienced staff in the second half of their professional careers and from different organizations, expressed separately during the interviews and group meetings held by the Inspectors, their common interest in participating in a humanitarian assistance and/or a peacekeeping mission for a limited period of time on a rotational basis. However, staff members claimed that the information required for them to make an informed decision is not easily available; additionally some of them believe that the perceived complex bureaucratic processes in place do not encourage inter-agency mobility. The Inspectors would support the launch of system-wide rotational arrangements targeted at facilitating voluntary mobility of staff wishing to participate in humanitarian and peacekeeping missions. These schemes should include, inter alia, a wide communication strategy covering all organizations of the United Nations common system, the use of rosters of qualified candidates from all common system organizations, new and simple administrative processes to facilitate paperwork and appropriate induction training. The Inspectors observed high interest on mobility issues in a considerable number of General Service staff, usually excluded in most of organizations from participating in mobility schemes. Some expressed their frustration at the lack of career development opportunities, in particular in small field offices. If mobility is generally accepted as having positive effects on staff career development and is a key in broadening staff experience, no staff category should be excluded from obtaining these benefits and new mobility schemes should be designed to, inter alia, overcome already identified problems. New inter-agency mobility schemes limited to a given location or geographical area and open to General Service and locally recruited staff, might provide an answer to this issue. Whether through rotational or managed staff exchange initiatives, geographically limited, organizations can increase staff motivation offering new career opportunities, avoiding costly geographical relocation and related costs, or at least limiting them while at the same time contributing to a better "Delivering as One". Additionally, organizations could look into the possibility of launching bilateral staff exchange agreements focusing on commonalities; they can also develop different internal mobility programmes targeting specific staff groups with specific needs, like for example the managed reassignment exercise for Junior Professional staff in the Secretariat, applicable only to newcomers at the P-2 level. All mobility schemes in place include provisions for the exclusion of the participation of highly specialized personnel in mobility schemes. Highly specialized staff are costly to replace and difficult to move. Furthermore, organizations of the United Nations common system are themselves very specialized entities, whose substantive activities are very different and specific, ranging from meteorology or telecommunications to human health; thus a considerable number of staff, mostly specialists, might not be suitable for participating in any inter-agency-mobility exercise. However, there are common areas between organizations where mobility could be promoted through system-wide occupational networks. In this regard, the Inspectors believe that inter-agency mobility initiatives in order to be effective, should also be designed around common activities, or occupations, like administration and management, finance, procurement, information and communication technologies, social and economy related, etc. This approach is being implemented within the United Nations Secretariat where staff can voluntarily join different occupational networks designed to promote staff mobility within specific job categories. The implementation of the following recommendation is expected to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations system. While developing staff mobility schemes, organizations should be aware of associated costs since staff mobility involves important costs for organizations. The JIU, in its report "Staff Mobility in the United Nations" referred to the financial implications of staff mobility within the United Nations Secretariat. Most of the organizations have not prepared clear financial estimates before launching mobility initiatives. The Inspectors stress the importance of a preliminary financial analysis in order to make informed decisions regarding the launch of new mobility initiatives. The ICSC secretariat in one of its notes indicated that "one of the specialists consulted estimated the average cost of every move at $60,000". Other officials interviewed provided figures in the range of $45,000. The JIU, in its report on "Staff Mobility in the United Nations", estimated $50,000. However, these estimates refer to direct relocation costs such as, transportation, household removal, relevant insurance, staff entitlements, etc. A myriad of hidden costs, such as time to learn the new job and settle in a new location, relevant training and induction, time required to comply with lengthy administrative procedures, etc. are very difficult to quantify and additional to the amounts indicated. Moreover, in addition to the "one-time" costs indicated above, there are recurrent costs associated to staff mobility for long periods of time, like the mobility allowance payable to internationally recruited staff paid as an incentive to encourage movement from one duty station to another in the form of flat amounts based on a cluster of moves ranging from one to seven, after five consecutive years at the same duty station, the mobility allowance is discontinued. A hardship allowance is also payable to internationally recruited staff on an assignment of one year or more, serving at duty stations in categories B to E. It should be noted that a review of the current methodology for the calculation of mobility and hardship allowances is planned for 2010-2011 by the ICSC. E. Dual career and staff mobility Several staff surveys and papers have referred to the difficulty of accompanying expatriate spouses to continue their professional careers due to the legal restrictions imposed to access the local labour market by most host countries, as one of the most important hurdles to overcome in order to recruit and retain highly qualified staff as well as to promote staff mobility within any organization; this extent is of particular relevance from a system-wide perspective. The lack of necessary work permits constitutes a strong disincentive to staff mobility, especially to the field. Special spouse work permits are available in only a handful of countries, mostly in the "H" or "A" categories of the ICSC duty station hardship classification. "Specific provisions for United Nations system family members to work in host countries only exist in 9 countries of the world. In contrast the United States Foreign Service maintains work permit agreements with 153 countries". The issue of spouse employment is a well known and long standing one. The JIU has already twice recommended that governing bodies of the organizations of the United Nations common system find a solution in coordination with host countries. In 2002, the Secretary-General of the United Nations stated, "In order to enhance staff mobility across the United Nations system, we will... approach Governments to explore possibilities for the renegotiation of host country agreements so as to allow United Nations spouses to work in those countries". Additionally, the issue has been raised numerous times at inter-agency level. Furthermore, the General Assembly of the United Nations has passed two resolutions encouraging Member States to consider granting work permits for the employment of spouses accompanying staff members of international organizations. The Inspectors regret that, after repeated recommendations and resolutions, this issue has not yet been resolved. They can only reiterate the recommendation included in previous reports of the JIU, advising of the need to find a solution to this crucial issue for the promotion of inter-agency staff mobility. They call on organizations to continue their efforts to find a satisfactory solution in a coordinated manner and in cooperation with host countries. It is advisable to introduce this issue in negotiations of any new host country agreement and in future renegotiations of current ones. In this regard, the Inspectors consider that the agreement between the Swiss authorities and the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the introduction of a new regime by the Swiss authorities called "Access to the Swiss labour market for the family members of staff members of permanent missions and international organizations", could serve as a best-practice example. However, Member States should bear their share of responsibility in resolving this long-standing issue if they truly support, inter alia, staff mobility. In order to find a solution to the above issue, some organizations of the United Nations common system and the World Bank Group have taken a proactive approach, establishing the Dual Career and Staff Mobility programme (DC&SM), a small inter-agency initiative of the CEB Human Resources Network, which follows the mandate of the 2004 UNDG Joint Guidance Note on the Employment of Expatriate Spouses. Furthermore, some organizations (i.e. FAO) have adopted policies to enable spouses of staff members to work for them. Following this example, organizations not having yet done so, could consider the feasibility of changing internal rules so as to give preferential consideration over external candidates in recruitment processes to equally well-qualified expatriate spouse applicants, in accordance with paragraph III/16/d of the Joint Guidance Note on the Employment of Expatriate Spouses. The programme is intended to help expatriate families to settle in to their new duty station, and to assist expatriate spouses to obtain employment. A key feature of the programme is its website, which publishes career opportunities; it also offers country-specific information on subjects such as accommodation, health, schools and getting around. In addition, Local Expatriate Spouse Associations (LESA) are being established in United Nations and World Bank Group duty stations under the overall responsibility of their respective Resident Coordinators and UN Country Teams. These associations assist spouses with their career concerns and provide on-site information and help to families moving into a new duty station. The work of the LESA is coordinated by the Global Expatriate Spouse Association (GESA) which is based in Geneva and managed by the Secretariat of the CEB. An evaluation of the DC&SM programme, carried out in late 2009 determined that "the programme has been successful in establishing a significant number of LESAs that represent about 55 per cent of the current international professional population. The GESA has also successfully raised the profile of the problem of international professional recruitment and retention, making sure that it is considered at the highest levels across the UN system". However, the evaluation identified the following issues:  There is a lack of quantitative evidence relating to the costs caused by spouse dissatisfaction. Much of the data needed is available but estimates have not been made.  LESAs operate as voluntary organizations outside the official boundaries of the UN presence in a duty station; they are often not accorded the importance that they deserve and they also suffer from a lack of sustainability due to personnel changes.  The technological infrastructure is very limited and does not provide LESA members with appropriate services.  The United Nations is not providing spouses with consistent access or support for professional development opportunities. A. Work/life balance in the United Nations system: current status and challenges Work/life balance in the United Nations system is understood as a set of different work arrangements aimed at achieving a more flexible work environment, with the final objectives of finding the optimum balance between professional and personal life, while contributing to enhance organizational efficiency. Some of the most popular work/life balance options provided by all organizations of the United Nations common system are: flexi-time, maternity, paternity and family leave. However, organizations offer many other options, as reflected in annex II. Several studies conducted in the corporate world have concluded that an appropriate balance between work and personal life through flexible work arrangements results in higher staff motivation and increased productivity through reduced operational costs. However, work/life balance considerations are not among the most important reasons to join the United Nations system, as reflected in the results of the 2008 ICSC staff survey on recruitment and retention (ICSC/67/CRP.9; see tables paragraphs 13, 20 and 21). In fact they are among the least important in a list of 17 different reasons for joining the United Nations system; furthermore its already relative small importance diminishes as the age ranges of candidates to join the system increase. The same pattern can be observed in the reasons of staff to stay; work/life balance considerations are also among the least important ones, however its relative importance is higher for staff than for external candidates. There are no major differences related to gender in terms of different responses to the same question, whereas age and category of staff do introduce some differences. Work/life balance seems to be relatively more important for respondents of the General Service category. The Human Resources network, at its 2007 summer session, agreed that the CEB secretariat would proceed with the services of a consultant to look at work/life balance issues in the United Nations system, including an inventory on the joint and individual work/life activities taking place across the system. A comprehensive report was prepared and considered by the Human Resources network in spring 2008; since then, organizations have met to discuss the report and its recommendations initiating a global work/life balance working group. The subject report provides details of the current status of work/life balance policies and implementation of the different options across the United Nations system. It underlines certain issues, confirmed by the Inspectors at staff group meetings organized during their field missions and relevant from a system-wide perspective, such as the need to harmonize work/life balance options at field level to avoid unnecessary competition for the same staff by organizations offering different benefits package in the same location. The report concludes that "given the wide variety of mandates, missions, organisational and system-wide objectives and HR strategies, it is almost impossible to provide a single standard for WLB [Work/Life Balance] and SWB [Staff Wellbeing] programmes ... However, harmonization and coordination of efforts is essential to ensure equity for staff in duty stations around the world, to promote inter-agency mobility and `Delivering as One'". Finally, it offers organizations three different sets of work/life balance options, defined within the report as: minimum, medium and "gold" standards. For ease of reference, annex II shows the options included in each standard. The idea behind the three standards is that the minimum standard represents the options that organizations, legally or statutorily, are obliged to provide; while the medium standard includes policies used by field oriented organizations. The gold standard adds policies, not mandatory but considered effective. Subsequent meetings of the working group on work/life balance further revised the concept of the three standards, and participants suggested that it would suffice to have only two sets of options, instead of three, given that most organizations already fulfil the minimum standard, most of which is mandatory across the system. In the latter proposal, the first standard would be a combination of the minimum and medium ones, while the second standard would be the current gold standard. The Inspectors consider that the number of work/life balance options available, if properly applied, cover reasonably well the needs of staff for enhanced flexibility at work. The issue, in their view, is not the choice of options but rather how these are implemented. Regarding the use of the standards described above, the simplest option of having a basic standard, available system-wide, combined with a second optional standard, which would include the rest of the work/life options that could be chosen locally and individually to match staff and specific organizational needs, has been agreed by all organizations; this measure would help to minimize the issue of organizations competing for the same staff as mentioned in previous paragraphs, while providing some flexibility. The Inspectors stress the importance of a results-based culture, as a prerequisite to appropriately implement work/life balance options. This issue is also identified in the CEB report "Work/Life balance in the organizations of the United Nations system" (CEB/2008/HLCM/HR/11 rev 1). A results-based culture focuses on outputs and results; where and how these are achieved are secondary considerations. However, the degree of understanding and application of results-based initiatives by management is uneven, not only across the system but in frequent cases also within the same organization; leading perhaps to one of the most important work/life balance issues identified by the Inspectors: the considerably unbalanced implementation of work/life balance programmes across and within organizations. Field missions confirmed the disparity in implementing work/life balance programmes. The Inspectors noted that in certain locations work/life balance options are only launched years after these are available in headquarters duty stations. The decision on which options are available in given locations is frequently taken by local management. The location is also the determinant factor for the launch of certain work/life options, given that some options, such as telecommuting, might be appropriate only in certain locations; thus, which options should be available in a given place, is a decision to be made locally after appropriate staff-management consultations. In order to better understand staff needs, some managers have established the necessary dialogue, including through the use of surveys, launching those work/life balance options considered most adequate by all parties in the location; others, manage work/life balance options in an arbitrary manner. Some organizations openly recognize that "supervisors have difficulty to promote the use of flexible working arrangements in their departments". In this regard, the Inspectors would like to recall the role of human resources management services and its responsibility in guaranteeing the even implementation of human resources management policies across a given organization. Last but not least, work/life balance programmes should also include implementation monitoring, reporting and evaluation mechanisms. The ultimate goal of work/life balance programmes is to enhance organizational efficiency through increased staff satisfaction. Hence, a qualitative assessment of the programme would be required in order to determine to which degree and at what cost the goal is achieved. In this regard, the Inspectors found that there is considerable room for progress, given that "UNDP is the only organization that runs a specific staff well-being unit with a separate project budget for its activities. This gives a good start to costing some WLB/SWB programmes, but not enough basis for a sound cost-benefit analysis across the UN system". In order to fully assess the benefits, the Inspectors urge organizations to introduce cost-benefit analysis, both, qualitative and quantitative, as an integral part of their work/life balance programmes. The implementation of the following recommendation is expected to enhance the efficiency of the organizations of the United Nations common system. B. Medical and staff health considerations Staff health considerations should be an integral part of staff mobility policies. The Inspectors held meetings with senior medical officials in order to obtain their views on current staff mobility and work/life balance schemes. The Inspectors share the views expressed below and support the proposals made, in particular by the Medical Services Division (MSD) of the United Nations Secretariat. However, they are concerned to learn that medical services were not consulted when staff mobility policies were developed by the Secretariat and stress the importance to systematically include health issues in current and future staff mobility and work/life balance schemes. When medical services conduct their clearance processes, the medical condition and capabilities of an individual are assessed against the intended job description, taking account of the environment of intended deployment If it is to be a requirement that staff should be mobile, and capable of deployment over a career to a variety of duty stations, including hardship duty stations, this has a significant impact on the medical standards that should be applied. In this sense, medical services claim that job descriptions are mostly deficient in content regarding physical and geographical requirements for future deployment. There may be circumstances where a job candidate is fit for work in a headquarters post, but for medical reasons could not be deployed to areas where medical infrastructure is limited. In such cases, the process of medical clearance should be a joint interaction between medical services and human resources management, where medical services determine capabilities and limitations, and human resources determines whether such limitations can be accepted, or not. The concept of restricted mobility due to, inter alia, medical reasons needs to be further developed within most of current mobility schemes, including inter-agency mobility mechanisms. If candidates could be excluded from employment (or lateral move/promotion opportunities) for medical reasons, the impact on career development, and potential for claims of "medical discrimination" need to be considered, and policy determined. The United Nations has recently signed the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. This has significant impact on many issues, including the way in which the UN administers disability benefits, termination of contracts for health reasons, and requirements for mobility. Once again, the employment process, including mobility schemes, needs interaction between medical services and human resources management, with medical services determining capabilities and possible needs for workplace accommodation, and human resources determining whether such needs can be reasonably accommodated, or not. The Inspectors believe that there is a need for higher participation of medical services in the development and implementation of relevant human resources management policies, including at system-wide level. Medical services can help human resources management to make better and more informed decisions regarding staff mobility. A best-practice example is provided by MSD, engaged in developing pre-deployment psychosocial assessment tools that are intended to identify staff who may be less resilient regarding hardship deployment, and more vulnerable to stress and its consequences. The intention is not to prevent deployment, but rather to identify opportunities for more effective and targeted mission preparedness interventions, and to alert mission medical support personnel regarding staff members who may need proactive assistance. Medical services have a major role to play in supporting work/life balance programs, and other aspects of psychosocial health and wellbeing. Unfortunately, psychosocial services in the United Nations system, including counselling services, are not managed according to any cohesive policy, or management structure. This problem (lack of capability to manage health-care services) is not isolated to psychosocial issues - the UN, in fact, does not have a policy for occupational health and safety at all. Senior medical management is aware of this situation which is trying to correct, through a program to motivate and implement strategic change in the way that the UN views and implements healthcare. In this regard, a paper detailing this situation and providing a new vision was recently presented to the HLCM. Through this document the United Nations Medical Directors Working Group has expressed growing concern regarding the current capacity of the UN system to protect, manage, and monitor the health of its staff adding that "this is of particular relevance to those staff deployed at hardship duty stations, and in the context of the UN's strategic movement towards mobility and increased field presence". The Inspectors would like to draw the attention of the organizations of the United Nations common system to the disturbing final conclusion contained in the above-mentioned paper: "The UN system's Medical Directors have deep concerns regarding the current status of occupational health and safety in the UN system, and consider it an absolute priority to re-evaluate, restructure, and reorient health-care services". It is generally accepted that a structured mobility scheme may enhance staff capabilities, providing staff with a broader experience. However, organizations should go beyond this widely accepted mantra; mobility should not be an end in itself. Staff mobility is key to achieving organizational goals; it is fundamental to deliver where the services of organizations are required and to react to emergencies or global challenges; additionally, in the view of the Inspectors, enhanced system-wide mobility would translate into a better understanding by staff of the complexities and peculiarities of different system organizations, thus contributing towards "Delivering as One". The Inspectors believe that staff mobility should have a purpose: to better meet organizational needs, in this case system needs, while appropriately taking into account staff needs. Only a proper match of organizational and staff needs can guarantee a solid base for a successful development and implementation of staff mobility and work/life balance initiatives. Inter-agency mobility is currently driven by staff members' individual initiative and not by organizations, who should take a proactive approach and develop new mobility schemes in consultation with staff. The major hurdle to overcome is the need to harmonize practices and tools across the system, thus regulations and rules should be common to all organizations. The Inspectors are pleased to note that progress has been made and that organizations are advancing in the necessary harmonization of practices in different areas; they encourage them to continue the effort at a faster pace given the strategic importance of the "Delivering as One" concept. Annex I: Staff mobility data for 2007, 2008 and 2009 Organizations Intra-Agency Mobility Inter-Agency Mobility HQ Out [1] HQ In [2] F - F [3] Total Out [4] Into [5] UN IAEA n/a ICAO ILO UNDP [6] UNICEF UNIDO UPU WFP UNESCO WHO [9] FAO ITU IMO [8] UNFPA UNHCR UNRWA WIPO [7] WMO UNWTO Legend: n/a: Not available [1] HQ Out: Professional staff - Moved from headquarters to non-headquarters within the organization [2] HQ In: Professional staff - Moved from non-headquarters to headquarters within the organization [3] F-F: Movement of staff from field to field within the organization [4] Out of the Organization: Professional staff who moved to another UN system organization [5] Into the Organization: Professional staff who moved from another UN system organization [6] UNDP: No disaggregated figures for Intra-Agency Mobility (2007 and 2008 data taken from ICSC survey), 2009 data for Intra-Agency Mobility not yet provided [7] The data for 2007 and 2008 for these organizations has been taken from the ICSC but not yet confirmed, and they have also not yet provided the data for 2009 [8] There is no data for IMO in the ICSC survey, and the organization has not provided data [9] The figure for 2007 is far higher than those for the other years given that WHO could not distinguish various categories more precisely for this year due to the introduction of the new Global Management System (GSM); therefore, this figure includes all reassignments for that period - including reassignments across programmes within HQ -and not just those out of HQ to one of the WHO regions Annex II: Work/life balance programmes in the organizations of the United Nations common system (2008) UNDP WHO UNAIDS WIPO UNOPS Flexitime Job sharing Part time Compressed workweek Telecommuting Family leave - paid Family leave - unpaid Maternity leave Paternity leave Adoption leave Parental leave Home leave Compassionate leave Overtime paid /compensated Time off to breastfeed Allowance to travel with child Staff counsellor or SOS Ombudsperson Stress management course Basic security training Rest & recuperation Pandemic awareness Career development options Workplace & sexual harassment Workplace WLB initiatives UN Cares/HIV in workplace Gym on- or off-site Health campaigns Dual career & staff mobility Support for work permits Family event Child care facilities Staff surveys Source: Chief Executives Board for Coordination, "Work/Life balance in the organizations of the United Nations System", CEB/2008/HLCM/HR/11 - rev 1, 28 August 2008, updated with new information received from JIU participating organizations. Annex III: Overview of action to be taken by participating organizations on JIU recommendations Intended impact United Nations* UNCTAD UNODC UNEP UN-HABITAT CEB IMO Report For action X For information c E e o L g Legend: L: Recommendation for decision by legislative organ E: Recommendation for action by executive head : Recommendation does not require action by this organization Intended impact: a: enhanced accountability b: dissemination of best practices c: enhanced coordination and cooperation d: enhanced controls and compliance e: enhanced effectiveness f: significant financial savings g: enhanced efficiency o: other * Covers all entities listed in ST/SGB/2002/11 other than UNCTAD, UNODC, UNEP, UN-HABITAT, UNHCR, UNRWA. 