%%%TREATY COMPLIANCE|JAPAN|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|FISSIONABLE MATERIALS|

New York, 3-28 May 2010 Implementation of article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons and paragraph 4 (c) of the 1995 Decision on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" Report submitted by Japan In accordance with subparagraph 12 of paragraph 15 in the chapter on Article VI of the Final Document of the 2000 NPT Review Conference, the Government of Japan submits its report on the measures it has taken to implement Article VI of the NPT and paragraph 4 (c) of the 1995 Decision on "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament". 1. Contribution to the 2010 NPT Review Process On March 23, the Government of Japan and the Government of Australia submitted a "New Package of Practical Nuclear Disarmament and Non-proliferation Measures for the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)" to the office of the United Nations Secretary-General as a working paper for the 2010 NPT Review Conference. This package was confirmed by the foreign ministers of both countries as a follow-up item in the Joint Statement by the Australia-Japan Foreign Ministers released at the ministers' meeting (held in Perth) and entitled "Towards a World without Nuclear Weapons". The package is the result of serious considerations being made by both governments while referencing the report of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament (ICNND). The ICNND was launched in September 2008 as a joint initiative between the Governments of Japan and Australia and as an independent enterprise involving various eminent individuals, and published a report in December 2009 with action oriented recommendations and agendas, including "A New International Consensus on Action for Nuclear Disarmament", which has been submitted to the present Conference for its reference. 2． Commitment to the Three Non-Nuclear Principles The Government of Japan continues to firmly commit itself to the "Three NonNuclear Principles", which describes the policy of not possessing, not producing and not permitting the introduction of nuclear weapons into Japan. Successive Cabinets of Japan, including the incumbent cabinet under Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama, have repeatedly articulated that Japan will continue to uphold these principles. 3. Efforts for the early entry-into-force of the CTBT Japan attaches great importance to the early entry into force of the CTBT, which constitutes one of the major pillars of the NPT regime. "Japan's initiative to promote the entry into force of the CTBT" was introduced by Foreign Minister Katsuya Okada at the 6th Conference on Facilitating the Entry into Force of the CTBT in September 2009, to intensify Japan's efforts to engage with Annex 2 states that have not yet signed or ratified the Treaty by taking every opportunity, including meetings between heads of states, to accelerate our efforts to advance the establishment of the International Monitoring System (IMS) and to cooperate with states concerned in the area of maintenance of IMS facilities. In accordance with the initiative, Japan has made various efforts, including the following: - Prime Minister Hatoyama, when he visited India in December 2009, raised and discussed the CTBT issue with his Indian counterpart and as a result the Joint Statement by both Prime Ministers issued afterword included a reference to the CTBT. - To promote the early ratification by the Annex II States as well as to promote the establishment of the IMS, in March 2010, the Government of Japan invited government officials from two non-ratification states to visit facilities of the International Monitoring System hosted by Japan and to exchange views on the treaty with relevant Japanese authorities. - As its technical assistance to developing countries in supporting the development of the IMS, from January to March 2010, Japan invited 11 administrative officers from various countries, who are expected to play global seismological network for nuclear tests, to attend its global seismological observation training course in order to have opportunities to acquire knowledge and advanced techniques of global seismological observation. 4. Activities in preparation for the commencement of Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty negotiations The Government of Japan gives emphasis to the importance and urgency of the commencement of negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT). Japan has been making its utmost efforts to break the current stalemate at the Conference on Disarmament (CD), thereby realizing the early commencement of negotiations on an FMCT. Japan contributed at the CD together with other countries to the adoption of a programme of work in May 2009 that included the decision to negotiate a FMCT. In August 2009, Japan hosted a seminar on an FMCT in Geneva together with the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), inviting experts from the International Panel on Fissile Materials (IPFM) and Verification Research, Training and Information Centre (VERTIC). In September 2009, Japan together with Canada and the Netherlands submitted to the CD as an official document the document prepared by the IPFM entitled "A Treaty Banning the Production of Fissile Materials for Nuclear Weapons or Other Nuclear Explosive Devices, with article-by-article explanations" in order to provide the Member States of the CD with useful reference material in the prospective negotiations of an FMCT. It is regrettable that since the adoption of a programme of work in 2009 the actual negotiations has yet to start. Japan appealed to relevant states of the CD members to agree to commence negotiations on an FMCT without delay on a number of occasions, including at the foreign ministerial level. In October 2009, Foreign Minister Okada visited Pakistan and discussed with his counterpart on possible cooperation for the early commencement of FMCT negotiations. 5. Submission of Resolutions on Nuclear Disarmament to the United Nations General Assembly Every year since 1994, the Government of Japan has submitted its resolution on nuclear disarmament to the United Nations General Assembly. In 2009, taking into consideration the recent international situation surrounding nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, Japan once again submitted its draft resolution on nuclear disarmament to the UN General Assembly. On 2 December 2009, the draft resolution was adopted at the Plenary Session of the United Nations General Assembly by an overwhelming majority of 171 votes in favour. Although the situation surrounding nuclear disarmament remains challenging, in response to the political will of a large majority of the international community, which was expressed through the adoption of this resolution, Japan intends to pursue its various diplomatic efforts to maintain and reinforce the international disarmament and non-proliferation regime based on the NPT. 6. Cooperation for denuclearization in Russia At the Kananaskis Summit in June 2002, G8 leaders announced "the G8 Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction" to address non-proliferation, disarmament, counter-terrorism and nuclear safety issues. The Government of Japan committed itself, for the purpose of this Partnership, to make a contribution amounting to over 200 million US dollars, out of which 100 million is to be allocated to the G8 disposition program of Russian surplus weapons-grade plutonium and the rest to projects for dismantling decommissioned Russian nuclear submarines. Since then Japan extended cooperation to Russia and completed the dismantlement of six decommissioned nuclear submarines. Furthermore, based on the decision in 2006, Japan's preparation has been made for cooperation for the construction of an On-shore Storage Facility for Reactor Compartments at Razvoynik Bay. Building on the completion of dismantling six decommissioned nuclear submarines in the Russian Far East by the end of 209, Japan is considering additional areas for bilateral cooperation. 7. Efforts to promote disarmament and non-proliferation education Since 1983, the Government of Japan has invited more than 700 participants in the UN disarmament fellowship programme to Japan, including the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This has provided these young officials, who will be responsible for future disarmament diplomacy, with an opportunity to witness the horrendous and long-lasting consequences caused by the atomic bombs. Japan will continue to contribute to this programme. Japan believes that the international community should be well informed of the destructive effects of nuclear weapons. In accordance with the wish of the people of Japan that such weapons never be used again, the Government of Japan has supported, on a number of occasions, the efforts of local governments and NGOs in foreign countries to organize exhibitions relating to atomic bombs. In the margins of the third session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 NPT Review Conference in 2009, Japan hosted a disarmament and non-proliferation education seminar on practical ways and tools to raise public awareness through education and its role in strengthening the NPT. The picture book related to the experience of the atomic bombing, On That Summer Day, was distributed to participants at the conference. Within the United Nations Conference on Disarmament in Niigata, a session on the role of civil society and mass media was held with prominent educators in August 2009. Japan hosted a reception and concert together with the Office for Disarmament Affairs (ODA) of the United Nations on 3 May 2010, the first day of the 2010 NPT Review Conference, in honour of the Hibakusha (people who survived the 1945 atomic bombings of Japan) and their work with young people to raise awareness of the dangers of nuclear weapons. 