%%%TREATY COMPLIANCE|MEXICO|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|NUCLEAR WEAPON TESTS|NUCLEAR WEAPON STATES|NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|FISSIONABLE MATERIALS|

New York, 3-28 May 2010 Implementation of article VI of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons and of paragraph 4 (c) of the 1995 decision on principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament National report of Mexico I. Submission of regular reports 1. Mexico is submitting its report on the steps it has taken as a non-nuclear-weapon State to comply with article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, with a view to encouraging greater efforts towards this end, and in order to promote the reporting of such information by the nuclear-weapon States. 2. Mexico is convinced that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons continues to be the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime and is crucial to achieving the objective of nuclear disarmament. The agreements adopted at the 1995 and 2000 Review Conferences of the Parties to the Treaty remain fully valid. With this understanding, Mexico stresses that accountability is an essential factor for assessing the level of compliance with the Treaty and the commitments made within that framework, and for promoting transparency and trust between the parties. 3. Mexico stresses that, given the commitment undertaken by the nuclear-weapon States to destroy their nuclear arsenals, those States have a greater responsibility for submitting information about steps taken to comply with the obligation to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures for nuclear disarmament, in accordance with article VI of the Treaty, and with the nuclear disarmament measures agreed upon in 2000. 4. This is an updated report on steps taken by Mexico since the submission of its national report during the first session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty, held in Vienna from 30 April to 11 May 2007 (NPT/CONF.2010/PC.I/5). II. Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 5. Mexico has actively promoted international activities designed to achieve the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. In that connection, it participated in the sixth conference, held in New York on 24 and 25 September 2009, for the purpose of analysing specific strategies designed to achieve the universality, implementation and entry into force of the Treaty. 6. At the sixty-second, sixty-third and sixty-fourth sessions of the General Assembly, Australia, Mexico and New Zealand submitted the annual resolution entitled "Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty" with a view to promoting its entry into force, which was adopted by a large majority of Member States. It should be noted that Mexico will continue to promote this issue at future sessions of the General Assembly. 7. Mexico has held bilateral and multilateral meetings at which it has consistently called for the Treaty's early entry into force. 8. With regard to the entry into operation of the International Monitoring System, it should be noted that four of the five Mexican monitoring stations are certified and operating, sending data to the International Data Centre in Vienna. The radionuclide station is being equipped, and will shortly conduct the testing phase leading to certification. III. Negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices 9. Mexico reiterates its support for efforts within the Conference on Disarmament to negotiate a non-discriminatory, multilateral, and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, which should also consider the issue of existing stockpiles with a view to their destruction. 10. On 29 May 2009, after more than 12 years, the Conference on Disarmament adopted draft decision CD/1863 by consensus. The draft decision contemplates the establishment of four working groups, including one devoted to the negotiation of a treaty banning the production of fissile material; however, during the first session of the Conference held this year, an impasse set in once again and the Conference could not begin its substantive work. In the light of this situation, Mexico will continue to demonstrate flexibility and the will to achieve a consensus regarding the early adoption of a programme of work for the Conference. IV. Principle of irreversibility to apply to nuclear disarmament, nuclear and other related arms control and reduction measures 11. Both individually and as part of the New Agenda Coalition (Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, South Africa and Sweden), Mexico will continue to promote nuclear disarmament in all relevant forums in which it participates, and in its bilateral meetings, placing particular emphasis on the need to apply the principle of irreversibility, transparency and verification, including measures for nuclear arms reduction and elimination. Thus, every year, it submits, together with the New Agenda Coalition, a resolution on the total elimination of nuclear weapons in the context of the work of the First Committee of the General Assembly, and will continue supporting that approach. V. An unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all States parties are committed under article VI 12. During the sixty-second, sixty-third and sixty-fourth sessions of the General Assembly, Mexico, together with other New Agenda Coalition countries, promoted the adoption of a resolution entitled "Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: accelerating the implementation of nuclear disarmament commitments", which, in paragraph 3, renewed its call upon the nuclear-weapon States to accelerate the implementation of the practical steps towards nuclear disarmament that were agreed upon at the 2000 Review Conference, thereby contributing to a safer world for all. 13. The resolution also calls upon States to comply with all commitments made regarding nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation and not to act in any way that may compromise that objective or that may lead to a new nuclear arms race. It also calls upon all States to spare no effort to achieve universal accession to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. 14. Mexico has stressed that the obligation to conclude a treaty on nuclear disarmament was recognized by the International Court of Justice in its Advisory Opinion of 8 July 1996 concerning the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons. 15. Also, on 11 September 2009, Mexico hosted the sixty-second annual conference of the Department of Public Information and non-governmental organizations (DPI/NGO conference) entitled "For Peace and Development: Disarm Now!", which was attended by 1,300 persons representing more than 340 NGOs from more than 55 countries. A final declaration was adopted at the Conference. 16. On 24 September 2009, Mexico participated in the Security Council Summit convened by the President of the United States of America with the aim of supporting full compliance with the multilateral disarmament and arms control treaties, including the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. At the Summit, Mexico promoted balanced treatment of disarmament and non-proliferation, being of the view that they are interlinked and mutually reinforcing, and supported resolution 1887 (2009) which, inter alia, calls upon all States to accede to the Treaty, to comply fully with their obligations under it and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and to set realistic and achievable goals for the 2010 Review Conference. 17. As a peace-loving country that promotes nuclear disarmament, Mexico welcomed the bilateral agreement between the United States and the Russian Federation, signed in Prague on 8 April, and calls upon the other nuclear Powers to take similar action to reduce their stockpiles. It should be noted that bilateral agreements are no substitute for conducting multilateral negotiations in accordance with article VI of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. 18. Mexico will also continue to work within the context of the Security Council for the elimination of nuclear weapons, on the understanding that nuclear nonproliferation is but one step on the path to disarmament. VI. Development of the verification capabilities that will be required to provide assurance of compliance with nuclear disarmament agreements for the achievement and maintenance of a nuclear-weapon-free world 19. Mexico has continued to participate actively in the various forums on disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation, maintaining a firm position that international verification and therefore accountability perform a crucial role in the negotiation and implementation of agreements on nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation, as well as in all efforts designed to bring about general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control. 20. As a sign of its commitment to this goal, Mexico participates actively in efforts to establish the international monitoring system of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization and complies with and supports the strengthening of the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards regime. 21. In March 2004, Mexico signed the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement with IAEA, and the Senate of the Republic is currently considering its ratification, which would confirm our country's commitment to implementing safeguards at our nuclear facilities. 22. Mexico has formally expressed interest in joining the Nuclear Suppliers Group as a means of promoting the adoption of additional measures to complement existing international legal instruments with a view to avoiding nuclear proliferation and promoting the safe transfer of nuclear and related sensitive material. 23. On 5 February 2010, it joined the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which will enable it to benefit from the knowledge and experience forming the basis for partner States' best practices to ensure that non-State actors do not gain access to sensitive nuclear material and technology. 