%%%NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|TREATY COMPLIANCE|IRAQ|

New York, 3-28 May 2010 Working paper submitted by Iraq Article II of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Nuclear non-proliferation Introduction The Government of Iraq is submitting this paper at a time when the Security Council is reviewing the disarmament-related restrictions imposed on Iraq pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions, foremost among which are resolutions 687 (1991) and 707 (1991). The paper aims to set out the position of Iraq with respect to the Treaty insofar as it relates to non-proliferation. The Government of Iraq is circulating this paper as an official document of the 2010 Review Conference because it wishes to officially document its position, reinforce its endeavours to lift the restrictions that have been imposed on it, and contribute to international efforts to make Conference recommendations that will lead to progress being made towards the effective and comprehensive implementation of the Treaty. :: The Government of Iraq, convinced of the importance of international peace and security, is involved in the struggle to rid the world of nuclear weapons and supports every effort that is made to that end. It believes that the 2010 Review Conference is an important stage on the road towards international nuclear non-proliferation. The Government is also well aware that the international environment will not be able to withstand any failure of the 2010 Review Conference similar to that of the 2005 Conference. At the 2010 Review Conference, a choice will have to be made between permitting the non-proliferation regime to break down and seizing the opportunity afforded by the Conference to achieve global stability. The Conference must not be merely another meeting at which the strengths and weaknesses of the Treaty are considered: real progress must be made in the field of non-proliferation by taking practical steps to confront the challenges, expectations and failures that have arisen from incomplete compliance with the provisions of the Treaty. :: The Government of Iraq underlines the importance of implementing the decisions that were adopted at the 1995 Review Conference upon the indefinite extension of the Treaty and the 13 practical steps that were adopted by the 2000 Review Conference, which constitute a programme of action to enhance the credibility of the Treaty and the review process itself. :: The Government of Iraq welcomes the international initiatives in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation, including the Security Council summit that was held in September 2009. It also welcomes the outcome of the negotiations that were held between the United States of America and the Russian Federation and the consequent new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty that was signed on 8 April 2010. :: The Government of Iraq believes absolutely that we all have the responsibility to respect and implement disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements. The Government is committed not only to those treaties and agreements but also to international arrangements relating to disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation. Against that background, the Constitution of Iraq, in article 9 (e), provides that the Government of Iraq shall respect and implement Iraq's international undertakings in respect of non-proliferation and the non-development, production or use of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and shall prohibit any equipment, materials, technology and delivery systems related to the development, manufacture, production and use of such weapons. :: Iraq became a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in 1969 and signed the Model Additional Protocol of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Comprehensive Safeguards System on 9 October 2008. The latter has been approved by the Cabinet and is currently awaiting ratification by the Council of Deputies. However, it should be noted that Iraq had made an official declaration to IAEA that it would apply the Protocol voluntarily with effect from 17 February 2010, on the basis of article 17 of the Protocol. Iraq also signed the Chemical Weapons Ban Treaty in February 2009, and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty on 19 August 2008. It also became a party to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction in 1991. :: The Government of Iraq has formed a national monitoring institution that has prepared a law that aims to establish and perpetuate a harmonized national system that will enable Iraq to honour its commitments under treaties and agreements relating to the non-proliferation of chemical and biological weapons and their delivery systems. That law will be applied to all peaceful activities, including materials, equipment and techniques and anything related to the production, possession, use, storage, import, export, transport, distribution and administration of any other activities, in order to ensure that they are not converted to prohibited activities, identify obstacles, and put in place mechanisms for making announcements, issuing permits and monitoring the movement of dual-use materials, in accordance with the Treaty safeguard agreement, the chemical weapons verification system and the Biological Weapons Convention. :: The Government of Iraq supports the non-proliferation regime and, in particular, NPT, and believes that nuclear weapons cannot be considered a means of ensuring security for any party, because possession of such weapons will inevitably lead to a regional arms race. The Government emphasizes the importance of peaceful and diplomatic multilateral discussion on this issue in order to eliminate causes of tension and promote disarmament. :: The Government of Iraq affirms that nuclear non-proliferation can only be achieved by universal accession to NPT and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the placement of all installations and programmes under the IAEA comprehensive safeguards system, in order to verify the peaceful purposes of those programmes. State agreement to apply the IAEA Additional Protocol and encouragement to comply with it will strengthen the Agency's verification role. :: The Government of Iraq believes that States should consult neighbouring countries when they establish nuclear plants, and should endeavour to make arrangements between themselves, under the supervision of IAEA and the relevant regional and international environmental agencies, to ensure that negative environmental impacts on the region will be limited and that no harmful radiation that could damage human beings or the environment are allowed to escape. Mechanisms to protect the environment of countries in the region against any climatic and demographic impact must be put in place. Consideration must also be given to border population clusters, international water courses and surface and groundwater sources when waste is disposed of or outdated technology is used that could lead to pollution. Nuclear safety standards and requirements and security must be observed when designing and building nuclear installations, because harmful radiation leaks ignore borders and have disastrous impacts on human beings and the environment. :: The Government of Iraq supports the outcomes of the 2006 Khartoum Summit, the 2009 Doha Summit and the 2010 Sirte Summit, which reaffirmed the demand of the Arab States, all of which are parties to NPT, that the international community should take immediate action to rid the world of nuclear weapons. The Government also affirms the need to translate international initiatives to that end into action plans with a specific and obligatory time frame, and avers that progress towards the realization of that aim requires, as a first step, the universality of NPT. :: The resolution of political and long-standing conflicts and removal of the principle causes of struggles and terrorism, particularly in regions of the world where tensions are highest, and where terrorist groups are widely found; the improvement of political relations; and building of trust and mutual understanding between countries are all roads towards the rejection of nuclear armament and acquisition policies and the reduction or restriction of opportunities for terrorists to obtain nuclear weapons. :: There is a need for security measures to be tightened and for work to be undertaken with IAEA in order to assist countries that wish to develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy to do so safely, thereby reducing the risk of nuclear proliferation. :: In order to ensure that nuclear materials are not obtained by non-Government parties, it is essential to find ways of securely storing those materials, disposing of nuclear waste, guaranteeing the security of nuclear installations and developing new technology for the treatment of spent fuel. :: The Government of Iraq notes the importance of supporting the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan for 2010-2013 that was put forward by its Director General and of working with IAEA in a global endeavour to verify the real security of all used, stored and transported nuclear and radioactive materials in the world and related installations. That may be achieved by State support for the verification of nuclear security and by maintaining such security by providing facilities and developing human resources. States must be called upon to safeguard and effectively secure any nuclear material they possess, including nuclear material that is to be used for nuclear weapons and in nuclear installations under their control, and to prevent any non-Government parties from obtaining the requisite information and technologies to use such materials for criminal purposes. :: The Middle East differs from other regions of the world in that it is very sensitive and strategically important, and unique in its economic significance. Hence, any escalation in armament by the countries of the region will have extensive ramifications for international peace and security. Furthermore, the Middle East continues to be the theatre of one of the most persistent conflicts of the modern age, namely, the Arab-Israeli conflict, quite apart from the other military conflicts and political disturbances that have taken place in the region. :: Any attempt to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East must begin with basic steps that include the nuclear disarmament of Israel, its accession to NPT and placement of all its nuclear installations under IAEA comprehensive safeguards. :: Failure to implement the resolution on the Middle East will perpetuate the instability and tension in the region and will add to the challenges linked to achievement of the universality of the Treaty other complications that will expose the non-proliferation regime to challenges and risks that will have a negative impact on the credibility of the Treaty and the achievement of its universality. :: Security and stability in the Middle East require the eradication of all weapons of mass destruction and, in particular, nuclear weapons, pursuant to the goal set forth in Security Council resolution 687 (1991), paragraph 14, and the relevant General Assembly resolutions that are adopted annually by consensus, in addition to the resolution concerning the Middle East that was adopted by the Fifth Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1995 and the Sixth Review Conference in 2000. 