%%%ELECTIONS|POLITICAL CONDITIONS|COTE D'IVOIRE|

Identical letters dated 23 February 2010 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Burkina Faso to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith the text of the press release issued following the working visit conducted on 22 February 2010 by the facilitator of the inter-Ivorian direct dialogue, Mr. Blaise Compaoré, President of Burkina Faso (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. * Reissued for technical reasons on 24 September 2010. (Signed) Paul Robert Tiendrébéogo Ambassador Deputy Permanent Representative Chargé d'affaires a.i. Inter-Ivorian direct dialogue Press release 1. On Monday, 22 February 2010, Mr. Blaise Compaoré, President of Burkina Faso, facilitator of the inter-Ivorian direct dialogue, made a working visit to Abidjan in order to discuss with the main Ivorian political stakeholders the ways and means of resolving the current crisis in Côte d'Ivoire. 2. During his visit, the facilitator held a series of meetings with the members of the permanent framework for coordination (CPC): Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, President of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire, Mr. Guillaume Soro, Prime Minister and Head of Government, Mr. Henri Konan Bédié, Chairman of the Parti démocratique de Côte d'Ivoire-Rassemblement démocratique africain (PDCI-RDA) and Mr. Alassane Dramane Ouattara, Chairman of the Rassemblement des républicains (RDR). He also met with Mr. Y. J. Choi, Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations in Côte d'Ivoire, and with members of the diplomatic corps accredited in Côte d'Ivoire. 3. The talks with these various high-level officials essentially dealt with three items: :: The question of the Independent Electoral Commission (CEI) :: The relaunching of the electoral process in order to draw up a new electoral timetable and manage the litigation on the provisional electoral list :: The establishment of a new Government 4. The Ivorian stakeholders and the representatives of the international community reiterated their desire to preserve the gains made during the electoral process and recognized the need to move it forward to its conclusion with the organization of open, free and transparent elections. 5. On the question of the Independent Electoral Commission, the facilitator and the Ivorian stakeholders agreed on the following: :: The structure of CEI will be maintained in accordance with the Pretoria Agreement :: The Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of CEI will be replaced, by the political groups that nominated them :: The Bureau of CEI will be elected by 25 February 2010 6. With respect to the relaunching of the political process, the facilitator and the Ivorian stakeholders strongly recommended that the following measures should be implemented: :: Extension of the administrative and judicial litigation on the provisional electoral list for a period of 21 days ending on 21 March 2010 (1 to 21 March inclusive) :: Production of the final electoral list as of 22 March 2010 :: Strict adherence to the modus operandi with respect to the administrative and judicial litigation on the provisional electoral list :: Review by the courts of judicial litigation that did not adhere to the modus operandi (written claims to local offices of the Independent Electoral Commission) :: Preparation of a new electoral timetable with a view to holding the first round of the presidential election in late April/early May 2010 7. The facilitator and the Ivorian stakeholders agreed that a Government would be established on 23 February 2010 comprising representatives of all the parties that were signatories of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. 8. The facilitator and the Ivorian stakeholders called for an end to demonstrations leading to the loss of human lives and the destruction of public and private property. In the interest of maintaining calm, they asked that measures be taken to restore dialogue and understanding. 9. At the end of his visit, the facilitator called on Ivorian politicians to step up their efforts to safeguard the Ouagadougou Political Agreement in order to consolidate peace, reconciliation and national unity in Côte d'Ivoire. 