%%%SPECIAL MISSIONS|PEACEBUILDING|NEPAL|

Letter dated 5 May 2010 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 5 May 2010 from Gyan Chandra Acharya, Permanent Representative of Nepal to the United Nations, in which he requested, on behalf of his Government, the extension of the current mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal from 15 May until 15 September 2010 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) BAN Ki-moon Letter dated 5 May 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Nepal to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General The Government of Nepal sincerely appreciates the valuable support and facilitation of the United Nations for Nepal's peace process, and the personal leadership of the Secretary-General in this context. Upon instruction from my Government, I have the honour to update you on the ongoing peace process in Nepal and to seek continuing support of the United Nations in the nationally driven peace process of Nepal. As you are aware, the original basis for United Nations support for Nepal's current peace process was an official letter from the then Prime Minister G. P. Koirala to the Secretary-General dated 9 August 2006 and an identical letter from Chairman Prachanda of the then Communist Party of Nepal or CPN (Maoist). United Nations Security Council resolution 1740 (2007), which first established the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), was based on this official request as well as the subsequent Comprehensive Peace Accord of 21 November 2006. Subsequently, other Security Council resolutions extended the duration of UNMIN. We have come a long way from the Comprehensive Peace Accord in terms of moving forward the peace process through the establishment of an interim government, promulgation of the interim constitution, the elections to the Constituent Assembly and the declaration of a federal democratic republic by the Constituent Assembly. We appreciate UNMIN's assistance to the Government of Nepal in various areas, as well as during the elections to the Constituent Assembly. Similarly, we also express our appreciation for the assistance and support provided by the United Nations to facilitate the discharge of all disqualified Maoist combatants. The current mandate of UNMIN expires on 15 May 2010. This was supposed to be the last extension of UNMIN's term. Its timing, two weeks before the deadline for promulgating Nepal's new Constitution, was fixed with an expectation that the peace process would be completed prior to the promulgation of the Constitution by 28 May 2010. The Government of Nepal is committed to taking this peace process forward in a spirit of sincerity and conviction to its logical conclusion with the support and cooperation of all its stakeholders. In light of the unexpected delay in the completion of the peace process at the moment, but convinced that there is a need to pursue this process with equal vigour and agility, the Government of Nepal now requests a further extension of UNMIN's mandate for a duration up to 15 September 2010. The Government is committed to pursuing the peace process with a holistic approach so that the peace process can be accelerated with greater focus and completed in a timely manner. I would be grateful if you could place this request before the Security Council for its positive consideration. We also count on your continuing support to facilitate the peace process in Nepal. (Signed) Gyan Chandra Acharya Ambassador Permanent Representative 