%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|SPECIAL MISSIONS|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|IRAQ|IRAQ SITUATION|ELECTIONS|KURDS|ARABS|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|HUMAN RIGHTS IN ARMED CONFLICTS|

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009) I. Introduction 1. In paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009), the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to report to the Council on a quarterly basis on the fulfilment of the responsibilities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The present report is the fourth submitted pursuant to that resolution. 2. The report provides an update on United Nations activities in Iraq since the previous report (S/2010/240), dated 14 May 2010, submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1883 (2009). It provides a summary of key political developments during the period under review, as well as regional and international events concerning Iraq. It also provides an update on the activities of my Special Representative for Iraq, Ad Melkert, as well as operational and security matters. II. Summary of key political and security developments in Iraq A. National elections 3. On 14 May 2010, the Independent High Electoral Commission (IHEC) completed a ballot recount for the Baghdad governorate at the request of the Electoral Judicial Panel. The exercise reviewed more than 2.5 million votes cast in over 11,000 polling places. This significant operational achievement for IHEC was conducted openly and transparently in the presence of political party agents, national and international observers, the media and representatives of the United Nations. 4. The recount exercise revealed no evidence of significant fraud or manipulation of ballots. On 16 May, IHEC announced that there would be no changes to the allocation of seats: the Al-Iraqiya list would stand, with 91 of 325 parliamentary seats, and the State of Law coalition would continue to hold 89 seats. However, two candidates who stood to win seats on the basis of the preliminary results were replaced by other candidates from their respective political entities owing to a change in the number of individual votes cast. 5. During the reporting period, a number of other appeals were filed with the relevant judicial bodies, including complaints registered by the State of Law coalition that winning candidates of other political entities did not meet the eligibility criteria. The State of Law coalition requested the cancellation of votes cast for the political entities of disqualified candidates, which was rejected by the Electoral Judicial Panel. 6. The Electoral Judicial Panel and the Court of Cassation, acting within their respective competencies, ruled on all outstanding appeals. By 2 June, after all outstanding appeals had been resolved, the Federal Supreme Court, in conformity with its constitutional mandate, certified the names of all 325 winning candidates for the Council of Representatives, thereby concluding the electoral process. B. Government formation process 7. On 14 June, the inaugural parliamentary session of the elected Council of Representatives was convened. This was done in accordance with the Iraqi Constitution which requires the first session of Parliament to be held within 15 days after the certification of the election results. At the meeting, the newly elected members took their oaths of office before the Acting Speaker of Parliament suspended the session to allow more time for negotiations over key posts, including those of the Speaker, the President of the Republic and the Prime Minister. No date was set for the next meeting. 8. On 11 June, the State of Law coalition and the Iraqi National Alliance announced their merger into a new coalition, known as the National Alliance. However, despite claiming the right to form the new government as the largest parliamentary bloc, the National Alliance has yet to name its candidate to the position of Prime Minister. Meanwhile, Al-Iraqiya, which rejected the claim of the National Alliance, maintains its "constitutional right" to form the next government on the basis of the election results. 9. After their first meeting, on 12 June, Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki and AlIraqiya leader Ayad Allawi met on several occasions to discuss the impasse. The two leaders reportedly discussed a number of issues related to the government formation process, including the importance of an inclusive government with a broad-based political consensus. The State of Law coalition and the Al-Iraqiya list had earlier agreed to form committees to draft a future government programme and discuss the allocation of posts. Meanwhile, leaders of major political blocs have also consulted separately with Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani who consistently maintains political neutrality and supports the prompt formation of a national partnership government. C. Regional developments 10. On 9 May, President Jalal Talabani travelled to Cairo to meet with the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, Amr Mousa, and with the President of Egypt, Hosni Mubarak. On 28 June, President Talabani participated in the Quintuple Arab Summit in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, addressing the restructuring and reinvigoration of the League of Arab States to further strengthen joint Arab action. The next summit will be held in Baghdad in 2011. 11. On 8 July, Prime Minister al-Maliki visited Beirut to pay tribute to late Shiite Grand Ayatollah Sayyed Mohammad Hussein Fadlallah, who died on 4 July. He met with Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri to promote Iraqi-Lebanese bilateral ties and ways to revive and strengthen Iraq's diplomatic ties with Arab States. 12. Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) President Massoud Barzani paid a five-day visit to Ankara from 2 to 6 June, where he met with President Abdullah Gül, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu to discuss issues of mutual concern, in particular security, the economy and energy. 13. There was an escalation of tensions along the Turkish-Iraq border during the reporting period, when Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) elements announced the termination of their unilateral ceasefire and carried out terrorist attacks in Turkey from northern Iraq. In response, Turkish armed forces conducted aerial bombardments and shelling of PKK positions inside Iraqi territory. 14. Iranian artillery shelling of positions controlled by the Free Life Party of Kurdistan (PJAK) reportedly occurred in the Qlladiza Guman district of the Erbil governorate. The attacks prompted demonstrations in front of the UNAMI compound in Erbil and at the Iranian Consulate offices in Basra and Erbil. The incidents have reportedly resulted in the displacement of several hundred families in the affected areas. 15. On 26 May, the Government of Iraq announced the dissolution of Iraqi Airways in response to a lawsuit brought by Kuwait Airways over aircraft confiscated during the first Gulf War. Kuwaiti lawyers stated that the Kuwaiti Government would take the measures necessary to preserve its interests. 16. On 20 June, my Special Representative travelled to Kuwait and met with Prime Minister His Highness Sheikh Naser Al-Mohammad Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah and Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Khaled Sulaiman Al-Jarallah. The Kuwaiti officials highlighted the need to make progress quickly in resolving outstanding matters between Iraq and Kuwait, especially in fulfilling Iraq's international obligations under outstanding Security Council mandates. They also expressed their hope that the new Government of Iraq would continue to promote the normalization of relations between Iraq and its neighbours, including Kuwait. 17. I regret to report that the Government of Iraq has as yet not responded to repeated requests to convey its readiness to continue the Iraq-Kuwait Boundary Maintenance Project, mandated by Security Council resolution 833 (1993), and to contribute its share of the additional funding in the amount of US$ 600,000. The commitment of the Government of Iraq and the contribution of its share of the funding are necessary to sustain the project following the repeated postponement of the final phase of the maintenance work to be implemented by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support. D. International developments 18. On 15 June, following a briefing to the Security Council by my High-level Coordinator on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the repatriation of Kuwaiti property, Gennady Tarasov, in accordance with paragraph 14 of resolution 1284 (1999), the Security Council extended the mandate of the High-level Coordinator until December 2010. The Security Council noted that the confidence and cooperation-building period between Iraq and Kuwait, launched in April 2009, had proven to be useful. However, the Council members also recognized that no further confirmed remains of Kuwaiti or third-country nationals had been found and that only limited progress had been made in regard to determining the fate of Kuwaiti national archives. The Security Council welcomed the decision of the Kuwaiti Government to fund a project costing US$ 974,000, sponsored by UNAMI and the United Nations Office for Project Services, to help build the capacity of the Iraqi Ministry of Human Rights in mass grave excavation and the identification of missing persons. 19. On 12 July, the United Nations Controller presented to the Security Council the second report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 1905 (2009), on the arrangements for depositing proceeds from oil and gas export sales into the Development Fund for Iraq. The second quarterly report by the Government of Iraq pursuant to paragraph 5 of the same resolution was presented by the President of the Iraqi Committee of Financial Experts, Abdul Basit Turki Saeed, who outlined Iraq's plans for the successor arrangements for the Fund. III. Activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq A. Political activities 20. Throughout the government formation process, my Special Representative has engaged broadly with bloc leadership and senior government officials to facilitate a resolution of the impasse. His interlocutors have included Prime Minister Al-Maliki, KRG President Barzani, Al-Iraqiya leader Ayad Allawi, Vice-President Adel Abdel Mahdi, Vice-President Tariq Al-Hashimi, Oil Minister Hussein Shahristani, Deputy Prime Minister Rowsch Shaways, Deputy Prime Minister Rafi al-Issawi and interim Speaker Fouad Massoum. In his meetings, my Special Representative has stressed the need for inclusiveness in the government formation process and respect for the Constitution of Iraq. He has also encouraged the parties to broaden ongoing bilateral negotiations through a forum of collective talks geared towards achieving an eventual political settlement. He has offered the assistance of UNAMI in the process, provided that it is requested by all major parties. 21. On 29 June, my Special Representative for Iraq travelled to the Kurdistan region to discuss government formation, the situation in Ninewa and larger questions regarding the process related to the disputed internal boundaries. He met with KRG President Barzani, KRG Prime Minister Barham Saleh, Speaker Kamal Kirkuki and KRG Minister of Interior Kareem Sinjari, among others. He also conducted a telephone call with the Governor of Ninewa, Atheel Nujaifi. President Barzani confirmed that the Kurdish Alliance has not yet declared its support for any major bloc, but that he was committed to playing a positive role in the negotiations, including facilitation should such engagement be welcome. B. Electoral assistance activities 22. The Mission continued to provide technical assistance to IHEC during the process of the recount and the certification of results. This included advice on developing procedures for recounting the ballots and on operational requirements, such as the layout of the recount centre and the transportation and handling of the ballots. UNAMI also deployed international staff members to the recount centre while the recount was conducted. Through its continual presence, UNAMI was able to closely follow the proceedings, thereby helping to instil confidence among all stakeholders in the process and outcome. 23. The Mission also continued to assist IHEC in addressing questions arising out of the remaining appeals and challenges that were being handled by the relevant judicial bodies, and as it compiled the final results of the election for certification by the Federal Supreme Court. Furthermore, UNAMI assisted IHEC with the planning of several conferences, to reflect on the lessons learned during the election process and help IHEC to identify ways in which to improve its operational capacity for future elections and referendums. Finally, UNAMI is also assisting IHEC in its planning of upcoming electoral events, including elections for the governorate councils of the Kurdistan region, for which the date has been postponed to 2011 by the KRG authorities. C. Political facilitation efforts on Arab-Kurdish issues 24. In a renewed effort to normalize Arab-Kurdish relations in the north, UNAMI supported a government-initiated dialogue process aimed at ending the boycott of the Ninewa Provincial Council and facilitated two meetings between the Ninewa Fraternal list and the Hadba list on 3 April and 15 May, respectively. The discussions focused on security-related issues and the transfer of detainees from Ninewa (currently held in the Kurdistan region), as well as power-sharing with regard to senior posts in the Ninewa Provincial Council. A detainee committee established as part of the Ninewa talks conducted several field visits to Asayesh detention facilities in the Kurdistan region. 25. The Mission also facilitated two further meetings of the newly established Committee on Ethnic and Religious Communities under the Ninewa dialogue process. Participants included representatives of the Christian, Shabak, Turkoman and Yezidi communities, as well as representatives of the Ninewa administration, KRG and the Government of Iraq. Discussions focused on security needs of the various communities and the protection of their legal, political and human rights. Three subcommittees were established, on security, services and education, and cultural, political and administrative rights. UNAMI also continued to assist in promoting a number of confidence-building measures in Kirkuk, related to outstanding property claims and restitution, education rights and detainee issues. After a four-month hiatus following the elections, the Kirkuk Property Committee resumed its meetings in June, with technical assistance from UNAMI. D. Humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and development 26. I would like to congratulate the Government of Iraq on the finalization of the Iraq National Development Plan, 2010-2014, which was launched by the Prime Minister on 4 July. I am encouraged by the positive momentum maintained by the Government of Iraq and the international community in regard to national planning initiatives, including the signing of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework 2011-2014, which illustrates the commitment of all partners to national ownership, in conformity with the principles of the Paris Declaration. I particularly wish to thank the Minister of Planning and Development Cooperation and his office, as well as the donor community, for their continued support to, and engagement with, the United Nations country team throughout these processes. 27. I am also pleased to see the progress being made on the integration of the implementing activities of UNAMI and the United Nations country team in relation to key state and peacebuilding priorities. The aim is to have an integrated programming approach that will assist communities which require joint political as well as developmental solutions. Key integrated task forces are addressing important areas, such as water resource management (led by my Deputy Special Representative for Development), census and civil registration (led by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)) and social safety net reform (led by the World Food Programme (WFP)). I wish to express my appreciation for the efforts of my Special Representative who, through his Deputy Special Representatives, has successfully established a fully integrated process. 28. The Task Force on Integrated Water Resources Management has developed a plan to support Iraq in the management of its water resources in partnership with the Government of Iraq. The Task Force, with support from the Department of Political Affairs, produced a concept paper setting out the parameters and underlying rationale for planned interventions according to priorities during the coming year, which will be carried out within the framework of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework. The interventions envisaged aim to support the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals by establishing an expert knowledge base and the capacity necessary for the Government of Iraq to successfully manage water resources in the future. 29. Other key joint initiatives of UNAMI and the United Nations country team, with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as the lead agency, include supporting the development of the public and private sectors through in-depth studies and consultations with stakeholders to identify key challenges and opportunities. Focusing on employment generation and growth planning, while ensuring the inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable populations, these programmes, with a combined funding of US$ 87.85 million and complemented by a number of sectoral projects, form the basis for United Nations support to longer-term development in Iraq. 30. An inter-agency team of monitoring and evaluation experts has also been assisting the Ministry of Planning and Development Cooperation in the design of a national monitoring framework for the National Development Plan. A workshop to this end was held in Erbil, from 14 to 18 June. A second workshop, organized in partnership with the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and with the assistance of the UNDP Oslo Governance Centre, was held from 6 to 8 July to review governance objectives in the National Development Plan and develop relevant indicators. At the same time, progress was made in the development of a harmonized results monitoring framework for the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, which will complement the monitoring framework designed for the National Development Plan. 31. With support from UNFPA, the Ministry of Youth and Sports and the Central Organization for Statistics published The Iraq National Youth Survey. The survey provides data on youth education and enrolment, employment, health and reproductive health, use of media and social partnership, and citizenship. Other United Nations agencies, including the United Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), contributed to the survey process. 32. The Mission and the United Nations country team are assisting preparations for Iraq's nationwide census, tentatively planned for October 2010. The Iraqi Government census institution, COSIT (Central Organization for Statistics and Information Technology), and its implementing partner UNFPA have successfully concluded a pilot project in this regard. 33. A number of groups in Iraq are still in need of humanitarian support. Ensuring access to essential basic services, such as quality education, health and nutrition, shelter, water and sanitation services, particularly for internally displaced persons, returnees and refugees, remain a priority for the United Nations country team. As of the end of May, 46,430 internally displaced persons and 12,170 refugees had returned, with 9,100 internally displaced persons and 2,610 refugees returning in May itself. To date, 30 per cent of refugees have returned to Baghdad and 20 per cent to Qadissiyah, while 54 per cent of internally displaced persons have returned to Diyala and 43 per cent to Baghdad. The largest number of refugees returned to Baghdad (30 per cent) and Qadissiya (20 per cent), while Diyala (54 per cent) and Baghdad (43 per cent) received the largest number of internally displaced persons. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and the International Organization for Migration and WHO continue to provide outreach services to returnees and refugees to ensure that they have access to services enabling their dignified and safe return. At the same time, technical assistance to the Ministry of Displacement and Migration continues, aimed at developing enhanced capacity to maintain systems supporting the ongoing returns process. On World Refugee Day on 20 June, a number of events were organized by UNHCR to raise awareness of the issues facing internally displaced persons, refugees, and returnees in Iraq and the region. I would like to urge the new Government to ensure that the welfare of Iraq's vulnerable populations remains at the forefront of its social investment programmes. 34. The United Nations Development Programme, in partnership with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, has provided substantive support to the Expanded Humanitarian Response Fund, which is a countrywide effort to fill critical gaps for vulnerable populations in order to protect livelihoods and respond to unmet or urgent needs as a result of geographical, sectoral and funding gaps in the Government's humanitarian response. As of June 2010, the Fund has financed 54 projects implemented across 74 sectors and executed with the support of nine international non-governmental organizations and 32 local non-governmental organizations. 35. At the present time, my team in Iraq is preparing an awareness campaign in regard to the Millennium Development Goals, which is to be launched in parallel with General Assembly meeting on the issue, to be held in September. The Government of Iraq at all levels, civil society, academia and the private sector will be engaged in promoting the efforts of Iraq towards achievement of the Goals by 2015. While Iraq has made progress in reducing hunger, promoting gender equality and reducing child mortality, there is more work to be done in a number of other fields, including increased participation in primary education, reducing unemployment and ensuring access to essential services in urban and rural areas of the country. Advocacy and awareness-raising activities currently under way through the inter-agency HIV/AIDS working group and the Gender Task Force also will contribute to this campaign. 36. Cross-border shelling in the north-eastern part of the Kurdistan region has reportedly resulted in further displacements since mid-May. I remain deeply concerned over the recent events along the border, which are taking a toll on civilian lives. Several hundred families have fled their villages in the affected areas, with many of them finding refuge in Sulaymaniyah governorate where they are receiving assistance from the United Nations and other humanitarian actors. 37. My Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq continues to lead the humanitarian country team in identifying the needs of civilians and working closely with partners and local authorities to ensure that these needs are being met. In this respect, I wish to commend the work currently being done by WHO in assisting the Government of Iraq to strengthen its emergency medical services to better respond to mass casualty incidents. I remain greatly concerned by the continued targeting of minorities and political figures. The constraints to humanitarian presence are often hardest felt by the most vulnerable, particularly women, children and minorities. 38. Iraq continues to face challenges in its supply and distribution of electricity, which have a significant impact on basic living conditions as well as economic activities in various parts of the country. In June, a combination of unusually high temperatures, extended power cuts and a shortage in fuel supplies contributed to the violent civil unrest in Basra. The United Nations country team, with UNDP in the lead, is working with the Ministry of Electricity to address some of these issues. I am concerned that these cuts in the supply of electricity have the potential to generate social and political instability if progress in this sector is not made as expectations remain high in regard to the provision of electricity along with all key essential services. 39. The Iraq Humanitarian Action Plan is funded at 32 per cent, however, only 12 per cent is new, with the remainder carried over from 2009. This gap is of concern, as the humanitarian needs in specific areas of Iraq remain at a level beyond the Government's current capacity to address. The capacity of the United Nations and its partners to assist is being hampered by insufficient funds. On 25 May, my Humanitarian Coordinator briefed Member States in Geneva about this issue and the scenario she presented was supported by other international humanitarian actors. I therefore request Member States to consider increasing their support for the Iraq Humanitarian Action Plan and the humanitarian efforts of the United Nations country team in Iraq. Such support will be critical to respond to acute humanitarian needs, including outbreaks of communicable diseases, in a timely manner. 40. On 27 June, the Steering Committee of the United Nations Development Group Iraq Trust Fund approved the final projects utilizing the remaining resources prior to the final allocation deadline of 30 June 2010, and funds are in the process of being transferred to the respective United Nations participating organizations. I congratulate the United Nations country team and the Government of Iraq on the Trust Fund which, as the first and oldest United Nations multi-donor trust fund, is also the first United Nations trust fund to have fully approved the allocation of all available resources and is now closing. The Multi-Donor Trust Fund Office reports total donor deposits of US$ 1.35 billion, with US$ 1.34 billion approved and US$ 1.33 billion transferred for a total of 190 projects. Building upon the agreement of the Executive Committee at its meeting on 10 June, the United Nations country team is currently holding discussions on the establishment of a new multi-donor trust fund for the new United Nations Development Assistance Framework for Iraq. E. Human rights 41. I am concerned with the overall human rights situation in the country, notably the high rate of indiscriminate and targeted attacks against the civilian population. Ongoing violence and targeted assassinations also continue to be reported against government officials, newly elected members of the Council of Representatives, media workers, minority and ethnic and religious groups. In May, approximately 100 Christian students travelling in buses to the University of Mosul were injured and a bystander was killed when two roadside bombs exploded as the buses passed. In April, approximately 50 civilians were killed as the result of bombings in Shi'a neighbourhoods in Baghdad. Between May and June, political figures were also the target of indiscriminate attacks: five family members, including three children, of an Awakening Council member were killed in Baghdad; a newly elected member of the Council of Representatives, Bashar Hamid Al-Egaidi, was assassinated in Mosul; and a parliamentary candidate, Fares Jasim Al Jabour, was killed in his house in West Mosul on 5 June. Journalists and media workers continued to be targeted in attacks aimed at restricting freedom of expression and opinion. A 23-year-old freelance journalist, Sardasht Othman, was kidnapped outside the Salahaddin University in Erbil and was later found shot dead on 6 May near the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan office in eastern Mosul. Mr. Othman was known for his writings critical of members of the Government. KRG is currently investigating the matter. 42. The UNAMI Human Rights Office continued to monitor government detention centres in Kirkuk, Basra and Erbil, in which poor conditions have been reported. In the detention centre in Basra, the Human Rights Office reported that the physical conditions of the prison did not meet minimal international standards. In another incident of concern, on 12 May, seven detainees suffocated while in transit from Al-Taji detention centre to Al-Tasfirat pretrial detention facility in Baghdad. It was reportedly the result of Iraqi army personnel transporting 100 detainees in two windowless vehicles whose capacity was for only 15 persons. 43. The UNAMI Human Rights Office organized and hosted a coordination meeting on 26 May with representatives from the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Interior, the head of the Prisons Department in the Ministry of Human Rights and the Human Rights adviser from the United States Embassy in Iraq. The aim of the meeting was to develop a framework for monitoring prisons and detention centres, information-sharing and addressing training needs for government officials on human rights issues. All participants agreed on the establishment of a national steering committee to monitor human rights in general and, in particular, the situation in Iraqi prisons. In Erbil, the capacity-building efforts continued with the UNAMI Human Rights Office, in conjunction with an international non-governmental organization, conducting a seminar on international criminal law and fair trial principles for eight Iraqi criminal lawyers. 44. I am pleased to report that the Kurdistan Regional Parliament passed a law on 24 May establishing a regional human rights institution, the Independent Board of Human Rights, which is to replace the dissolved KRG Ministry of Human Rights. UNAMI will work with KRG to build the capacity of this important new institution. 45. In a further positive development, on 14 June the Iraqi Federal Court passed a ruling increasing the number of seats in the Council of Representatives for the Yezidi minority group in proportion to their population in accordance with the figures from the most recent national census. 46. On 26 June, UNAMI issued a press statement to mark the International Day in Support of Victims of Torture, in which it urged the Government of Iraq to ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. I reiterate this call to the Government of Iraq and would urge it to consider ratification of this important international human rights instrument. 47. The situation at Camp Ashraf remains unresolved. On 2 July, the United States Forces in Iraq (USF-I) ended its presence at Forward Operating Base Grizzly and handed over the base to the Iraqi Army. UNAMI is monitoring the situation closely and visiting Camp Ashraf on a regular basis. The Government of Iraq has stated its intention to relocate all residents of the Camp to an alternative, as yet unidentified, location within Iraq at an unspecified date in the future. It has also reiterated its commitment to respect the rights of the Camp's residents and has stated that the departure of USF-I should not affect the supply to them of goods and services of a humanitarian nature. F. Security, operational and logistical issues 48. In view of the planned drawdown of the USF-I forces, and its expected impact on the level of security and logistical support provided to UNAMI, a United Nations interdepartmental planning team has been working to identify alternative support arrangements. Meetings with representatives of the United States Government are also being held on a regular basis in order to ensure a smooth transition during this period. 49. During the reporting period, the Project Manager for the future United Nations integrated compound in Baghdad arrived in the mission area and assumed his duties. Weekly progress reports were prepared and shared with the Department of Field Support, the Department of Safety and Security and the Department of Management. The design of the compound is ongoing. In Basra and Kirkuk, there has been an increase in the number of United Nations missions owing to better air transport services, logistical support and capacity to conduct red zone missions. UNAMI is now exploring the establishment of new facilities at these two locations. 50. Al-Qaida in Iraq and the Islamic State of Iraq continue their efforts to aggravate the sectarian divide by targeting officials of the Government of Iraq, Iraqi security forces and the pilgrims. In early July, approximately 70 civilians were killed and over 400 others wounded in Baghdad in a six-day period commemorating a Shi'a religious anniversary. This followed a similar attack in May when the Iraqi security forces and civilians in the Shi'a districts of north-east Baghdad were the targets of small arms fire and improvised explosive device attacks which killed 100 people and wounded 400 in a single day. These groups continue to identify United Nations activities in Iraq as possible targets for attack. 51. Baghdad has seen a consistent rotation of different methods of attack since April; armed opposition groups continue to modify and reemploy tried and tested tactics against targets who include Shi'a civilians, government employees and senior ranking officers of the Iraqi security forces. Attacks by indirect fire still continue to periodically occur in the Baghdad International Zone and at the Baghdad International Airport complex where the United Nations has facilities; to date, there have been no casualties or damage to facilities. 52. Despite regular military operations throughout the city of Mosul, armed opposition groups continue to target Iraqi security forces and civilians. In north central Iraq, the threat from vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices continues to exist, resulting in frequent incidents. Most attacks appear to be aimed at the Iraqi security forces and provincial government employees and property. Assassination attempts of prominent figures continue. The Governor of Anbar recently survived the third assassination attempt aimed at him. Kirkuk has been generally stable since the previous reporting period. On 8 June, shots were fired at a USF-I/United Nations convoy travelling in Kirkuk, resulting in one USF-I soldier being wounded. No UNAMI staff members were injured and the convoy immediately returned to Forward Operating Base Warrior. 53. The provinces in the south central and south have continued to experience low incident numbers during the past three months. The majority of incidents observed in these regions have been improvised explosive device attacks on USF-I. On 5 June, a projectile was fired at a USF-I/United Nations convoy travelling in Basra; there were no casualties but damage was caused to one of the convoy vehicles. IV. Observations 54. The successful conclusion of the national electoral process on 2 June and the convening of the new Council of Representatives on 14 June, represented important milestones in Iraq's democratic transition. However, I am concerned that continued delays in the government formation process are contributing to a growing sense of uncertainty in the country. Not only does this risk undermining confidence in the political process, but elements opposed to Iraq's democratic transition may try to exploit the situation. The number of recent security incidents throughout Iraq, mainly in the north of the country and in Baghdad, including attacks against newly elected members of parliament and religious pilgrims, are of particular concern. 55. In this context, I urge all political bloc leaders to work together through an inclusive and broadly participatory process to end the present impasse. After exercising their right to vote on 7 March, there are high expectations among the Iraqi people that their leaders will adhere to the Constitution and ensure an orderly and peaceful transition of power. I firmly believe that this will contribute to the country's stability and the prospects for national reconciliation. In accordance with their mandate, my Special Representative and his team in UNAMI stand ready to assist. 56. Once the government formation process has been completed, it is imperative that the new Government, together with the Council of Representatives and other stakeholders, make national reconciliation a priority and begin to address the many outstanding political and constitutional challenges facing the country. This includes Arab-Kurdish relations as they relate to disputed areas, revenue-sharing, the adoption of legislation related to hydrocarbons, relations among the federal, regional and provincial governments, the constitutional review process, and the strengthening of institutions of governance and the rule of law. 57. In particular, promoting dialogue and encouraging compromise in disputed areas will greatly contribute to the country's stability. In this context, I am encouraged by the progress being made in talks assisted by UNAMI to end the impasse over the boycott of the Ninewa Provincial Council by Kurdish parties. An agreement would contribute significantly to easing tensions in the disputed territories and restore confidence insofar as resolving Arab-Kurdish issues at the national level. I therefore strongly encourage the continuation of the work of the High-Level Committee on Security which was created as part of the combined security mechanism and whose membership includes the Ministers of Defence and of Interior, and the KRG Ministers of Interior and Peshmerga Affairs. In accordance with its mandate, UNAMI is committed to assisting all concerned to address the full range of security matters that remains under dispute in northern Iraq. 58. Another matter that requires urgent attention is the need for the new Government of Iraq to do its utmost to fulfil its outstanding obligations under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular issues related to Kuwait, as soon as possible. In this regard, I once again call on Iraq to confirm its commitment to Security Council resolution 833 (1993) and its land and maritime borders with Kuwait. It is also essential that progress be made with respect to the Iraq-Kuwait Boundary Maintenance Project and missing Kuwaiti nationals and properties. I consider that such actions would encourage the Security Council to review my report submitted in July 2009 pursuant to Council resolution 1859 (2008) and to consider the steps that need to be taken for the full normalization of Iraq's international status. In this regard, I strongly encourage Iraq's neighbours to make it a priority to engage the new Government of Iraq in addressing issues of mutual concern. Such efforts could go a long way in bringing greater stability to the region as a whole. 59. A major challenge facing the new Government will be accelerating the pace of development and reconstruction in the country, as articulated in the National Development Plan. The recent unrest in Basra over electricity shortages and the lack of potable water underscore the urgent need for an improvement in the delivery of essential services and the creation of jobs. Through a concerted commitment by the Government, the United Nations and the international community, I am confident that there can emerge a harmonized and coordinated effort to meet the needs of the Iraqi people, in the spirit of the Millennium Development Goals and the Paris Declaration. I would also like to stress that the development priorities identified in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework and continuing humanitarian response programmes, including vital assistance to refugees and internally displaced persons, will inevitably require more resources from international donors in addition to the substantial contributions already being made by the Government of Iraq. 60. Since Iraq remains an extremely complex operating environment for the Organization, the safety and security of United Nations personnel continue to be a key concern. I am therefore grateful to a number of Member States that provide security and logistical support for the United Nations presence in Iraq. The planned drawdown of United States forces in Iraq will inevitably have an impact on the United Nations. UNAMI is identifying new and alternative arrangements to ensure and enhance its operational capacity in the future. This will necessitate strong financial support from Member States in order for the United Nations to fully implement its mandate in Iraq. 61. The United Nations is committed to implementing its mandate in accordance with resolution 1883 (2009) and to working in consultation with the Government of Iraq. I would like to thank my Special Representative, UNAMI staff, both national and international, and the personnel of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes for their commitment to assisting the people and Government of Iraq under challenging conditions. Their tireless efforts in rebuilding the country are deeply appreciated. 