%%%PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|FUNDS|IRAQ|IRAQ SITUATION|

Letter dated 9 December 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council * Reissued for technical reasons on 11 November 2011. I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter addressed to you from H.E. Mr. Nouri al-Maliki, Prime Minister of the Republic of Iraq, regarding the extension of the arrangements of the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) (see annex). I have further the honour to request that the present letter and its annex be circulated to the members of the Security Council and issued as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) T. Hamid Al Bayati Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative [Original: Arabic] I should like to refer to my letter dated 13 December 2009 addressed to the President of the Security Council, in which I explained that in 2010 the Government of Iraq would put in place appropriate arrangements, in keeping with the Constitution, for the Development Fund for Iraq and the International Advisory and Monitoring Board, with a view to ensuring the continued equitable use of oil revenue in the interests of the Iraqi people, in accordance with international best practices with regard to transparency, accountability and integrity. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1905 (2009), the Government of Iraq submitted in its first quarterly report the requisite action plan and timeline for the transition to the successor arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq and the International Advisory and Monitoring Board. It subsequently submitted its second and third reports on the progress that had been made. In the third report, details were given of the parts of the action plan that had been completed and those that remained incomplete. Reference was also made to the situation in Iraq and the fact that the delay in the formation of a new Government after the legislative elections that took place on 7 March 2010 had, in one way or another, affected the ability of Government institutions to take rapid and effective action with regard to the comprehensive implementation of the action plan. On the basis of the foregoing, and in order to make it possible to ensure the comprehensive implementation of the action plan and a smooth transition to the successor arrangements, the Government of Iraq is once more in need of the assistance of the international community. It therefore hopes that the Security Council will extend for a further and final six months, ending on 30 June 2011, immunity for the Development Fund for Iraq, on the basis of the arrangements set forth in Security Council resolution 1483 (2003), paragraph 20. I should be grateful if you would circulate this letter to the members of the Council with the greatest possible expedition and include it as an annex to the resolution currently being drafted on Iraq. (Signed) Nuri Kamel al-Maliki Prime Minister of the Republic of Iraq Baghdad, December 2010 