%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|MILITARY DEMOBILIZATION|DISPLACED PERSONS|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE|ANGOLA|ANGOLA SITUATION|STAFF SECURITY|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1998/695 27 July 1998 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH LETTER DATED 27 JULY 1998 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MOZAMBIQUE TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL I have the honour to forward to you, on behalf of the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity, the communiqué on the situation in Angola issued by the Central Organ of the Organization of African Unity Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution. I would be grateful if the text of the present communiqué could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Carlos Dos SANTOS Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Permanent Representative of the Republic of Mozambique and Chairman of the African Group for the month of July English Page Annex Communiqué on the situation in Angola issued on 24 July 1998 by the Central Organ of the Organization of African Unity Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution The Central Organ of the Organization of African Unity Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution met today, 24 July 1998, in an extraordinary session in Addis Ababa, at ambassadorial level, to consider the situation in Angola. The session was presided over by H.E. Smail Chergui, the Ambassador of Algeria to Ethiopia and Permanent Representative to the Organization of African Unity. At the end of its deliberations, the Central Organ: 1. Took note of the information provided by the representative of the Government of Angola on the deteriorating situation in his country; 2. Holds the leadership of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA), and specifically Mr. Jonas Savimbi, personally accountable for the resumption of hostilities and the deteriorating security situation in Angola, as evidenced by their persistent refusal to conform to the relevant decisions of the United Nations Security Council regarding the implementation of the military and political aspects of the Lusaka Protocol, particularly the demobilization and disarmament of its troops, as well as the extension of State administration; 3. Strongly condemned UNITA for its acts of armed aggression and reoccupation of the territory already handed over to the State administration, thus creating an unfortunate outflow of refugees to the neighbouring and displaced persons; 4. Called once again on the leaders of UNITA to undertake the total and unconditional demobilization of their troops in accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol; 5. Appealed to the United Nations Security Council to assume its full responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security and to take all necessary measures to assist the long suffering people of Angola, restore peace and stability to their war-torn country; 6. Called on all OAU Member States to apply, firmly and resolutely, the measures adopted by the United Nations Security Council, especially, within the context of Security Council resolutions 1135 (1997) and 1173 (1998); 7. Expressed concern at the low level of support for humanitarian assistance in Angola and renewed the OAU's appeal to the international community to provide the necessary humanitarian and economic assistance for the reconstruction of Angola, particularly the rehabilitation of demining operations; 8. Expressed its deep concern over the outflow of refugees and displaced persons, resulting in the deterioration of the humanitarian situation and called on the OAU Commission of Refugees and displaced persons; 9. Condemned the widespread harassment of humanitarian aid workers, leading to their withdrawal from parts of Angola, and the loss of property and supplies of humanitarian agencies. It appealed for the protection of all humanitarian aid workers in Angola; 10. Expressed its appreciation to the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation for its statesmanship in the management of the peace process in Angola and the current crisis in particular. 