%%%INTERNATIONAL TRADE|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|ELECTION OF OFFICERS|

United Nations TD/B/WP/220 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Distr.: General 26 February 2010 Original: English Trade and Development Board Working Party on the Strategic Framework and the Programme Budget Fifty-fifth session Geneva, 15 - 16 February 2010 Report of the Working Party on the Strategic Framework and the Programme Budget on its fifty-fifth session Held at the Palais des Nations, Geneva, from 15 to 16 February 2010 I. Agreed conclusions adopted by the Working Party at its fifty-fifth session Review of the implementation of UNCTAD's communications strategy and publications policy (Agenda item 3) The Working Party, 1. Takes note of the secretariat's report on the implementation of the communications strategy and publications policy, the report on the readership survey and other information supplied by the secretariat; 2. Notes the progress made in the implementation of the communications strategy, encourages the Secretary-General of UNCTAD to continue his efforts and welcomes the new and targeted products for specific audiences; 3. Emphasizes the importance of UNCTAD publications as a source of leading analysis and policy recommendations; 4. Requests that, in the implementation of the communications strategy, particular attention be devoted to: (a) Enhancing outreach to government policymakers, for example through systematic briefings on flagship reports and other publications, and improving outreach at the country level, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme, United Nations country teams and regional bodies; (b) Making progress towards a more user-friendly, accessible and multilingual website and using e-mail alerts and other tools to better reach its targeted audiences; (c) Allocating, within the regular budget, adequate resources to finance the implementation of the communications strategy without prejudice to other UNCTAD activities and, if necessary, seeking extrabudgetary resources; 5. Requests that, in the implementation of the publications policy, particular attention be devoted to: (a) Full implementation of the Accra Accord, as stipulated in paragraph 186; (b) Enhancing the quality, timeliness and relevance of UNCTAD's publications and the required flexibility to address topical and emerging issues within its mandate; (c) Ensuring the timely translation of UNCTAD publications as a matter of priority; (d) Optimizing dissemination through the use of both hard and soft copies to targeted audiences; (e) Improving mechanisms for assessing UNCTAD publications; 6. Recalls the previously adopted agreed conclusions and reiterates its request for the allocation of regular resources to fund the Least Developed Countries Report; 7. Recalls the previously adopted agreed conclusions and requests the Secretary-General of UNCTAD, within existing resources, to ensure that future major publications of UNCTAD, as appropriate, particularly the flagship reports, address the special and particular challenges of the LDCs; 8. Recalls paragraph 44 of the Accra Accord and requests the UNCTAD secretariat to increase the number of publications on assistance to the Palestinian people, when the need arises, within existing resources, as part of the support to alleviate the adverse economic and social situation in the Palestinian territory with a view to creating the conditions conducive to building a sovereign and viable Palestinian State in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Road Map, the Annapolis Conference Joint Understanding and the Paris conferences. II. Chair's summary A. Proceedings 1. The fifty-fifth session of the Working Party on the Strategic Framework and the Programme Budget was held in Geneva from 15 to 16 February 2010, to review the implementation of UNCTAD's communications strategy and publications policy. B. Statements 2. The following speakers made opening statements: Mr. Petko Draganov, Deputy Secretary-General, UNCTAD; the representative of Thailand on behalf of the Group of 77 and China; the representative of Egypt on behalf of the African Group; the representative of Sri Lanka on behalf of the Asian Group; the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean countries; the representative of Spain on behalf of the European Union and associated countries (candidate countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and Turkey; countries of the stabilization and association process; and potential candidates Albania, Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Republic of Moldova, Serbia and Ukraine); the representative of Nepal on behalf of the least developed countries; the representative of Algeria; the representative of Benin; and the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. C. Informal meetings 3. The Working Party pursued its deliberations in an informal setting. D. Action by the Working Party 4. The Working Party considered the documents "Report on the implementation of UNCTAD's communications strategy and publications policy" (TD/B/WP/219), "UNCTAD communications strategy" (TD/B/56/9/Rev.1) and "UNCTAD publications policy" (TD/B/56/10/Rev.1) and adopted the agreed conclusions reproduced in section I above. III. Organizational matters A. Election of officers (Agenda item 1) 5. At its opening plenary meeting, on 15 February 2010, the Working Party elected H.E. Mr. Vassily Nebenzia (Russian Federation) as its Chair and Mr. Bakary Bamba (Côte d'Ivoire) as its Vice-Chair-cum-Rapporteur. B. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work (Agenda item 2) 6. At the same meeting, the Working Party adopted its provisional agenda (contained in TD/B/WP/218). The agenda was thus as follows: 1. Election of officers 2. Adoption of the agenda and organization of work 3. Review of the implementation of UNCTAD's communications strategy and publications policy 4. Provisional agenda for the fifty-sixth session of the Working Party 5. Other business 6. Adoption of the report of the Working Party to the Trade and Development Board 7. The Working Party agreed to shorten its meeting to two days, and end its session on Tuesday, 16 February 2010, instead of on 17 February 2010 as originally scheduled. C. Provisional agenda for the fifty-sixth session of the Working Party (Agenda item 4) 8. At its closing plenary meeting, on Tuesday, 16 February 2010, the Working Party adopted the provisional agenda for its fifty-sixth session (see annex I). D. Adoption of the report of the Working Party to the Trade and Development Board (Agenda item 6) 9. At the same meeting, the Working Party authorized the Rapporteur to finalize the report on its fifty-fifth session. Provisional agenda for the fifty-sixth session of the Working Party 3. Review of the technical cooperation activities of UNCTAD and their financing 4. Evaluation of technical cooperation activities: (a) In-depth evaluation of UNCTAD's technical cooperation activities dedicated to least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing states and structurally weak, vulnerable and small economies; (b) Progress report on the implementation of recommendations from the independent external evaluation of UNCTAD's commodities programme; 5. Provisional agenda for the fifty-seventh session of the Working Party 6. Other business 7. Adoption of the report of the Working Party to the Trade and Development Board Attendance 1. Representatives from the following States members of the Working Party attended the session: Albania Algeria Benin Canada China Côte d'Ivoire El Salvador Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Japan Peru Russian Federation Switzerland Thailand 2. Representatives from the following States members of UNCTAD but not members of the Working Party attended the session: Angola Bangladesh Botswana Bulgaria Cameroon Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Dominican Republic Egypt Finland France Germany Ghana Greece India Iraq Israel Italy Jordan Kenya Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Malaysia Mauritius Mexico Morocco Myanmar Nepal Nigeria Pakistan Philippines Qatar Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Syrian Arab Republic Turkey Zambia Zimbabwe 3. The following observer was represented at the session: Palestine 4. The following intergovernmental organizations were represented at the session: African Union European Union 5. The following United Nations agency was represented at the session: International Trade Centre 