%%%AIRSPACE|TERRITORIAL SEA|LEBANON|AIRCRAFT|ISRAEL|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|

General Assembly Security Council Sixty-fifth session Agenda item 36 The situation in the Middle East Sixty-sixth year Identical letters dated 1 March 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I transmit to you herewith a statistical summary of the violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) committed by Israel in January 2011 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 36, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Nawaf Salam Ambassador Permanent Representative Israeli violations, acts of aggression and other activities during the month of January 2011 Date Time Land violations 6 January 2011 The Israeli enemy at its gh2 position east of Ra's Naqurah directed two searchlights towards Lebanese territory. Between 10 and 12 January 2011 Opposite Abbasiyah, the Israeli enemy installed a solar-powered surveillance camera directed towards Lebanese territory. 12 January 2011 On the outskirts of Rumaysh, members of an Israeli enemy patrol breached the technical fence and summoned and abducted herdsman Charbel Al-Khouri, who was within liberated Lebanese territory. They took him to occupied Palestinian territory before releasing him at 0200 hours on 13 January 2011. 13 January 2011 An Israeli enemy civilian at the sh34 position (Fatima Gate -- 3) used a video camera to film the Kafr Killa Lebanese Army position for five minutes. 15 January 2011 While an Israeli enemy patrol was moving between its positions at gh21 (south of Mazra`at Duhayrah) and gh20 (Duhayrah Gate), one member of the patrol photographed the sentry at the Lebanese Army position at Duhayrah. As an Israeli enemy patrol was leaving its position at gh21 (south of Mazra`at Duhayrah), one patrol member pointed a weapon in the direction of the sentry at the Lebanese Army position at Duhayrah. 18 January 2011 The Israeli enemy raked the area between Sammaqah and Ruwaysat al-Alam with medium-weapons fire while, at the same time, hostile vehicles moved between those two positions. 19 January 2011 Members of an Israeli enemy patrol halted near the gh21 position (south of Mazra`at Duhayrah) and addressed indecent language to the sentry at the Lebanese Army position at Duhayrah. 20 January 2011 Members of a three-man Israeli enemy patrol crossed the technical fence separating the area of the occupied Shab`a Farms with regard to which Lebanon maintains a claim from the liberated area on the outskirts of the town of Kafr Shuba, penetrating some 20 metres into Lebanese territory and remaining there for two minutes. 25 January 2011 The Israeli enemy raked the area around Sammaqah with medium-weapons fire while, at the same time, a hostile helicopter circled over the occupied Shab`a Farms. An Israeli enemy patrol directed a searchlight towards the Lebanese Army checkpoint at Udaysah. 26 January 2011 Using a megaphone, the Israeli enemy opposite the town of Abbasiyah threatened Lebanese citizen Youssef Shahhab, who was working on his land inside Lebanese territory. Two of the Israeli enemy crossed the technical fence separating the area of the occupied Shab`a Farms with regard to which Lebanon maintains a claim from the liberated area on the outskirts of the town of Kafr Shuba, penetrating some 20 metres into Lebanese territory and remaining there for five minutes. The Israeli enemy fired four flare shells between the Sammaqah and Ruwaysat al-Alam positions in the occupied Shab`a Farms. 27 January 2011 Members of an Israeli enemy patrol halted near the gate opposite the Lebanese Army checkpoint at Udaysah and observed checkpoint personnel through binoculars. Two members of the hostile patrol then pointed 12.7 mm machine guns towards the aforementioned checkpoint. Members of an Israeli enemy patrol halted near the gate opposite the Lebanese Army checkpoint at Udaysah and pointed 12.7 mm machine guns towards the checkpoint. Members of an Israeli enemy patrol directed a searchlight for five minutes towards the observation tower at the Lebanese Army observation post at Markaba. The Israeli enemy broke into the FM wave band of the Lebanese Army position at Alma al-Sha`b: Hebrew words were heard. 28 January 2011 One man of an Israeli enemy patrol, passing through the Hassan Gate, crossed the technical fence separating the area of the occupied Shab`a Farms with regard to which Lebanon maintains a claim from the liberated area on the outskirts of the town of Kafr Shuba, penetrating some 20 metres into Lebanese territory and remaining there for three minutes. Members of an Israeli enemy patrol told Lebanese citizen Rida Dawi to leave his land on the outskirts of Aytarun, some 40 metres from the technical fence and within Lebanese territory. Israeli enemy personnel at the Duhayrah Gate position (gh20) observed Lebanese territory through binoculars. Members of an Israeli enemy patrol halted at the Fatima Gate -- 4 position, directed profanities towards the personnel of the Lebanese Army observation post at the Fatima Gate and used a video camera to film that post. 29 January Members of an Israeli enemy patrol photographed the Lebanese Army observation post at the Fatima Gate and the sentry at the Fatimah Gate garden. 30 January Members of an Israeli enemy patrol halted opposite the Lebanese Army checkpoint at Udaysah and directed profanities and curses towards those manning the checkpoint. 31 January Members of an Israeli enemy patrol pointed 12.7 mm machine guns towards the Lebanese Army checkpoint at Udaysah. An Israeli enemy patrol halted opposite the Lebanese Army checkpoint at Udaysah and pointed 12.7 mm machine guns towards the checkpoint. Sea violations 4 January 2011 The Israeli enemy carried out maintenance on the line of buoys off Ra's Naqurah, coming round to the Lebanese side, which constitutes a violation of Lebanese territorial waters. An Israeli enemy maritime target was observed moving north, violating Lebanese territorial waters, one nautical mile from the line of buoys off Naqurah, 11.5 nautical miles from the coast. At 1145 hours the target had reached Ra's Sur, outside Lebanese territorial waters. 16 January 2011 An Israeli enemy military launch directed a searchlight towards Lebanese territorial waters and the coast off Ra's Naqurah for five seconds on each occasion. On five occasions an Israeli enemy military launch directed a searchlight towards Lebanese territorial waters for five seconds on each occasion. Air violations 2 January 2011 An Israeli enemy aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 0955 hours. An Israeli enemy aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1030 hours. 3 January 2011 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1718 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1810 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over the South before leaving at 2200 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Kila. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1055 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1000 hours over Rumaysh. 7 January 2011 An Israeli enemy aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 0946 hours. 9 January 2011 An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1655 hours. An Israeli enemy aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1713 hours. 10 January 2011 An Israeli enemy aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1850 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South and the western Bekaa before leaving at 2355 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. 11 January 2011 Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1330 hours over the sea off Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut, the South, Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 0420 hours on 12 January 2010 over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over the South before leaving at 1840 hours over Aytarun. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 2359 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South and the western Bekaa before leaving at 1840 hours over Naqurah. Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace. They circled over the South before leaving at 0940 hours. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Kila. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1230 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace. They circled over the South before leaving at 1415 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1540 hours on 13 January 2010 over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over B`abda, Beirut and the South before leaving at 1950 hours over Naqurah. Ten Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah and Aytarun. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1145 hours over the sea off Naqurah. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Batrun. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1215 hours over the sea off Kafr Kila. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Naqurah. It circled over the sea between Sidon and Naqurah before leaving at 1840 hours over the sea off Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 2237 hours. 17 January 2011 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Naqurah. It circled over the sea between Damur and Tyre before leaving at 0900 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1042 hours. An Israeli enemy aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Baalbek at a low altitude. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1200 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 0730 hours on 20 January 2011 over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Kila. It circled over the Bekaa and the South before leaving at 1400 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 2235 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the western Bekaa and the South before leaving at 1705 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1719 hours. Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace. They circled over the South before leaving at 1830 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 0700 hours on 21 January 2011 over Naqurah. 21 January 2011 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1405 hours. Eight Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah and the Shab`a Farms. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1130 hours over the sea off Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over the South and the western Bekaa before leaving at 2330 hours over Naqurah. 22 January 2011 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1649 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the western Bekaa and the South before leaving at 2000 hours over Rumaysh. 23 January 2011 Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Kila. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1020 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Kila. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1120 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. 24 January 2011 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 1832 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South, the Bekaa and Beirut before leaving at 0325 hours on 25 January 2011 over Naqurah. Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace. They circled over the South before leaving at 2355 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 0615 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek, Hirmil and the South before leaving at 2255 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1640 hours over Naqurah. Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace. They circled over the South before leaving at 1005 hours. An Israeli enemy aircraft violated Lebanese airspace. It circled over the South before leaving at 0046 hours. 