%%%PLEBISCITES|CYPRUS|CYPRUS QUESTION|GREEK CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|TURKISH CYPRIOT COMMUNITY|

General Assembly Sixty-fifth session Agenda item 43 Question of Cyprus Security Council Sixty-sixth year Letter dated 27 April 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 26 April 2011, addressed to you by Mr. Sertaç Güven, Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I should be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 43, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Ertuğrul Apakan Permanent Representative I have the honour to convey herewith a copy of the letter dated 24 April 2011 addressed to you by His Excellency Mr. Derviş Eroğlu, President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, regarding the anniversary of the separate simultaneous referenda that were held in two parts of Cyprus on 24 April 2004 (see enclosure). (Signed) Sertaç Güven Chargé d'affaires a.i. Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus On the occasion of the anniversary of the separate simultaneous referenda that were held in the two parts of Cyprus on 24 April 2004, I have the honour to bring to your kind attention the following. At the outset, I wish to point out that 24 April 2011 has a significance, for the Turkish Cypriots, beyond being the seventh anniversary of the above-mentioned referenda on the United Nations Comprehensive Settlement Plan. This date is also a reminder of the broken promises that were made to the Turkish Cypriots and the resultant disappointments and difficulties we have since faced. As will be recalled, the Turkish Cypriots had cast a "yes" vote in the referendum held in the North, whereas the Greek Cypriots voted "no" in the referendum held in the South. It was by no means an easy decision for the Turkish Cypriots to approve, in that referendum, the Annan Plan, which was a recipe for a settlement that involved great pain, hardships and concessions for them, including displacement for the second, third or even fourth time. On the other hand, as indicated by the report of the then-United Nations Secretary-General dated 28 May 2004 (S/2004/437), "the sheer size of the `No' vote raises even more fundamental questions" as to whether the Greek Cypriot side was ready for a settlement on the basis of "political equality and the sharing of power". It was underlined in the same report that "if the Greek Cypriots are ready to share power and prosperity with the Turkish Cypriots in a federal structure based on political equality, this needs to be demonstrated, not just by word, but by action". It is unfortunate to observe that seven years later, the Greek Cypriot side is still unable to take concrete steps in that direction. As is also known, the United Nations Secretary-General and the European Union Commission, as well as the international community in general, had then stressed that the Turkish Cypriot side should not be victimized by the lack of a settlement, and that the isolation imposed on the Turkish Cypriots should be lifted. Promises were made, decisions were taken and calls were made to that end. Unfortunately, however, these promises have not been kept and the Turkish Cypriots have been left to live under inhuman isolation that has been continuing for over 45 years. I would once again like to draw Your Excellency's attention to this long-continuing predicament of the Turkish Cypriot people and to reiterate that the unfavourable experiences since 2004 have created great disappointment among the Turkish Cypriot people. The attitude displayed by the Greek Cypriot side both during and after 2004, while not changing the political will of the Turkish Cypriot people for a settlement, has played a primary role in an inevitable erosion of their belief that a settlement will actually materialize. These experiences and the consequent lack of confidence necessitate that greater caution be exercised so as to ensure that any comprehensive settlement can be viable and lasting. The Turkish Cypriot people have elected me to try to find not a settlement within which their rights and interests will depend on mere verbal assurances that may soon be forgotten or cast aside, but one in which these rights and interests will be firmly guaranteed without any dilution. We, as the Turkish Cypriot side, are participating in the negotiations that are conducted within Your Excellency's mission of good offices, by drawing lessons from the experiences of 2004, while at the same time looking ahead to the future. In spite of its negative vote in the referenda of 2004, the Greek Cypriot side was not left without an alternative and was in fact rewarded with European Union membership as the so-called "Republic of Cyprus". It is for this reason that if we succeed, with my counterpart Mr. Christofias, in coming up with a viable and sustainable settlement agreement, it is necessary that precautions be taken so that the experiences of 2004 and afterwards are not repeated. This is a requirement of reason, fairness and justice. The Turkish Cypriot side recognizes that the real remedy for all problems related to the Cyprus issue is a mutually agreed comprehensive settlement. No other alternative could be a real substitute for this. A just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus question will greatly contribute to peace and stability in the whole Eastern Mediterranean region and will be to the benefit of all the relevant parties. The Greek Cypriot side, however, does not seem to genuinely desire a successful conclusion to the comprehensive negotiation process. As former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan stressed in his aforementioned report of 28 May 2004, the Greek Cypriots must first decide whether they truly want a new partnership with the Turkish Cypriots. Only if this is the case will it be possible to achieve a comprehensive settlement. In fact, if appropriate motivation is provided to the Greek Cypriot side by the European Union and the international community, with the necessary political will, it would be possible to reach a solution in a short time. I would like to take this opportunity to stress once again our commitment, as the Turkish Cypriot side, to the search for a negotiated solution in Cyprus, the path to which clearly lies in the finding of a mutually acceptable settlement agreement. The opportunity afforded to the Greek Cypriot side to overcome any difficulty arising from the lack of a settlement on the island by resorting to other means as the so-called "legitimate government" and by keeping the Turkish Cypriots under isolation is preventing it from favouring a comprehensive settlement based on compromise and concession. I would like to reassure Your Excellency that, as the Turkish Cypriot side, we will continue to take our place at the negotiating table in a constructive spirit of goodwill and work for a settlement under your auspices. My sincere hope and expectation is that, at the tripartite meeting with Your Excellency to be held in June, together we will take the necessary steps for the achievement of a viable and lasting settlement that would take into account the past experiences and present realities, without further delay. (Signed) Derviş Eroğlu President 