%%%INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|DECISION-MAKING|GOVERNANCE|

Sixty-fifth session Agenda item 18 (b) Macroeconomic policy questions: international financial system and development Letter dated 27 May 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral I have the honour to transmit to you, on behalf of the informal Global Governance Group (3G), comprising the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, the Kingdom of Bahrain, Barbados, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Jamaica, Kuwait, the Principality of Liechtenstein, Malaysia, the Principality of Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Panama, Peru, the Republic of the Philippines, the State of Qatar, the Republic of Rwanda, the Republic of San Marino, the Republic of Senegal, the Republic of Singapore, the Republic of Slovenia, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and my own country, Switzerland, the input of the 3G to the Group of 20 (G-20) on the interaction between the G-20 and international organizations (see annex). On behalf of the 3G, I would be grateful if you could circulate the present letter and its annex as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 18 (b). (Signed) Paul Seger Ambassador Permanent Representative Global Governance Group input on the interaction between the Group of 20 and international organizations The Global Governance Group (3G) notes the increasingly important role of international organizations, within and outside the United Nations system, in carrying out mandates and studies on behalf of the Group of 20 (G-20) for the preparation of G-20 summits. The International organizations that support the G20 process with the provision of technical expertise include the Financial Action Task Force, the Financial Stability Board, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and regional development banks, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the International Energy Agency, as well as entities of the United Nations system such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. At the outset, the 3G would like to recall its position stated in its paper on "Strengthening the Framework for G-20 Engagement of Non-members", which was issued as a document of the General Assembly (A/64/706, annex). The United Nations is the only global body with universal participation and unquestioned legitimacy. G-20 processes should recognize and reflect this reality. The G-20 and its actions and decisions should thus complement and strengthen the United Nations system. Given the growing agenda of the G-20, the working relationship between the G-20 and international organizations could increase in quantity and intensify in scope. In an effort to make such interactions between the G-20 and international organizations more transparent and in order to strengthen the formal governance arrangements already in place, the 3G would like to make the following recommendations: :: If international organizations are asked to carry out mandates of the G-20, such mandates should be referred, after the relevant G-20 summits, to the organizations' formal decision-making processes for appropriate consideration and decision. It is also important that the G-20 look into whether the necessary funding is provided for the accomplishment of these mandates and avoid cross-subsidization by core resources. If there is a shortfall in funding, the respective governing bodies should decide on the next steps. :: Governing bodies of international organizations and the broader membership should receive regular briefings by their secretariats on the status of implementation of G-20-related mandates. :: Studies carried out by international organizations on behalf of the G-20 should be made available to all Member States. If appropriate, the findings should be discussed with Member States in a timely manner. :: Decisions relating to governance, strategies, management and financing of international organizations should be made in the respective governing bodies of the organizations in question. The 3G believes that implementing these recommendations will promote transparency and inclusiveness vis-à-vis the actions taken by the G-20 and contribute to strengthening global governance. It could also help avoid the creation of an informal governance structure in relation to these international organizations. 