%%%NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|ADVISORY OPINIONS|DISARMAMENT AGREEMENTS|

Sixty-sixth session Items 98 (o), (r) and (x) of the provisional agenda* * A/66/150. ** The information contained in the addendum was received after the submission of the main report. General and complete disarmament Nuclear disarmament Reducing nuclear danger Follow-up to the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons Report of the Secretary-General Addendum** Page III. Information received from Governments Guyana Portugal [Original: English] [15 July 2011] Guyana reaffirms its commitment to make diligent efforts to fulfil its international obligations in respect of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, including implementation of General Assembly resolution 65/76, which Guyana was honoured to co-sponsor. In this regard, the Government of Guyana submits as follows: The only protection against the catastrophic consequences posed by the continuing existence of nuclear weapons is the total elimination of such weapons. To this end, Guyana expresses its commitment, as a party indirectly concerned with the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons, to the realization of the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world. Guyana, as a State party to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, is cognizant of the need to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to the cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament. At the same time, Guyana reaffirms the inalienable right of all States to acquire and develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Guyana shares the General Assembly's concerns with regard to the unequivocal commitment of nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, agreed at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Guyana supports the Secretary-General's five-point proposal for nuclear disarmament insofar as it proposes the consideration of negotiations on a nuclear weapons convention or agreement on a framework of separate mutually reinforcing instruments, backed by a strong system of verification. This would be a progressive attempt towards the full realization of the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. Moreover, Guyana strongly affirms the need, as recognized by the General Assembly, for a multilaterally negotiated and legally binding instrument to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the threat or use of nuclear weapons pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons. Non-nuclear-weapon States are especially at risk and are largely unable to protect themselves against the threat or use of nuclear weapons by nuclear-weapon States. Such an instrument would thereby serve as a good-faith initial undertaking towards achieving the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. Although Guyana itself has never experienced any instance of the development, production, testing, deployment, stockpiling, threat or use of nuclear weapons, Guyana is desirous of a nuclear-weapon-free international environment and to this end, shares in those international controls that are effective in this regard, especially those that would squarely fall within the call of the International Court of Justice for an "obligation to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament", as underlined by the General Assembly in paragraph 1 of its resolution 65/76. Guyana respectfully submits that it has always stood for the peaceful resolution of matters that threaten international peace and regional security, and to this end, reaffirms its recognition that the achievement of a nuclear-weapon-free world is a progressive step in furthering the full realization of such peace and security and the advancement of mankind. Portugal has been an active player in all relevant forums in which disarmament and the proliferation of nuclear weapons are discussed. Portugal shares the goal of a world free of such weapons, in a context of peace, security, and good faith. In fact, Portugal believes an environment of enduring peace and security, as achieved namely through regional collective security alliances, is key to the establishment of multilateral negotiations conducted in good faith, as underlined in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution 65/76. Portugal is a member of all relevant nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation regimes, treaties and organizations, incorporating recommended guidelines and best practices into its national legislation and administrative procedures. At the same time, Portugal shares information with entities, both national and international, so as to assist the international community in fighting against all illicit nuclear-related procurement by countries of concern and nonlegitimate actors. In addition, as a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Portugal works actively in order to strengthen all provisions of the Treaty, including its safeguard system. 