%%%OBSERVER STATUS|

Sixty-sixth session Request for the inclusion of an item in the provisional agenda of the sixty-sixth session Observer status for the International Emergency Management Organization in the General Assembly Letter dated 20 May 2011 from the Permanent Representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General * Reissued for technical reasons on 22 June 2011. In accordance with rule 13 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, I have the honour to request the inclusion of an item entitled "Observer status for the International Emergency Management Organization in the General Assembly" in the provisional agenda of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly. In accordance with rule 20 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, an explanatory memorandum (annex I) and a draft resolution (annex II) are attached to the present letter. With the aim of supporting the integration process of the International Emergency Management Organization into the United Nations system, the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Macedonia has sent letters with similar content to the President of the General Assembly and the President of the Economic and Social Council. I have the further honour to request that the present letter and its annexes be circulated as a document of the General Assembly. (Signed) Pajo Avirovikj Ambassador Permanent Representative Explanatory memorandum The International Emergency Management Organization (IEMO) is an intergovernmental organization established on 14 April 2006 and governed by statutes, open to States and international organizations, endowed with juridical personality under international law; it is composed of a decision-making Council and a directional secretariat. The goal of IEMO is to work on both natural and man-made emergencies, with special focus on integrated emergency prevention, preparedness, mitigation and recovery as well as on under-assisted emergencies and in support of relevant United Nations General Assembly resolutions. Council According to the statutes, the Council, the major body of the organization, is composed of the voting representatives as well as observers, and decides by simple majority (one vote for each voting State). Each State designates a representative within the Council, charged to follow the activities of the organization, while international organizations may participate in the Council in the capacity of observer. The Council convenes in ordinary session once a year, normally parallel to the International Conference on Emergency Prevention, convened annually by the organization. Secretariat The directional secretariat, executive organ of the organization, is in charge of the operational activity and ensures the keeping of the records and the proceedings of the Council and the fulfilment of secretarial duties in favour of the Council. It includes the Office of the President, principal officer of the organization, who nominates and coordinates the other officers, the Office of the Inspector-General, in charge of internal affairs, as well as departments and commissions. Members Associated members of the organization are 101 States (as at 31 December 2010) which permanently receive its services; the founder members were Benin, Madagascar and Somalia, joined by Lebanon. Members affiliated with the organization and therefore represented by their respective national emergency management agencies and competent ministries are: Algeria, Burundi, Colombia, Congo, Eritrea, Equatorial Guinea, Kenya, Macedonia, Malawi, Nigeria, Pakistan, Senegal, Samoa and Zambia. The organization is self-funding through specific programmes in support of relevant emergency relief entities. The organization is growing rapidly and on 22 June 2010 became an official participant in the United Nations Global Compact, registered as No. 11929; and is duly filed at No. C-J0824 in the Yearbook of International Organizations, an initiative in formal relations with UNESCO. Relevance of the activities of the organization to matters of interest to the General Assembly The organization acts on the basis of and in response to specific General Assembly resolutions focused on emergency preparedness and disaster reduction, resolutions 46/182 of 19 December 1991, 56/103 of 14 December 2001, 56/195 of 21 December 2001, 59/231 of 22 December 2004, 62/92 of 17 December 2007, 62/192 of 19 December 2007, 63/137 of 11 December 2008, 63/217 of 19 December 2008 and 64/200 of 21 December 2009. The main specificity of the organization resides in its integrated approach to natural, man-made and complex emergencies, as well as in its focus on neglected emergencies, specifically oriented to complex emergencies, in a scenario where natural disasters and humanitarian crises are normally dealt with separately. For the organization's vision the concept of emergency should be conceived as including both natural disasters and humanitarian urgencies as well as complex and mixed crises, in view of the growing level of complexity in the present worldwide emergency scenario. Prevention is essential and represents the only way to reduce the increasing number of emergencies at the international level. The principal activity of the organization consists in the mobilization of under-mobilized resources in support of the United Nations system, by responding to the aforesaid General Assembly resolutions through the establishment of a large arrangement of about 750 emergency-related entities called the Global Prevention Network and based on the statistical support of the IEPS (Integrated Emergency Prevention System) an advanced statistical tool aimed at evaluating in an integrated way natural, man-made and complex emergency risk assessment and on which the United Nations shall surely count to attain the goals of the various General Assembly resolutions focused on humanitarian issues. As far as the diffusion of the culture of prevention and the sensitization to assistance in neglected emergencies is concerned (to avoid duplication in emergency aid and to prevent the evolution of incipient urgencies into larger emergencies), the organization promotes its International Emergency Prevention Day on 14 April each year, anniversary of the organization's foundation, as well as its annual International Conference on Emergency Prevention. The IEMO International Conference on Emergency Prevention enjoys the patronage of the United Nations Capital Development Fund, the presidency of the European Parliament, and governmental authorities and competent ministries of various countries. Operational framework of action of the International Emergency Management Organization The International Emergency Management Organization works for the diffusion of emergency prevention in support of the Millennium Development Goals, considering prevention one of the key factors for development. The organization works through an integrated approach on five specific sectors concerning emergency prevention, which reflect the functioning of its Global Prevention Network and its integrated emergency prevention system: (1) Natural catastrophes (2) Technological emergencies (3) Food and water shortages (4) Socio-economic and health crises (5) Political and humanitarian urgencies. Members of the organization have in common a strong sensitivity regarding emergency prevention and recovery from neglected emergencies, which enhances their respective possibilities of cooperation in respect of humanitarian, socio-economic and environmental issues. The capacity of the organization to gather under-mobilized resources in support of the United Nations system has led it to actively engage on different related issues, according to the various national situations: (1) Countries in economic and labour crisis (2) Countries in food crisis (3) Countries in socio-political emergency (4) Countries affected by natural disasters (5) States with strong demographic growth (6) Countries in environmental crisis (7) Least developed countries (8) Landlocked countries (9) Small island States (10) Countries vulnerable to complex crisis. In this way the International Emergency Management Organization, whose main objective is to strengthen resilience to emergencies as well as to work for recovery from neglected crises, operates according to relevant resolutions in which the General Assembly focuses on prevention and appeals to intergovernmental organizations to consider disaster risk assessment as an integral component of development plans and poverty eradication programmes, by assessing and managing risks prior to the occurrence of disasters. Taking into account the relevance of its activity to matters of interest to the General Assembly, the participation of the International Emergency Management Organization in the sessions of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer will decidedly enhance its effectiveness in the service of the United Nations system. Draft resolution The General Assembly, Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the International Emergency Management Organization, 1. Decides to invite the International Emergency Management Organization to participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer; 2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution. 