%%%CULTURE|CULTURAL PLURALISM|DEVELOPMENT|DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|

Sixty-sixth session * A/66/150. Item 21 of the provisional agenda* Culture and development Note by the Secretary-General The Secretary-General hereby transmits the report prepared by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in accordance with General Assembly resolution 65/166. Report of the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Summary The present report, prepared by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), presents progress made in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 65/166, entitled "Culture and development", and includes an assessment of the value and desirability of organizing a United Nations conference on culture and development. To this end, the report outlines the work undertaken by 18 United Nations entities, demonstrating the contributions of culture to development. In addition, it presents the value of convening such a conference, assessing the aim, level, format, timing and the budgetary implications. It also includes recommendations for enhancing progress towards further integration of culture into development policies and practice. Contents Page Introduction Background Interface between culture and development Progress of implementation in the United Nations system Assessment of modalities for a United Nations conference on culture and development Conclusions 1. The present report is submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 65/166, entitled "Culture and development", in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and relevant United Nations bodies and multilateral development institutions, to submit to the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session a progress report on the implementation of the resolution and to include therein an assessment of the value and desirability of organizing a United Nations conference on culture and development, including its aim, level, format and timing, as well as budgetary implications. 2. The most recent report on the topic of culture and development (A/59/202) concerned the implementation of General Assembly resolution 57/249. II. Background 3. The evolution of the concept of development from a singular universal model and vision to a broader concept that entails multiple and diverse paths has resulted in a human-centred approach to development. This broadening of the development paradigm has gradually paved the way for acknowledging the indispensable role of culture in sustainable development. Consequently, a vision of sustainable development that better reflects the complexities of societies and the contextual implications has emerged. The 1996 report of the World Commission on Culture and Development, entitled Our Creative Diversity, contributed to the conceptual advancement highlighting the fundamental cultural dimension of a human-centred development model, and proposed that culture be prioritized in development policies. UNESCO was entrusted to lead the World Decade for Cultural Development from 1988 to 1997. The decade culminated in the Stockholm Intergovernmental Conference on Cultural Policies for Development, which called for a cultural approach to human development and marked cultural policy as one of the key elements of development strategy. 4. Despite significant progress since the Stockholm Conference, the nexus between culture and development is still inadequately reflected in international development policies and culture remains ancillary in the development equation as defined by the different development objectives and measures. However, recent global developments signal a welcome trend towards the systematic integration of culture into development strategies and programmes. Among the eight thematic windows established to sustain the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, the culture and development window of the Millennium Development Goals Achievement Fund, financed by Spain, has provided an unprecedented opportunity to document the link between culture and development. Furthermore, the outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals at its sixty-fifth session (General Assembly resolution 65/1) emphasized the importance of culture for development and its contribution to the achievement of the Goals. It also encouraged international cooperation in the cultural field, aimed at achieving development objectives. This was reaffirmed by Assembly resolution 65/166, which called for the integration of culture into global and national development policies. Moreover, the Economic and Social Council recently adopted "Science, technology and innovation, and the potential of culture, for promoting sustainable development and achieving the Millennium Development Goals" as the theme for the annual ministerial review, to be held at its substantive session of 2013. The preparations for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20 Conference), scheduled to take place in 2012, provide an opportunity to genuinely assess the integration of the cultural dimension in development. III. Interface between culture and development 5. The relationship between culture and development is multifaceted. In addition to its intrinsic value, culture contributes to both the process and outcome of development. It has a cross-cutting role in achieving development goals and is a driver of development in its own right. Development initiatives and approaches that prioritize culture are likely to result in inclusive and context-sensitive development that yields equitable outcomes and enhances ownership by target beneficiaries. As such, development must be rooted in local cultures and knowledge and tailored to local circumstances in order for overall ownership to be enhanced, in line with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. Consequently, the inclusion of the cultural dimension in the conception, measurement and practice of development is key to attaining and sustaining development objectives. 6. The culture sector, encompassing cultural heritage, creative and cultural industries, cultural tourism and cultural infrastructure, generates substantial economic benefits, including job creation. Despite the lack of reliable and consolidated data on the socio-economic contribution of culture, cultural industries account for more than 3.4 per cent of the global gross domestic product, with a global market share of approximately 1.6 trillion United States dollars in 2007, which represents almost double the amount estimated for international tourism receipts for the same year, according to a report carried out by PricewaterhouseCoopers in 2008. As outlined in the same report, cultural and creative industries represent one of the most rapidly expanding sectors in the global economy, with a growth rate of 17.6 per cent in the Middle East, 13.9 per cent in Africa, 11.9 per cent in South America, 9.7 per cent in Asia, 6.9 per cent in Oceania, and 4.3 per cent in North and Central America. The report also records how the culture sector grew steadily in the 1980s and exponentially in the 1990s, when the creative economies in the member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development grew at an annual rate twice that of service industries and four times that of manufacturing. 7. National economies significantly benefit from the cultural sector. For instance, IBF International Consulting reported in 2007 that Mali's culture sector accounted for 5.8 per cent of employment in 2004 and 2.38 per cent of the gross domestic product in 2006, while Thailand has an estimated two million craft workers, of whom almost half work full time in the craft trade. Similarly, the creative sector in Brazil contributed 6.7 per cent of the gross domestic product in 1998, according to UNESCO data in "The power of culture for development". Promoting and further developing the culture sector as a powerful economic sector generates employment and provides outlets for innovation. 8. The tourism sector has diversified to become one of the fastest growing economic sectors, especially in developing countries. Gross worldwide tourism receipts grew at an average rate of 7 per cent from 1998 to 2008; according to figures released in June 2011 by the World Tourism Organization (UNWTO), the rate of growth in the least developed countries, for the same period, was 12 per cent. In 2010, international tourism generated 919 billion dollars in export earnings. Emerging and developing countries accounted for 47 per cent of world international tourism arrivals and 36.9 per cent of world international tourism receipts in 2010. Cultural tourism presently accounts for 40 per cent of world tourism revenues. Cultural heritage sites in general, and in particular, those inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List, generate substantial revenues and employment from tourism. The same applies to intangible cultural heritage, which sustains living cultural expressions and traditional know-how, as well as performing arts. Museums and other cultural institutions also significantly contribute to economic investments and benefits. Therefore, identifying tourism as a subsector for investment would encourage investment in infrastructure and stimulate local development. 9. Though inherently complex and difficult to quantify, investing in intercultural dialogue can help prevent conflicts, build peace and protect the rights of marginalized groups, thus creating conditions for achieving development goals. By promoting understanding and reconciliation, intercultural dialogue transcends barriers between and within cultures, serving as a valuable lever to counter ignorance, prejudice and exclusion. In addition to fostering social cohesion, culture is an essential component of human development, as it provides a sense of identity and is a source of creativity at both individual and societal levels. With globalization and technological advances presenting opportunities as well as threats, culture-sensitive approaches help to protect vulnerable communities from the pressure of homogenization, to the enrichment of all societies. 10. Local and indigenous knowledge systems and environmental management practices provide valuable insight and tools for tackling ecological challenges, preventing the loss of biodiversity, reducing land degradation and mitigating the effects of climate change. With the profound development implications of climate change, capitalizing on the positive practices embedded in traditional cultures that value the balance between the natural and human worlds can contribute towards achieving development objectives. Seeking synergies between traditional and modern environmental practices and strengthening community participation in conservation initiatives are central aspects of environmental sustainability. 11. Although there is no explicit reference to culture in the Millennium Development Goals, culture bears direct and indirect effects on their attainment. The cultural dimension in development reinforces national ownership of development initiatives by ensuring responsive and context-appropriate development policies, aligned with national development priorities. The economic prospects of the culture sector are particularly relevant for developing countries, given their rich cultural heritage and substantial labour force. Sustainable tourism and the culture and creative industries are strategic outlets for income generation and poverty reduction. Cultural industries require limited capital investment and have low entry barriers. Culture-related economic opportunities are not easily outsourced, making them attractive to investors. Effective promotion of the cultural industries is likely to have direct impact on vulnerable populations, owing to the significant reliance of the culture economy on the informal sector, where poor and marginalized populations, including women, often find employment, and can thereby stimulate social inclusion while maximizing jobs and trade opportunities. Development experiences indicate that the economic empowerment of women frequently results in a multiplier effect, with community gains and economic growth. Besides empowering marginalized communities, the cultural industries encourage innovation, support skill development and generate entrepreneurial capital within local communities. IV. Progress of implementation in the United Nations system United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 12. As the only United Nations agency with a specific mandate in the field of culture, UNESCO strategic programmes are diverse and seek to foster cultural diversity, intercultural dialogue and a culture of peace, as well as to demonstrate the fundamental linkage between culture and sustainable development. For UNESCO, the cultural dimension of development entails protecting and promoting cultural diversity in all its manifestations, including safeguarding tangible and intangible cultural heritage, preserving the diversity of cultural expressions, mainstreaming cultural approaches to the prevention of HIV/AIDS and to material health, as well as advancing culturally sensitive policies and actions. 13. During the past year, UNESCO has consolidated the repositioning of culture in development through a range of analytical, normative, technical and operational initiatives and tools. Among other benefits, these initiatives advanced the aims of the resolution. Multiple donors support UNESCO culture-related operational projects that promote local development. 14. Eight normative instruments, including seven conventions, guide UNESCO engagement in the field of culture. These are: the Universal Copyright Convention; the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict; the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property; the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage; the UNESCO Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity; the Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage; the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage; and the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. Drawing on these instruments, UNESCO has developed several tools and capacity-building activities to pursue the global culture and development agenda. 15. With regard to the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, in particular its provisions for the promotion of cultural industries and expressions, capacity-building initiatives include an expert facility programme (totalling 1 million euros and funded by the European Union) that seeks to strengthen the system of governance for culture through technical assistance missions. In addition, UNESCO has produced a series of innovative policy, research and educational tools, such as the policy guide for developing cultural and creative industries and the online resource hub, "Culture and creative industries around the world". Also in the framework of that Convention, UNESCO encourages public-private partnerships through its Global Alliance for Cultural Diversity, a mechanism that promotes collaborative arrangements to strengthen cultural industries in developing countries. With funds in excess of 4 million dollars, the International Fund for Cultural Diversity currently supports 31 projects from 24 developing countries. These projects will contribute to a global database on best practice for culture and development projects. 16. In relation to the Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage, a large-scale capacity-building programme supporting ratification and effective implementation has been launched. A group of 60 experts, including 20 from Africa, received training and continue to participate in more than 30 capacity-building activities worldwide. The global capacity-building strategy is supported by the Fund for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage and by extrabudgetary contributions, amounting to approximately 10 million dollars for a two-year period. 17. In line with the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity, UNESCO developed the "Cultural Diversity Lens", a tool that enables policymakers and practitioners to assess development policies and programmes from a cultural diversity perspective. Employing this lens, UNESCO conducted workshops that led to the review of 12 United Nations Development Assistance Framework documents and outcomes, of 8 joint programmes of the United Nations and of 50 project documents. Furthermore, the cultural policies of nine countries were reviewed to reflect cultural diversity principles and 11 United Nations country teams were trained to take culture into account when designing programmes and strategies. 18. To inform national policymakers of the need to protect underwater cultural heritage from looting, UNESCO, in collaboration with different partners, organized seven regional conferences on the Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage. These meetings focused on improving legal protection, raising awareness of underwater heritage conservation and capacity-building in the field of underwater archaeology and heritage management. 19. In the framework of the preparations for the recently adopted global World Heritage Capacity-Building Strategy, 2,864 individuals participated in 32 capacity-building trainings conducted in 5 regions, with women representing 37 per cent of participants. In 2012, the theme of the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage will be "World Heritage and sustainable development: the role of local communities in the management of World Heritage Sites". UNESCO continues to work on case studies, in the framework of other conventions, that demonstrate the crucial role of local communities in the socio-economic development of World Heritage sites, while maintaining their outstanding universal value and integrity. A coordination meeting with the secretariats of other biodiversity-related conventions took place in April 2011. 20. Regarding the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, UNESCO combats illicit trafficking of cultural objects through strategic partnerships, awareness-raising and capacity-building. Several legal, practical and awareness-raising tools, such as the Database of National Cultural Heritage Laws, have been developed. National and regional trainings organized by UNESCO in 2011 include workshops in Egypt, Mongolia, Namibia and the Philippines. 21. In addition, UNESCO has undertaken measures to respond to the increased demand for data and to support the strategic integration of culture in development policies. To better measure the impact and relevance of cultural policies and initiatives, the UNESCO Institute for Statistics developed the UNESCO Framework for Cultural Statistics, a tool that defines culture for statistical purposes and allows for the production of internationally comparable data. The Institute is also advancing rapidly on the production of data on employment in the culture sector. Building on recently generated data and experiences gained from implementing culture-related development projects worldwide, the innovative culture for development indicator suite informs decision-making by providing qualitative and quantitative indicators covering seven development areas. 22. To respond to the global HIV/AIDS epidemic, the UNESCO culture, HIV and AIDS programme supports policy and planning that is gender-responsive, human rights-based and built on a thorough analysis of the sociocultural specificities of the communities concerned. Culturally appropriate approaches stress the need for multiple, context-specific biomedical, behavioural and structural interventions. UNESCO developed a series of guideline materials for the design of cultural approaches to HIV/AIDS prevention and care, including an interactive e-learning tool for project officers. Other programme activities include nurturing "enabling environments" for culturally appropriate HIV and AIDS policies, and strengthening local research. 23. The contribution of the culture and creative industries to sustainable development is strengthened through the culture and development window of the Achievement Fund, of which UNESCO has been designated Convenor. With a budget of 95 million dollars, 18 joint programmes are supported worldwide under this inter-agency initiative, which builds on culture as an asset for socio-economic development and a factor for social cohesion and peace. The cultural dimensions covered by the programmes range from cultural heritage to cultural industries and cultural tourism to intercultural dialogue. National ownership with community-based action is one of numerous strengths of the joint programmes, which involve coordination with economy and finance, culture, tourism and environment ministries. The joint programmes on culture and development have produced a number of tangible results in areas such as tourism, heritage promotion and conservation, craft and creative industries and intercultural dialogue. As living laboratories for "Delivering as one", the joint programmes have generated considerable innovation and knowledge in terms of inter-agency cooperation and programming and have contributed to advancing United Nations reform at the country level, building on the comparative advantage of each entity. 24. A two-year knowledge management system project on culture and development aims to capitalize on the experience of the 18 joint programmes on culture and development funded by the Achievement Fund, and to capture, codify, translate and disseminate knowledge with a view to learning, raising awareness and informing future development policy and programming. The project will enable the further assessment of the linkages between culture and development, including the impact of culture on the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 25. On 1 July 2011, UNESCO and the World Bank signed a memorandum of understanding formalizing ongoing cooperation on culture and development, with a framework for technical work in the areas of preservation and rehabilitation of historic cities, conservation of natural heritage sites, cultural indicators, the economics of culture and the promotion of cultural diversity. UNESCO is exploring other potential partnerships to strengthen culture and development linkages. 26. UNESCO supports multiple efforts geared at harnessing indigenous knowledge. It coordinated the elaboration of a joint reflection paper by the InterAgency Support Group on Indigenous People's Issues, on the theme of indigenous people and the role of their culture and identity in development, in the light of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, as a contribution to the ninth session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. In addition, UNESCO further consolidated its support for cultural approaches to natural resources management, including the preservation and application of local and indigenous knowledge for environmental sustainability, through a joint programme with the secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. Strengthening the linkages between culture and biodiversity, the joint programme employs a holistic approach consistent with cultural values, knowledge systems and livelihoods that contributes to conservation as well as the sustainable and equitable use of biodiversity. 27. With the aim of optimizing the contribution of culture to sustainable development, field offices have implemented General Assembly resolution 65/166 through capacity-building, awareness-raising, knowledge exchanges, culture mainstreaming, fund mobilization and support for the strengthening of national legal and policy frameworks. 28. In response to the General Assembly's request, the Director-General of UNESCO invited all relevant United Nations bodies to provide contributions on the implementation of the resolution, since its adoption on 20 December 2010. The following 17 organizations responded. United Nations Development Programme 29. The primary engagement of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in the area of culture and development is through the culture and development window of the Achievement Fund. Alongside other United Nations entities, UNDP participates in the implementation of the 18 joint programmes on culture and development. UNDP administers the Fund on behalf of the United Nations system. 30. UNDP implements other initiatives aligned with General Assembly resolution 65/166, including the biennial Equator Prize that supports efforts to reduce poverty through the sustainable use of biodiversity, and promotes sustainable development that respects the rights of indigenous people through the Global Environment Facility Small Grants Programme. Under the first pillar of its Millennium Development Goals "Breakthrough Strategy", UNDP continues to implement the Millennium Development Goals acceleration framework for 14 countries across the globe. The tool, developed by UNDP and endorsed by the United Nations Development Group, aids Governments and development partners in examining issues of participation, discrimination and cultural exclusion, in line with resolution 65/166, as they relate to bottlenecks hampering the progress of interventions based on the Millennium Development Goals. The bottleneck assessment under the framework includes questions concerning reducing language barriers and respecting indigenous peoples' practices in public services such as health and education. 31. On 20 May 2011, UNDP, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the International Labour Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund launched the first global United Nations inter-agency initiative to advance the rights of indigenous peoples, the United Nations Indigenous Peoples' Partnership. Furthermore, the Human Development Report, together with other UNDP publications, underscores culture as an integral part of sustainable development and achieving the Millennium Development Goals. In addition, the Assistant Administrator of UNDP launched a new report, in collaboration with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), entitled Creative Economy Report 2010: a Feasible Development Option, which reviews the market situation for creative industries and the potential of cultural industries for developing countries that seek to diversify their economies and progress in one of the most vibrant sectors of the world economy. Development Operations Coordination Office 32. Pursuant to paragraph 6 of the resolution, the Development Operations Coordination Office communicated the text of the resolution to all resident coordinators, inviting them to further integrate and mainstream culture into their programmes within the United Nations Development Assistance Framework. Currently, some 60 per cent of the programmes under the Framework (in 112 countries) reference culture and/or include a cultural component in their activities. United Nations Industrial Development Organization 33. In its strategy for the development of creative industries, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) seeks to empower entrepreneurial women, youth, rural groups and peripheral communities to respond to market opportunities utilizing the rich creative cultural heritage and diverse creative knowledge to produce innovative goods and services. To this end, a targeted environment of policy support measures, microcredit as well as venture funds and business support mechanisms are put in place. In relation to the economic potential of creative knowledge for multimedia and audio-visual production, UNIDO assisted eight island States in the Caribbean to promote entrepreneurship, develop frameworks and enhance institutional capacities for business development services for the creative industries. Through South-South Cooperation, the project built the capacities of national as well as regional counterparts, using UNIDO methodologies for entrepreneurship development and business development services. 34. UNIDO supports specific policies and advocacy measures to redress exclusion of indigenous communities from the benefits of activities related to creative industries. For example, the "Entrepreneurship for Creative Industries" project in China, implemented within the United Nations Development Assistance Framework "Outcome One" programme for 2008-2011, seeks to develop social and economic policies for human-centred, sustainable and equitable growth. 35. Under the prevailing conditions of global competition and concerns for harnessing environment-friendly resources, creative industries are considered to be a key sector for operationalizing new perspectives and technologies, through sustainable national and industrial development strategies for poverty reduction. UNIDO has produced two substantial documents on creative industry development. In response to increasing requests from Member States, UNIDO intensified its technical assistance to promote the development of cultural assets through the creative industries. That includes addressing insufficient quality standards, inadequate supply capacity, insufficient market linkages and limited commercialization of creative industries. Furthermore, UNIDO developed relevant linkages with other sectors, including agribusiness, in order to enhance the potential for job creation and human development, based on traditional and cultural heritage. World Tourism Organization 36. The World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) recognizes sustainable tourism as a powerful tool for development and cultural diversity and as a key contributor to local economies worldwide. The advancement of sustainable tourism, in a manner that establishes a balance between environmental, economic and sociocultural aspects of tourism development, lies at the heart of UNWTO programmes. The Global Code of Ethics for Tourism, the guiding policy document of UNWTO, unequivocally affirms the importance of culture for sustainable development, economic growth, human enrichment and poverty eradication. The Code promotes cultural diversity and advocates for cultural tourism as an essential component of sustainability. 37. Within the framework of its capacity-building activities, UNWTO developed a tourism management programme at heritage sites to facilitate the development of policy and operational guidelines for addressing tourist congestion at cultural and natural heritage sites, and for enhancing the tourism sector's ability to develop and present destinations and heritage sites in a more comprehensive manner. 38. UNWTO acknowledges that linking tourism with cultural heritage better serves local economies. When managed well, cultural tourism protects a nation's natural and cultural treasures and improves the quality of life for residents and visitors. A handbook for the tourism sector on communicating heritage will further contribute to capacity-building activities on cultural tourism and consolidate the creative sector. The first UNWTO study on tourism and intangible cultural heritage, which is expected to be published in 2011, provides comprehensive research and innovative forms of policymaking through case study analysis, drawn from across five continents, on the links between tourism development and intangible cultural heritage. UNWTO is a member of the steering group for the UNESCO programme on World Heritage and sustainable tourism. 39. The Technical Cooperation and Services Department of UNWTO implements many cooperation projects where culture is the major focus. The tourism development master plan for the State of Punjab in India includes sustainable development of cultural tourism at some of the prime locations in the State, where cultural tourism will open up new avenues for socio-economic development of the local communities through job creation and income generation, particularly for youth and women. Within the framework of the Achievement Fund, UNWTO, together with other United Nations entities, is implementing the joint programme for the mobilization of the Dahshur World Heritage Site for community development in Egypt. 40. In 2002, the UNWTO "Sustainable Tourism Eliminating Poverty" initiative was launched to reduce poverty levels by promoting sustainable forms of tourism. To date, 24 regional and national trainings on tourism and poverty reduction have been organized to build capacities among public officials, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and communities in developing countries, with a total participation of over 2,000 officials. With the support of a wide range of public and private sector organizations, 97 projects are already being implemented, benefiting 33 developing countries. Projects range from the training of local guides and hotel employees to facilitating the involvement of local residents in tourism development around natural and cultural heritage sites and establishing business linkages between poor producers and tourism enterprises. Relevant examples of such projects with a clear cultural heritage component can be found in several countries, including Ethiopia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic and the United Republic of Tanzania. Finally, UNWTO has published five reports providing evidence of the impact of tourism in reducing poverty levels, as well as recommendations on how to maximize these impacts. World Bank 41. The World Bank's policies support culture as a key component of the development paradigm, with significant implications for social cohesion, opportunities for economic growth and positive synergies with poverty reduction strategies. Cultural considerations and cultural development objectives have been set for an increasing number of projects that are primarily generated in the following areas: (a) urban development, which promotes the rehabilitation of historic cities and sites, their accessibility, conservation and presentation; (b) local economic development, as it relates to the activities of small and medium enterprises, especially of the informal sector, which lie at the core of handicrafts production and commerce; (c) social development, which promotes cultural diversity in order to ensure social cohesion among diverse social groups and the integration of indigenous peoples, minorities and migrants into the social fabric; and (d) sustainable tourism development, which promotes economic investments primarily in the hospitality business and services related to natural and cultural landscapes. The total volume of the World Bank's investments in development projects with a cultural dimension has increased from 1.3 billion dollars, between 1990 and 1999, to 4 billion dollars between 2000 and 2009, with a majority of the investments generated under urban development. 42. The World Bank's assistance to the Governments of developing countries and emerging economies extends to analytical work and technical assistance to assess institutional frameworks and improve the effectiveness of national and local agencies responsible for the management of cultural assets. The World Bank also conducts research work on policy topics such as cultural economics and the threats to cultural heritage caused by increasing natural hazards and the impact of climate change. International Fund for Agricultural Development 43. As part of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) engagement with indigenous peoples, the following activities were carried out in 2011, in order to raise public awareness of indigenous peoples' cultural diversity. In May, at the meeting of the World Summit on the Information Society Forum in Geneva, IFAD delivered a presentation entitled "Promoting indigenous peoples' education -- IFAD engagement with indigenous peoples", which highlighted development with culture and identity. In June, IFAD sponsored the first "Indigenous Terra Madre" forum, an event focused on strengthening the food cultures of indigenous peoples and creating spaces for the expression of indigenous voices in the ongoing food and climate debate. 44. IFAD is currently implementing its policy on engagement with indigenous peoples, which includes principles of engagement relating to "cultural heritage and identity as assets", through which IFAD will build upon indigenous peoples' cultural distinctiveness and assist communities in taking full advantage of their traditional knowledge, culture, governance systems and natural resources. The IFAD Indigenous Peoples Assistance Facility finances projects designed and implemented by indigenous peoples' communities and includes "development with culture and identity" as one of the selection criteria for financing. At an IFAD workshop in February 2011, the process of establishing an indigenous peoples' forum at IFAD was initiated. The forum's objectives would include the strengthening of partnerships between IFAD and indigenous peoples, in order to address poverty and sustainable development with culture and identity. 45. IFAD funded a grant to Oxfam Italy for a project addressing the marginalization of poor farmers and migrants from Ecuador, Morocco and Senegal through market linkages and the promotion of diversity. The project empowers poor rural communities and enhances their income generation opportunities by rescuing and conserving target plant species and their associated indigenous knowledge; enhancing cultivating practices; developing commercialization and marketing; and raising public awareness on the value of target species in nutritional security, health and income generation. An important dimension of the programme was to ensure cultural continuity. 46. The IFAD Indigenous Peoples Assistance Facility has supported a wide variety of microprojects focusing on indigenous traditional knowledge and community practices of environmental management. Several such projects revitalized traditional agricultural systems and handicraft techniques, while others aimed at valuing and strengthening indigenous peoples' communities' identities, traditional customs and languages. World Intellectual Property Organization 47. Consistent with the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) focus on the linkage between intellectual property and the preservation of the public domain, WIPO undertook a series of initiatives, including the second survey on voluntary registration and deposit systems (on repositories of cultural and historical heritage); the scoping study on copyright and related rights and the Public Domain (a comparison of national legislations that directly or indirectly define the public domain); and the survey of private copyright documentation systems and practices. In October 2011, WIPO will organize a conference on copyright documentation and infrastructure to showcase the findings. 48. More than 35 countries have used the WIPO Guide on Surveying the Economic Contribution of the Copyright-based Industries, which includes industries considered to be of great cultural value. This informs national development as measured through gross domestic product, employment and trade statistics. Several countries use the outcome reports and studies as a basis to further study and develop their creative and cultural industries-related policy. Furthermore, WIPO assists member States in developing national strategies on the creative industries. The Creative Industries Division of WIPO has developed several publications on specific creative industries. A guide to assessing the economic, social and cultural impact of the creative industries is being developed. The multi-stakeholder project includes inputs from UNESCO and Eurostat, among others, and is designed to enable countries to address cultural and developmental policy issues. 49. Upon request, WIPO conducts capacity-building activities. In 2011, the Copyright Development Services Division organized 20 activities, including 7 national, 7 regional and 2 interregional training programmes, and 4 expert missions for developing countries. Moreover, the Traditional Knowledge Division of WIPO, in collaboration with the Government of Oman, organized an international technical symposium entitled "Intellectual property and sustainable development: documentation and registration of traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions", held in June 2011. In May 2011, WIPO and the International Council of Museums signed a memorandum of understanding pledging collaboration and cooperation on intellectual property issues of interest to museums. WIPO participated in several awareness-raising and technical cooperation activities in numerous countries. Notably, WIPO participated in the work of the independent expert in the field of cultural rights on access to cultural heritage. Lastly, WIPO produced a United Nations Television and Video film entitled "Digitizing traditional culture in Kenya". Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 50. In 2011, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and UNESCO will jointly organize a workshop on the quality of food and agricultural products. To prepare for the workshop, FAO initiated a study on the potential of origin-linked products to preserve and promote the UNESCO Programme on Man and the Biosphere, World Heritage sites, the FAO Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems and other areas of natural and cultural interests. The workshop will identify areas in which FAO and UNESCO can further collaborate in the preservation and promotion of natural and cultural heritage. United Nations Environment Programme 51. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) emphasizes the importance of a holistic approach to achieving environmental protection and sustainable development, including the interlinkages between global environmental changes and adverse social, cultural and economic effects. In the light of the decision by the Governing Council of UNEP, at its sixteenth session, to focus on environment and cultural diversity, UNEP environmental protection activities include biodiversity, traditional knowledge, indigenous languages and practices, cultural diversity and biodiversity and cultural behaviours. UNEP, in the fifth report of its Global Environment Outlook series, will consider the interlinkages between knowledge and practices of indigenous communities, and the goals of conservation and sustainable use; the analysis will be submitted as a contribution to the preparation process for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. 52. Key initiatives include the production of awareness-raising materials for the annual celebration of the International Day of the World's Indigenous People and for several UNEP publications, such as the special issue of the youth magazine "TUNZA" on indigenous knowledge and the environment and articles on indigenous knowledge in "The Environment Times", a publication of the UNEP Global Resource Information Database in Norway (GRID-Arendal). 53. Using the framework of multilateral environment agreements, UNEP focuses on identifying cultural and community rights to biodiversity management, including conservation, sustainable use and access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing. Linking the concepts of access- and benefit-sharing and traditional knowledge, UNEP worked with relevant stakeholders, including UNESCO, to develop a set of biocultural community protocols to help mainstream culture, biodiversity management and traditional knowledge into livelihood securities, economic wellbeing and sustainable development. In 2010, a website developed jointly with UNESCO was launched by UNEP, as part of the International Year of Biodiversity, to showcase work on biocultural community protocols. A policy brief on communities and well-being, developed by UNEP and other partners and addressing rights-based approaches, development and community knowledge services, was distributed at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, held in Nagoya, Japan, in October 2010. 54. UNEP is one of five United Nations entities participating in a joint programme in Namibia, funded by the Achievement Fund. The project builds on cultural and natural heritage as a basis for the development of cultural tourism and targets ethnic minority groups. UNEP is responsible for mainstreaming environment into cultural tourism by supporting the Government of Namibia in more effectively integrating and implementing the principles of cultural and natural diversity into sustainable development policies and activities. 55. In 2010, UNEP supported a project on the involvement of African nongovernmental organizations in the access- and benefit-sharing process. It explored the role of such organizations in the protection of traditional knowledge, awareness-raising and capacity-building in local communities in the context of traditional knowledge as it relates to access- and benefit-sharing legislation in some African countries. Furthermore, UNEP, in partnership with several organizations, including the Drought Monitoring Centre of the Climate Prediction and Applications Centre of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) concluded a project on harnessing and application of indigenous knowledge in nature conservation and natural disaster management in Africa. This knowledge, in line with African traditions, has been handed down orally from generation to generation, hence the compelling need to document it. In 2010, a book entitled Traditional Knowledge in Policy and Practice: Approaches to Development and Human Wellbeing was published by the United Nations University Press, with support from UNEP. Within the framework of the Convention on Biological Diversity articles on access- and benefit-sharing and traditional knowledge, UNEP assisted Parties to the Convention to finalize traditional knowledge-related work programmes and complete negotiations under the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 56. Since 2000, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) mandate has included conducting policy-oriented research to assist developing countries in identifying innovative policy options for optimizing the economic contributions of the creative industries, in order to foster trade and development gains towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. The UNCTAD Creative Economy Programme works on the development dimensions of creative industries. Key contributions of UNCTAD include the joint UNCTAD and UNDP "Creative Economy" reports of 2008 and 2010, as well as the UNCTAD global database on the creative economy. UNCTAD Creative Economy Programme e-news raises awareness of the importance of culture and the growing contributions of the creative economy to fostering sustainable and inclusive development, facilitates networking and partnerships, and enhances synergy between key stakeholders. 57. In 2010, UNCTAD prepared country profiles and a user guide for the UNCTAD Global Database on the Creative Economy. Demand-driven capacity-building continues to assist end-users from all countries to assess the trade performance of their creative products in the global market. The tool is used in policy design to shape concrete actions for nurturing the creative economy. UNCTAD supports developing countries in enhancing their creative productive capacities and the appropriate institutional, regulatory and financing mechanisms to facilitate the emergence of domestic markets for culture and creative goods, as well as services. 58. UNCTAD conducted research on the linkages between the creative economy and the green economy, capturing ongoing policy debates on how creativity and biodiversity can be a win-win solution for promoting sustainable development and economic recovery. In the context of the International Year of Biodiversity, celebrated in 2010, UNCTAD launched the "eco-chic" initiative to increase awareness within the international community of environmentally and socially sensitive practices in the use of biodiversity. 59. Through its Creative Economy Programme, UNCTAD assists developing countries to put in place concerted multidisciplinary policies and inter-ministerial actions involving the areas of culture, tourism, trade, labour, technology and enterprise development. Examples include national country studies, released in June 2011, for Mozambique and Zambia. 60. Concrete initiatives to optimize the contributions of culture and the creative industries for development include the "Creative Africa Initiative" launched in 2008. It showcases the richness of African cultures and the creative talent of Africans to promote inclusive development rooted in the creative economy. Subsequently, the Prime Minister of Nigeria created the Nigerian chapter of the initiative to support the Nigerian film industry. In Ghana, Mali and Senegal, the creative economy is now part of the national strategy for poverty reduction. In 2011, UNCTAD, in collaboration with the World Meteorological Organization, launched the "Puppet Planet Project" to encourage action that addresses climate challenges and environmental degradation while promoting sustainable development and the culture/creative economy in developing countries. United Nations Institute for Training and Research 61. The United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) series on the management and conservation of World Heritage seeks to optimize the impact of UNESCO conventions on natural and cultural heritage by focusing on related national policy formulation, best practices and case studies knowledge exchange. A values-based management approach, which makes the conservation of heritage meaningful, has been developed over the course of seven workshops. The series has also focused on the innovative role that natural and cultural heritage can play in peacebuilding, using the example of Hiroshima by highlighting the resonance and relevance of its policies for other sites around the world. United Nations Office for Project Services 62. The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) contributes to the promotion of culture for sustainable development through the restoration of cultural heritage and historic buildings, the improvement of access to local markets and historical sites, and the management of small grants to help local communities address environmental challenges. UNOPS capacity-building for the development of a dynamic cultural and creative sector includes projects in Argentina and Guatemala, where UNOPS supports the respective Governments through the provision of human resource management services and information and communications technology equipment, and assists in the conservation of historical buildings. To contribute to improved access to markets, products and services, including cultural goods and cultural tourism sites, UNOPS maintains and builds large road networks throughout Africa and Asia and provides demining services. Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS 63. The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) supports evidence and rights-based responses to HIV, in order to move towards zero new infections, zero discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths. UNAIDS recognizes the central role of culture as a foundation of society, and seeks to maximize the positive contributions of cultural leaders towards responses that: (a) achieve public health goals through the implementation of evidence-supported approaches; (b) respect the dignity and rights of individuals, particularly with regard to nondiscrimination, health, security of the person, privacy and freedom from violence; and (c) include pragmatic approaches that respond to peoples' behaviours and needs. 64. UNAIDS promotes inclusive dialogue in all aspects of the HIV response, acknowledging that the behaviours and known risk factors for HIV infection can be controversial and culturally sensitive. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 65. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is deeply committed to ensuring that refugees, stateless and internally displaced persons and other persons of concern have equal access to their rights, protection, services and resources, and are able to participate as active partners in the decisions that affect them. To this end, UNHCR has committed to mainstreaming an age, gender and diversity approach in its operations worldwide. The diversity element of the approach refers to differences in values, attitudes, cultural perspectives, beliefs, ethnic background, nationality, sexual orientation, gender identity, ability, health, social status, skills and other specific personal characteristics. By analysing these dimensions as interlinked personal characteristics, UNHCR can better understand the multifaceted protection risks and capacities of individuals and communities, and address and support these more effectively. By promoting respect for difference as an enriching element of any community, UNHCR fosters full equality. National or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities or indigenous groups often experience discrimination and marginalization, factors that are compounded in forced displacement situations. UNHCR works to identify the risks, as well as the strategies to mitigate them. United Nations Human Settlements Programme 66. The United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) provides technical assistance and extensive guidance for policymakers and local leaders to assist in the development of public policies and participatory decision-making processes, with a view to contributing to the improvement of the living conditions of indigenous peoples in urban areas. In 2011, UN-Habitat produced a policy guide to secure land rights for indigenous peoples in cities, in partnership with the Global Land Tool Network. In 2010 and 2011, UN-Habitat focused on some of the specific challenges indigenous peoples are facing in cities, in particular with regards to health and the negative impacts of climate change on vulnerable urban settlements, but also to indigenous peoples' contributions to a sustainable urban development and a green economy. United Nations Population Fund 67. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) developed a "culture lens" in 2001 to integrate cultural dynamics into all its human rights-based programming on sexual and reproductive health, gender equality and population and development. Critical to this "lens", is a focus on young people as powerful enablers of the struggle against poverty and as the cultural and political drivers of development. UNFPA continues to support processes, at the national level, designed with and for youth constituencies, as part of its broader engagement for safe motherhood and family planning. 68. The Executive Director of UNFPA launched a campaign initiative, "7 Billion Actions", on World Population Day, 11 July 2011, targeting broad cultural agents of change, to work on building awareness and to magnify the opportunities and challenges of a world of seven billion people. UNFPA offices around the world are also working with faith-based non-governmental organizations and religious leaders as critical gatekeepers of culture, who form part of its Global Interfaith Network on Population and Development. The aim of the network, which has more than 500 members, is to encourage participation in national development plans and processes; build service capacities around family planning, safe motherhood, urbanization and immigration; and provide coordinated humanitarian relief efforts that take into account the specific reproductive health needs of girls and women. 69. UNFPA chairs the inter-agency task force on engaging faith-based organizations for the Millennium Development Goals. Under the aegis of that mechanism, UNFPA co-sponsors a strategic learning exchange for senior United Nations staff, based around the themes of faith, culture and development. The course is offered through the United Nations System Staff College in Turin, Italy, each year, and includes global faith-based non-governmental organizations as resources for the mutual policy and programmatic learning on culture and development. United Nations Volunteers programme 70. The United Nations Volunteers programme (UNV), in collaboration with different partners, organized multiple activities in line with the resolution, including workshops promoting cultural heritage and facilitating capacity-building for the cultural and creative industries. For instance, UNV, along with other United Nations entities, national partners and the local community, promoted Haitian art in all its forms to contribute to sustainable livelihoods, especially in the communities most devastated by the earthquake that struck Haiti in 2010. Moreover, UNDP and UNV are among several United Nations entities participating in a joint programme on creativity and cultural identity for local development, in Honduras. V. Assessment of modalities for a United Nations conference on culture and development 71. The contributions of the United Nations entities summarized in this report showcase multiple and diverse programmes and different approaches to sustainable development. They demonstrate that culture-sensitive approaches underline mandates in areas as diverse as agriculture, food security, poverty alleviation, health, environmental sustainability, urbanization, refugee protection, migration, social cohesion, human rights and gender equality. Furthermore, the contributions entail technical assistance at both a policy and an operational level, with support focusing on: capacity-building (both for institutions and individuals); awareness-raising; mainstreaming culture in development policies and programmes; conserving and leveraging cultural heritage, including indigenous knowledge as an asset for development; generating knowledge though policy-oriented research; lessons learned through implementation; and data collection for monitoring and evaluating the impact of culture on development. Collaborative efforts building on the comparative advantages of the United Nations entities and community-oriented approaches are also recurring themes. 72. The current global efforts that address gaps in achieving sustainable development and mapping the way for future development goals and approaches, including the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in Istanbul, Turkey, in May 2011, the preparations for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012 and for a summit on the Millennium Development Goals in 2015, remain insufficiently informed by the impact of culture on development, including its contribution to the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals. While future opportunities exist for examining the potential contributions of culture to achieving sustainable development, such as the annual ministerial review at the substantive session of the Economic and Social Council of 2013, they afford rather limited potential and lack appropriate expertise, among other resources, to satisfactorily address the nexus between culture and the three pillars of development. There is a need for additional quantitative data and substantial debates on the linkages between culture and development. 73. Culture-sensitive approaches and practices are neither consolidated nor fully assessed within United Nations shared policies, practices and, most importantly, vision. Consensus-building and a better articulation of a shared vision and guidelines, together with an enhanced exchange of experiences, would ensure that United Nations entities more effectively respond to the increasing demand for assistance in this sector, and would contribute to the ongoing efforts to mainstream culture into the distinctive mandates of United Nations entities. Moreover, it would facilitate further collaboration in joint programming exercises at the country level and inform the decisions of development actors. 74. A high-level culture and development conference would address the impact of culture on sustainable development, both in quantitative and qualitative terms, in order to better inform the development agenda towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals. 75. The year 2011 marks the thirteenth anniversary of the Stockholm Intergovernmental Conference on Culture Policies for Development, with its focus on "the power of culture". It provides a timely opportunity for the international community to build on the momentum, take stock and consider the appropriate manner in which to integrate the cultural dimension into the development agenda towards 2015 and beyond. 76. The proposed two-day conference could be organized in plenary sessions and round tables. Conference invitations would be extended to some 500 participants comprising of high-level Government representatives, heads of United Nations entities, representatives of development banks, non-governmental organizations, foundations, civil society and the private sector. 77. In response to the General Assembly's request, in its resolution 65/166, for a budget estimate for convening the proposed conference, it is expected that, should the conference be held at the United Nations Headquarters in New York, the minimum estimate would be 400,000 dollars, including the use of the venue, interpretation and translation services and security expenses, but excluding travel and accommodation of participants. 78. Alternatively, the conference could be hosted by a Member State. VI. Conclusions 79. General Assembly resolution 65/166 was instrumental in revitalizing the debate on the impact of culture on sustainable development, at a time when international development actors are assessing gaps in achieving development objectives in view of the upcoming United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and a summit on the Millennium Development Goals in 2015. 80. The present report presents the first opportunity to take stock of actions by United Nations entities that integrate culture, showcasing the culture-sensitive approaches to development across the United Nations system and demonstrating the impact of the culture sector on development at large, and in particular, on the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals. 81. The resolution encouraged the compilation of data, facts, figures and best practices on the linkages between culture and development, in order to demonstrate the impact of culture on the social and economic well-being of peoples and societies, thus informing national and international development policies. 82. Furthermore, the resolution facilitated greater mainstreaming of culture into United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks and fostered international partnerships in the field of culture and development, such as the memorandum of understanding recently signed by UNESCO and the World Bank. 83. The following actions could build on the achievements of 2011 and reinforce implementation of General Assembly resolution 65/166: (a) Support sustained efforts by all United Nations entities directed at enhancing understanding of the nexus between culture and sustainable development through the development of indicators, statistics and best practices to inform development policies. The Statistical Commission could be invited to address this subject and contribute to building a body of data on the relevance of investing in the culture sector; (b) Encourage studies that document the qualitative impact of culture on the well-being of society and showcase the potential of human rights-based cultural approaches to foster sustainable peace. In this regard, UNDP, in its Human Development Report, could be encouraged to reflect on the qualitative impact of culture on human development and integrate culture-based data into the human development index; (c) Pursue further efforts for the operationalization of the culture and development approach initiated under the projects funded by the Millennium Development Goals Achievement Fund, demonstrating the relevance of culture for the achievement of development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals; (d) Invite UNESCO to consider organizing the proposed conference and to look for possible modalities, in close collaboration with all concerned United Nations entities, in order to enhance understanding of the quantitative and qualitative contributions of culture for inclusive, equitable and sustainable development. The conference could sustain the momentum generated by the General Assembly resolution on culture and development and provide an opportunity to formulate a consolidated approach to culture and development throughout the United Nations system, including through a substantial outcome document with new elements and commitments by the international community. 