%%%SLAVERY|TRUST FUNDS|FUND-RAISING|PROJECT EVALUATION|PROJECT MONITORING|PROJECT FINANCE|

Sixty-sixth session * A/66/150. Item 69 (a) of the provisional agenda* Promotion and protection of human rights: implementation of human rights instruments Status of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report, which is submitted in accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/122, describes the recommendations for grants and other related decisions that were adopted by the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery at its fifteenth session, held in Geneva from 6 to 10 December 2010. The recommendations for grants were approved by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the Secretary-General on 20 January 2011. The report also provides information on policy decisions adopted by the Board in implementation of the recommendations made by the Office of Internal Oversight Services with a view to further enhancing the activities of the Fund. It updates the report submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session (A/65/94). 1. The General Assembly, in its resolution 46/122, established the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery with the purpose of extending humanitarian, legal and financial aid to individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. Funding is obtained by means of voluntary contributions from Governments, non-governmental organizations, private or public entities and individuals. II. Administration of the Fund and Board of Trustees 2. In conformity with resolution 46/122, the Fund is administered in accordance with the financial regulations and rules of the United Nations on general trust funds for humanitarian assistance, by the Secretary-General, through the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), with the advice of a Board of Trustees. 3. The Board of Trustees is composed of five United Nations experts with relevant experience in the field of human rights and, in particular, on issues of contemporary forms of slavery, serving in their personal capacities. In December 2007, the Secretary-General appointed the following members for a three-year term ending on 31 December 2010, with due regard to equitable geographical distribution: Ms. Gulnara Shahinian (Armenia), Ms. Virginia Herrera Murillo (Costa Rica), Ms. Prateep Unsongtham Hata (Thailand), Mr. Cleophas Kwdjo Mally (Togo) and Mr. David Weissbrodt (United States of America). Ms. Shahinian resigned on 23 May 2008 because she was nominated as Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences. In March 2009, the Secretary-General appointed Ms. Klara Skrivankova (Czech Republic) to replace Ms. Shahinian. In June 2011, the Secretary-General appointed the following members for a term ending on 31 December 2013, with due regard to equitable geographical distribution: Ms. Virginia Herrera Murillo (Costa Rica), Ms. Klara Skrivankova (Czech Republic), Ms. Asma Jahangir (Pakistan), Mr. George Omona (Uganda) and Mr. Michael Bersford Dottridge (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland). III. Grant cycle and admissibility criteria A. Grant cycle 4. The deadline for submitting applications for project grants for 2011 was 31 March 2010. Admissible applications received were examined by the Board of Trustees at its fifteenth session, held in Geneva from 6 to 10 December 2010. The recommendations for grants adopted by the Board of Trustees at that session were approved by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, on behalf of the Secretary-General, on 20 January 2011, and the grants approved were to be paid in March 2011. In some cases, payment was subject to the receipt of additional information and/or overdue narrative and financial reports from the beneficiary in question. Beneficiaries of project grants will have to provide the secretariat of the Fund with mid-year narrative and financial reports on the use of their grants before 30 September 2011 and final year narrative and financial reports on the use of their grants before 30 March 2012. Until satisfactory reports on the use of previous grants are received, no new project grants can be paid to those beneficiaries. 5. The deadline for submitting applications for project grants for 2012 was 31 May 2011. Admissible applications received will be examined by the Board of Trustees at its sixteenth session, to be held in Geneva in November 2011. B. Admissibility of new applications and selection process 6. In accordance with the selection criteria adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 46/122, the beneficiaries of assistance from the Fund shall be individuals whose human rights have been severely violated as a result of contemporary forms of slavery. Project admissibility criteria are outlined in the Fund's guidelines. 7. Admissible application forms are verified as to their conformity with approved selection criteria and additional information is requested from the organization if necessary. Reference organizations and specialized networks are also consulted if necessary. The complete application form and all required additional documents are then summarized and analysed by the secretariat in accordance with the selection criteria, to facilitate the work of the Board of Trustees. At its annual session, the Board of Trustees reviews all applications declared admissible, including the original application form, the summary analysis prepared by the secretariat and any other relevant information. The Board of Trustees then makes recommendations to the Secretary-General in accordance with its guidelines. Following the session the secretariat reviews all the recommendations of the Board of Trustees for consistency with relevant United Nations administrative and financial rules and regulations. The High Commissioner subsequently approves, on behalf of the Secretary-General, the recommendations regarding project grants. 8. The beneficiary organizations are requested to accept all conditions attached to the grant, such as providing additional documents and/or mid-year and final narrative and financial reports on the use of grants by a given deadline. Upon receipt of this confirmation, the secretariat of the Fund requests the financial services of the United Nations Office at Geneva to pay the project grant promptly. C. Monitoring and evaluation by the Board and secretariat 9. The secretariat reviews all narrative and financial reports received from beneficiary organizations on the use of project grants and asks for additional information, if needed. OHCHR field presences and other United Nations field offices such as those of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) may be requested to provide the secretariat of the Fund with additional information on the organization or project. 10. In carrying out their evaluation, the Board and the secretariat implement the following activities: (a) At its annual session the Board of Trustees reviews the situation of project grants allocated in previous years. When the Board is satisfied with the reporting by a given organization, it recommends closing the file. If the report is not complete, the Board makes a recommendation requesting specific additional information. No new grants will be allocated to that organization until the Board is satisfied with its report; (b) Board members and the secretariat may visit projects financed by the Fund; (c) Board members may establish, if needed, direct contact with project leaders in the field in order to better evaluate the use of the grants. The secretariat may also meet with project leaders; (d) Reference organizations and specialized networks may be invited to the session of the Board of Trustees to provide additional information on specific organizations or projects. IV. Financial status of the Fund 11. According to information received from OHCHR at the fifteenth session, an amount of $656,793 was available from new contributions paid since the fourteenth session of the Board of Trustees (see table 1). Table 1 Contributions available at the fifteenth session of the Board of Trustees Donor Amount (United States dollars) Date paid Belgium November 2009 Cyprus November 2010 Egypt April 2010 Germany August 2010 Holy See March 2010 Israel February 2010 Japan June 2010 Spain Switzerland December 2009 Turkey United Arab Emirates Weissbrodt, David Total contributions 12. Figure I shows the trend in the amounts of contributions received from 1998 to 2010 per session. V. Fifteenth session of the Board of Trustees 13. The fifteenth session of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery was held at Palais Wilson in Geneva from 6 to 10 December 2010. The session was opened by the Chief of the Rule of Law, Equality and Non-Discrimination Branch of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on behalf of the High Commissioner. 14. All five members of the Board -- Virginia Herrera Murillo (Costa Rica), Klara Skrivankova (Czech Republic), Prateep Unsongtham Hata (Thailand), Cleophas Kwdjo Mally (Togo) and David Weissbrodt (United States of America) -- attended the session. Mr. Weissbrodt was re-elected as Chair of the Board. Ms. Herrera Murillo was elected as the Vice-Chair of the Board. 15. The Board held 10 meetings during which it examined information prepared by the secretariat concerning the implementation of recommendations adopted at its fourteenth session, the financial situation of the Fund, fund-raising efforts, applications for project grants, financial and narrative reports on the use of previous grants, cooperation with other United Nations bodies, mechanisms and procedures, cooperation with the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking, the fellowship programme and follow-up to the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services. A. Recommendations for grants 16. On the basis of the available funds, the Board adopted its revised cost plan for 20102011 for an amount of $1,027,885. 17. The Board examined 243 admissible applications for project grants from 61 countries amounting to approximately $3,754,000. In addition, approximately 30 applications were declared inadmissible. Applications were received from the following continents, countries and territories: Africa (80): Benin (3), Burkina Faso (2), Burundi (1), Cameroon (8), Chad (1), Congo (1), Côte d'Ivoire (4), Democratic Republic of the Congo (8), Ghana (8), Kenya (7), Liberia (2), Namibia (1), Niger (2), Nigeria (4), Sierra Leone (2), South Africa (3), Sudan (1), Togo (4), Uganda (10), United Republic of Tanzania (7), Zambia (1); Asia and the Pacific (100): Bangladesh (11), Cambodia (2), China (3), India (48), Indonesia (3), Iran (Islamic Republic of) (1), Nepal (5), Pakistan (20), Philippines (2), Republic of Korea (1), Singapore (1), Sri Lanka (1), Thailand (1), Timor-Leste (1); Europe and Central Asia (35): Azerbaijan (1), Belgium (1), Bosnia and Herzegovina (3), Bulgaria (1), France (3), Georgia (1), Ireland (1), Kyrgyzstan (1), Lithuania (1), Republic of Moldova (4), Romania (1), Russian Federation (6), Serbia (1), Tajikistan (2), the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (5), Ukraine (1), United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (2); Americas (17): Brazil (3), Costa Rica (1), Ecuador (2), Haiti (7), Mexico (5); Middle East and North Africa (12): Egypt (1), Iraq (6), Israel (2), Mauritania (1), United Arab Emirates (1), Occupied Palestinian Territories (1). 18. In the light of the selection criteria, the Board of Trustees recommended 61 project grants for a total amount of $555,115, which will assist non-governmental organizations in 46 countries and territories: Africa: Cameroon (2), Congo (1), Côte d'Ivoire (2), Democratic Republic of the Congo (2), Ghana (2), Kenya (2), Liberia (1), Namibia (1), Niger (2), Nigeria (1), South Africa (1), Togo (1), Uganda (2), United Republic of Tanzania (2); Asia and the Pacific: Bangladesh (2), Cambodia (1), China (1), India (4), Indonesia (1), Iran (Islamic Republic of) (1), Nepal (2), Pakistan (3), Philippines (1), Singapore (1), Thailand (1); Europe and Central Asia: Azerbaijan (1), Bulgaria (1), France (1), Ireland (1), Kyrgyzstan (1), Lithuania (1), Republic of Moldova (1), Romania (1), Russian Federation (1), Serbia (1), Tajikistan (1), Ukraine (1); Americas: Brazil (1), Costa Rica (1), Ecuador (1), Haiti (1), Mexico (1); Middle East and North Africa: Israel (1), Mauritania (1), United Arab Emirates (1) and Occupied Palestinian Territories (1) (see list of project grants in annex I). 19. The Board also recommended establishing a contingency list of 10 project grants for a total amount of $89,000, to be disbursed in case some of the nongovernmental organizations selected for grants do not comply with the conditions attached to their grants. The proposed contingency list includes 10 nongovernmental organizations in 10 countries including Brazil (1), Côte d'Ivoire (1), Ghana (1), Haiti (1), India (1), Pakistan (1), Tajikistan (1), the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (1), Togo (1) and Uganda (1) (see list of project grants in annex II). 20. The Board also recommended setting aside a budget line of $20,000 for special emergency grants. 21. The Board took into account the importance of gender representation, thematic priorities and national and regional distribution when considering applications for project grants. 22. The relevant statistics since the Board started allocating grants in 1998, including the number of project applications received and the amount of money requested, as well as the number of grants received and the amount of money allocated by the Fund, are shown in table 2 and figure II. Table 2 Statistics on the allocation of travel and project grants, 1998-2010 Year Number of admissible applicationsa Amount requested (United States dollars) Number of grants approved Amount allocated (United States dollars) a Each year, about 50 to 70 inadmissible applications are received. B. Fund-raising 23. The Board held its annual meeting with donor Governments, interested Governments and other donors on 10 December 2010. The meeting was attended by representatives of 27 Governments and Permanent Observers, including Afghanistan, Algeria, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Belgium, Benin, Brazil, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Egypt, Italy, Greece, the Holy See, Iraq, Israel, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Mauritania, Mexico, the Niger, Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South Africa and Turkey. A representative of the International Organization of la Francophonie also attended the meeting. 24. The Chair and Board members thanked donors for their generous contributions to the Fund and presented a number of projects funded by the Fund which provided direct assistance to victims of contemporary forms of slavery. Several States expressed their strong support for the work of the Fund and commended the excellent work done by the Fund. 25. During its annual session, the Board noted the Secretary-General's statement on the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery, 2 December 2010, in which he appealed to all Member States to contribute generously to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, which has helped thousands of victims to recover their lives and dignity. 26. The Board assessed the future needs of the Fund and estimated that the Fund would need at least $1.5 million before its sixteenth session in 2011 in order to meet the demand in a satisfactory manner. 27. The Board recommended that the Chair and the secretariat of the Human Rights Council invite a representative of the Board to introduce the work of the Fund at the eighteenth session of the Human Rights Council, to report on the financial situation of the Fund and to invite donors to contribute to the Fund. C. Follow-up to the recommendations of the Office for Internal Oversight Services 28. As recommended by the Board at its eleventh session, a global review of the Fund was undertaken by the Office of Internal Oversight Services from November 2006 to January 2007 to review the impact of the Fund's activities on the target groups and to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of its reporting and monitoring processes. The final report, containing 22 recommendations, which was issued in June 2007, concluded that the Fund is addressing its mandate and has a positive impact on victims of contemporary forms of slavery. 29. Under the agenda item on follow-up to the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the Board members noted the progress made by the secretariat of the Fund and the members of the Board in implementing those recommendations. The Board noted that only 4 of the 22 recommendations made by the Office of Internal Oversight Services remain pending implementation. The Board decided to further follow up on the following recommendations that are considered as being completed by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in order to improve the Fund methodology and to enhance its effectiveness: Recommendation 1 30. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended that more detailed guidelines be established for the selection process of beneficiaries. 31. The Board adopted the final version of its guidelines and policies at its fourteenth session. The Board noted that the guidelines were posted on the Fund website and were translated into French. The Board recommended that OHCHR translate the guidelines into Spanish. Recommendations 2 and 3 32. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended prioritizing certain forms of contemporary slavery, in particular those not addressed by other international organizations, including forms of slavery related to cultural practices such as forced labour, child marriage, widow inheritance and bonded labour, and support for projects adopting a strategy that addresses the root cause of the problem, combined with direct assistance and income-generating activities that assist victims of contemporary forms of slavery. 33. The Board adopted guidelines at the fourteenth session with special provisions encouraging non-governmental organizations to develop sustainable projects accompanied by actions addressing the root causes of modern slavery, combined with direct assistance and income-generating activities that assist victims of contemporary forms of slavery. 34. A number of projects directed towards providing assistance to victims of forms of slavery linked to cultural practices such as forced marriage, sexual slavery, forced labour, child marriage, widow inheritance and bonded labour were approved. Recommendation 4 35. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended that the Fund consider building a longer-term relationship with organizations that give direct assistance by providing funding to them over a period of two to three years. 36. The Board adopted guidelines and policies containing special provisions on a two-year funding policy, subject to the availability of funds at its fourteenth session. Of the 61 project grants approved at the fifteenth session, 25 were approved for nongovernmental organizations that had previously received funding from the Fund. Recommendations 6 and 7 37. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended improving access to information available on the Fund's website in order to facilitate the establishment of partnerships and sharing of best practices among grantees, to raise awareness of the problem of slavery and to publicize the achievements of the Fund. 38. A revised version of the website of the Fund was launched in 2009. The Board welcomed the translation of the website into French and Spanish. The Board recommended that best practices and lessons learned be compiled from narrative reports and be made publicly available. The Board further recommended updating the brochure on the work of the Fund. The Board welcomed the revision of OHCHR fact sheet No. 14 on Contemporary forms of slavery and recommended that it be published after review by the Board and the OHCHR Publication Committee. In June 2011, the secretariat of the Fund completed the update of the brochure and the compilation of best practices and lessons learned. 39. The Board stressed the importance of the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery (2 December) as an annual occasion to raise awareness of the issue and recommended that the Chair continue to make a statement on that occasion. Fellowship programme 40. In line with recommendation 7 requesting OHCHR to raise awareness of contemporary forms of slavery, the Board recommended at its fourteenth session the establishment of a fellowship programme for staff members and affiliated members of human rights organizations, notably those working on issues related to contemporary forms of slavery, to give them the opportunity to gain first-hand experience, knowledge and skills in the field of international human rights, in general, and on contemporary forms of slavery, in particular. 41. In line with that recommendation, the secretariat launched a call for applications for the fellowship programme in July 2010 and received 40 applications from individuals recommended by human rights organizations. The fellowship programme was established for an initial period of four months and was conducted from 16 August to 17 December 2010. The selected candidates were Ms. Ana Paula G. C. de Souza (Brazil) (Anti-Slavery International), Mr. Kouanté Sigfrid Gerlac Chrysole André Yoro (Benin) (Defence for Children International), Ms. Mariannick Koffi (Côte d'Ivoire/France) and Mr. Adodo Esséna Sossou (Guinea) (Action contre l'exploitation des enfants et des femmes). 42. The staff of OHCHR and members of the Board of Trustees provided training for the fellows on the international human rights system including the treaty body system, the Human Rights Council, the universal periodic review and special procedures in relation to contemporary forms of slavery. As part of the programme, some fellows were given assignments in other OHCHR branches including the treaty bodies and the special procedures. The fellows used their expertise by producing research documents and awareness-raising materials. In view of the effectiveness of the programme, the Board recommended that two fellowships be extended for an additional period of eight months, from 5 January to 2 September 2011. 43. The Board also recommended that the fellowship programme for 2011/12 be organized as a 12-month programme for two fellows for the period from 5 September 2011 to 31 August 2012. Recommendation 8 44. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended that the Board of Trustees should focus to a greater extent on policy issues such as establishing priorities for the future development of the Fund, fund-raising, monitoring and providing technical expertise to non-governmental organizations in order to better address the needs of victims of slavery over the long term. 45. The Board of Trustees had discussions relating to the role of the Board in the monitoring of the projects approved, in the pre-screening of the applications, in fund-raising efforts and in establishing regular channels of communication with the secretariat. The Board discussed the role of members of the Board and recommended including an agenda item on policy issues for the next session of the Board of Trustees to discuss thematic and regional priorities as well as capacity-building for applicants and grantees. Recommendation 9 46. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended the establishment of a formal monitoring and evaluation mechanism. 47. The Board adopted amended guidelines for project evaluation and recommended that the secretariat continue liaising systematically with OHCHR country offices, human rights advisers, regional offices, United Nations peace missions and UNDP to monitor and evaluate projects on the ground. 48. The Board welcomed the report of the consultant mandated to undertake a needs-assessment exercise and to evaluate the effectiveness of the past activities and present programmes of selected non-governmental organizations that have applied for funding. The Board recommended expanding this experience and recommended setting aside a budget line of $10,000 for this purpose. 49. The Board recommended that selected projects be visited on a regular basis. Reports of project visits should be prepared by the secretariat for consideration by the Board at its annual session. The Board recommended allocating 5 per cent of the total budget for monitoring and evaluation of projects. Furthermore, the Board recommended that UNDP and International Labour Organization field offices be informed of any planned evaluation missions. Recommendation 10 50. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended establishing a management information system to allow effective monitoring and follow-up of grants and to reduce the workload. 51. The Board expressed its appreciation for the completion of a new management information system that had been developed by the information technology section of OHCHR and was currently used by the secretariat of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, and recommended the allocation of funds to engage a temporary assistant who would enter data in the new grant management system. The Board recommended that applications for the next cycle of grants should be submitted through this new online application system. The Board recommended that the system should not be exclusive and that non-governmental organizations that did not have the capacity to submit electronic applications should be allowed to continue to apply by post. Recommendation 13 52. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended reformulating the processing and funding cycle of the Fund. 53. The Board adopted a grant cycle for project grants for 2012 as follows: (a) Deadline for the submission of project applications for 2012: 31 May 2011 (b) Annual session of the Board of Trustees: 28 November-5 December 2011 (c) Disbursement: January to February 2012 (d) Submission of interim financial and narrative reports: 30 September 2012 (e) Submission of final financial and narrative reports: 30 April 2013 Recommendations 14 and 15 54. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended that OHCHR establish a more comprehensive and cost-effective pre-screening policy. 55. As recommended by the Board at its fourteenth session, for each new applicant, the secretariat continues to systematically request and review the registration certificate of the organization, the statute of the organization, a copy of bank records indicating signatories for the organization, copies of bank statements, letters of recommendation and evidence of other sources of funding. The secretariat continues to liaise with the secretariat of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture and the Assisting Communities Together project to exchange information on applicants. For each grantee, the secretariat continues to systematically contact the referees and donors. 56. The Board further recommended that the secretariat continue its successful cooperation with OHCHR field officers and desk officers to verify the work undertaken by new applicants, notably the quality of the assistance provided to victims of contemporary forms of slavery at the grass-roots level. 57. The Board recommended that the secretariat request from UNICEF and the International Labour Organization their directory of non-governmental organizations. The Board further recommended that the secretariat assist organizations to prepare their applications and better meet the Fund's requirements through OHCHR field presences and, where these do not exist, through United Nations country teams, whenever possible. Follow-up to the outstanding recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services Recommendation 11 58. The Office of Internal Oversight Services recommended the preparation and adoption of a manual on standard operating procedures providing detailed guidelines on the operation and administration of the Fund. 59. In February 2011, the secretariat of the Fund completed the drafting of the manual, based on the manual on standard operating procedures prepared by the secretariat of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture. Recommendation 16 60. In accordance with a recommendation of the Board, OHCHR is following up on recommendation 16 concerning specific funding allocated in Uganda. Recommendations 20 and 21 61. The Board members urged OHCHR to implement recommendations 20 and 21, relating to the overall coordination and establishment of a common secretariat of the humanitarian funds managed by OHCHR. 62. In March 2011, OHCHR endorsed the decision to merge the secretariats of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery and the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture. D. Cooperation with United Nations agencies and developments in the United Nations system concerning relevant mandates 63. The Board met with the secretariat of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture to exchange information about work methodology, the role of Board members and the best practices of that Fund. The Board noted with interest the positive impact that the online application process had on increasing the capacity of the Fund for Victims of Torture in handling project grants and the various activities carried out by the Board members of that Fund. 64. The Board met with the assistant of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences to discuss future collaboration with the Fund in terms of dissemination and support for country missions. The Board invited the Special Rapporteur to contribute to the activities relating to the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Fund. 65. In line with recommendations 6 and 8 made by the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the Board decided to recommend that a budget line of $15,000 be allocated for grants to non-governmental organizations to enable them to attend regional, subregional and national meetings organized in the framework of the field missions of the Special Rapporteur and to contribute to the implementation of the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur in her reports. 66. The Board recommended organizing a joint parallel event with the Special Rapporteur in the framework of the eighteenth session of the Human Rights Council, with interested Governments and non-governmental organizations. Cooperation with the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking 67. Under the agenda item relating to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, the Board members met staff members of the Division for Treaty Affairs and the Chief of the Organized Crime and Illicit Trafficking Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to discuss potential channels of collaboration and synergies between the two Funds. 68. The Board welcomed the nomination by the Secretary-General of two members of the Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery as members of the Board of Trustees of the Fund for Victims of Trafficking, which would ensure communication and synergies between the two Funds. It was further noted that about 25 per cent of grants made by the Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery in 2010 was allocated to projects providing direct assistance to victims of trafficking. The Board recommended that the secretariats of the two Funds hold regular meetings, to ensure continued collaboration and avoid duplication of work, and that awareness-raising materials should also include cross references to the two Funds. The Board noted that the overlap of the two Funds is reduced by the fact that the new Fund for Victims of Trafficking is expected to allocate grants to government and inter-governmental initiatives, which are not within the mandate of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery. The secretariats of the two Funds agreed to exchange working methods and to have regular meetings. E. Twentieth anniversary of the Fund in 2011 69. The Board members recalled that General Assembly resolution 46/22, by which the Fund was established, was adopted on 17 December 1991, and decided to organize a series of activities to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the Fund. The anniversary offers the opportunity to reflect on the Fund's impact as a mechanism supporting the work of non-governmental organizations providing direct assistance to victims of contemporary forms of slavery. It is also an opportunity to learn from the two decades of work in this field and to share with a wider audience the current challenges to the efforts to prevent slavery and to protect and fully rehabilitate victims. 70. On 1 June 2011, the Fund and Anti-Slavery International, in cooperation with Children Unite, the Permanent Mission of Costa Rica and the Permanent Mission of Uruguay, organized a side event to raise awareness about child domestic servitude and to discuss the role of human rights as a means of protecting them. The event was attended by representatives of United Nations agencies, several civil society organizations and members of permanent missions, including those of Armenia, Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, Greece, Honduras, Jamaica, the Philippines, South Africa, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom and Uruguay. 71. From 1 to 28 September 2011, coinciding with the eighteenth session of the Human Rights Council, the Fund will host an exposition at the Exhibition Gallery, Palais des Nations, which will showcase 56 works of art related to the work of the Fund. 72. The Board of Trustees also decided to organize a side event in the framework of the eighteenth session of the Human Rights Council in cooperation with the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences. 73. The celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the Fund will culminate with an event on 2 December 2011, the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery, which could include the participation of Board members, the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, former fund grantees, non-governmental organizations and Governments. 74. The Board approved the setting of a budget line of $20,000 to fund those events. VI. International Day for the Abolition of Slavery 75. On 2 December 2010, the Board members made the following statement to commemorate the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery: (a) On the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery, we express our commitment to the complete eradication of slavery and slavery-like practices. We hope that today serves as a reminder that, despite hundreds of years of effort to abolish slavery, no country is immune to those grave human rights abuses. (b) There is enough evidence to show that slavery-like practices are vast and widespread. Of special concern is the situation of children, who are denied the fundamental right to be born free and to be protected from enslavement. Just one figure tells a grim story: it is estimated that about 4.9 to 6.15 million children are trapped in slavery and slavery-like practices. (c) It is an appalling reality that today millions of human beings worldwide continue to be subjected to slavery and slavery-like practices. As a legally permitted system, traditional slavery has been abolished everywhere; but it has not been completely stamped out and new forms of slavery have emerged. (d) Debt bondage, serfdom, forced labour, child labour and servitude, trafficking in persons and in human organs, sexual slavery, the use of child soldiers, the sale of children, forced marriage and the sale of wives, and the exploitation of prostitution violate the most fundamental human rights, rights that we all possess, irrespective of sex, nationality, social status, occupation or other difference. (e) Even when abolished, slavery leaves traces. It can persist as a state of mind -- among victims and their descendants and among the inheritors of those who practised it -- long after it has formally ended. (f) Slavery-like practices are often clandestine. Fear, ignorance of one's rights and the need to survive do not encourage victims to speak out. The majority of those who suffer are the poorest, socially excluded groups in society. The overlapping factors of poverty, class and race create structural problems and cycles of marginalization that are hard to break. Gender inequalities and discrimination, lack of education, desperation for work and demand for cheap labour also trap people. (g) The United Nations has responded to these challenges by establishing several relevant thematic procedures, including the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery, including its causes and consequences, a key mechanism in the fight against slavery and the eradication of slavery-like practices. The United Nations has also established the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children; the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography; the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance; the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences; the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict; and the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants. These thematic rapporteurs respond quickly to information about individual cases and have been successful in preventing or stopping violations. (h) In 1991, the United Nations also created the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery which assists nongovernmental organization projects to provide concrete humanitarian, legal, and financial assistance to victims and potential victims of contemporary forms of slavery. For example, in 2009/10, the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery was able to assist victims and potential victims in 44 countries by giving 63 grants. The need for such assistance is further reflected in over 250 applications the Trust Fund has received this year amounting to about $3,550,700. (i) On this day, we pay tribute to all Governments, civil society organizations, and individuals engaged in activities aimed at eradicating slavery and ensuring that all victims obtain redress, including the means for as full rehabilitation as possible. We express our profound commitment to the struggle against slavery and particularly to the victims. (j) We urge all States to ratify and implement existing instruments in this area -- in particular the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. (k) We also appeal to all Member States to implement their obligations to abolish and eradicate slavery in all its manifestations. We express our gratitude to all donors to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery and call upon the international community to express its solidarity with victims of slavery by contributing generously to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery to allow the Fund to increase assistance to victims and contribute to ending these intolerable and unacceptable practices worldwide. VII. How to contribute to the Fund 76. Governments, non-governmental organizations and other private or public entities can contribute to the Fund. Donors should indicate "for the Slavery Fund, account SH" on a payment order. For information on how to contribute, donors are requested to contact the secretariat of the Fund at: Secretariat of the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, United Nations, CH 1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland; Telephone: 41 22 928 9737 or 928 9164; Fax: 41 22 928 9050. VIII. Conclusions and recommendations 77. The Fund has attracted increased interest among non-governmental organizations working to assist victims of slavery. About 243 applications for grants amounting to approximately $3,754,000 were received in 2010. The Board of Trustees was only able to recommend grants amounting to $555,115 which represents less than 15 per cent of the total amount requested. The Fund continues to fall short in terms of meeting the growing demand and need for support. About 450 applications for grants amounting to approximately $6,125,000 were received in 2011. The Board estimates that, in order to be able to fulfil its mandate and to respond positively to new applications to be received in 2011, the Fund would need new contributions amounting to at least $1.5 million prior to the sixteenth session of the Board of Trustees, to be held in November 2011. 78. Donors and potential donors are encouraged to step up further their support to the Fund to allow the Fund to expand its crucial assistance to victims of slavery. In respect of the next cycle, donors are invited to contribute to the Fund before November 2011 in order for the contributions to be duly recorded by the United Nations Treasurer in advance of the sixteenth session of the Board. 79. Organization of the sixteenth session of the Board in 2011. The Board approved a provisional agenda for the next session of the Board, to be held in Geneva from 28 November to 5 December 2011. Project grants recommended by the Board of Trustees at the fifteenth session Organization Country or territory Title of project or aspect covered Amount approved Africa Women in Action against Gender-Based Violence Cameroon Men Empowerment and Engagement Tool (MEET) to end early or forced marriages and sale of wives Mengbwa: Actions Jeunes Project to combat the forced and early marriage of Mbororo girls in Koutaba Association Avenir NEPAD Congo Congo Legal assistance for widowed victims of contemporary forms of slavery in Brazzaville Association Jekawili Côte d'Ivoire Project to improve the living and working conditions of young servant girls in the city of Bouaké International Catholic Child Bureau (BICE) Project to prevent and respond to the trafficking and exploitation of children in Côte d'Ivoire Oeuvres Sociales pour le Développement (OSD) Democratic Republic of the Congo Care of divorced child mothers following forced marriage and forced household labour Regroupement des mamans de Kamituga Combating the servitude and exploitation of children used as workers in mining areas in the rural territory of Mwenga Network for Community Planning and Development Ghana Ending Slavery in Small-Scale Mining (Galamsey) Project AfriKids Ghana AfriKids New Beginnings Programme Young Widows Advancement Program Kenya Assisting widows in Kayole to get access to and control of family property as a means of mitigating some negative aspects of widow inheritance Harvest of Hope Self-Help Community Centre Recovering victims of trafficking and slavery in Mtwapa town in Kenya, through empowerment African Network for the Prevention and Protection against Child Abuse and Neglect (ANPPCAN Liberia) Liberia Combating child labour through awareness-raising campaign in rural Montserrado County National Society for Human Rights (NSHR) of Namibia Namibia Operation to combat slavery-like practices in Namibia Association Timidria (human rights organization) Niger Request for assistance for the socio-economic reintegration of two families that have been victims of practices of slavery in Abalak and Tchintabaraden Association pour la Lutte contre le Travail des Enfants au Niger (ALTEN) Projefid Women's Aid Collective (WACOL) Nigeria Protection and rehabilitation of victims of child labour and servitude, working at Abakaliki mines and quarries Justice ACTs South Africa Trafficking Proof Campaign Togo Preventing the worst contemporary forms of slavery, including trafficking in children, and caring for vulnerable and at-risk children by strengthening social and educational opportunities Uganda Youth Development Link Uganda Combating child trafficking and other contemporary forms of slavery and exploitation of young people in Kawempe, Rubaga and Makindye Divisions, Kampala District, Uganda, by the end of 2011 Youth Aid Uganda Community effort to child labour prevention and rehabilitation Mbutu Agricultural Society (MAS) United Republic of Tanzania Sensitization of Local Leaders on Child Labour in Kisarawe and Mkuranga District Kashog-Karagwe Development Association Restoration of Government-appropriated land Asia and the Pacific JOGAJOG Bangladesh Protection of street children from trafficking Prova Society Child Labour Elimination and Prevention (CLEP) Samaritan's Purse International Relief Cambodia Community trafficking prevention and peer education project Association of Indonesian Migrant Workers in Hong Kong China Women's Empowerment: The Training and Development of Women Leaders to End Debt Bondage Centre for Community Economics and Development Consultants Society (CECOEDECON) India Sara Akash Hamara -- social inclusion of girls (6 to 18 years old) engaged in child labour through education and participation Asia Indigenous Peoples Pact Foundation Social integration and support to the victims of trafficking and child labour in north-east India Manav Seva Sansthan (Seva) Half-Way Home -- right-based care and support for victims of trafficking Women's Interlink Foundation Empowerment of victims of trafficking, sexual slavery, child labour and child servitude Pusat Kajian dan Perlindungan Anak (Centre for study and child protection) Indonesia Elimination of child involvement in marijuana cultivation and trade, in Aceh Province, Indonesia Omid-e-Mehr Foundation Iran (Islamic Republic of) Omid Halfway House Shelter Project Children -- Women in Social Services and Human Rights (CWISH) Nepal Decent work for domestic workers The Advocates for Human Rights (former Minnesota Human Rights Advocates) Sankhu-Palubari community school project Insan Dost Association Pakistan Ending Child Labour through Education (ECLE) DAMAAN Development Organization Violence and forced marriages in southern Punjab -- rehabilitating victims and making ways for political discourse Bonded Labour Liberation Front Pakistan, BLLF Pakistan Freedom through education Asia against child trafficking (Asia ACTs), Inc. Philippines Inter-agency approach to address organ trafficking in Philippines Humanitarian Organisation for Migration Economics Singapore Help desks and shelters for migrant workers Children of the Forest Foundation Thailand Kelly Anusorn School Art Centre Europe and Central Asia Clean World Aid to Women Social Union Azerbaijan Support and rehabilitation centre for human trafficking victims Animus Association Foundation Bulgaria Assuring sustainable humanitarian aid to women survivors of trafficking Les amis du bus des femmes France An emergency situation in 2010: to support and continue the provision of assistance to and protection of victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation in Paris Ruhama Ireland Support to victims of sex trafficking in Ireland Golden Goal Kyrgyzstan Supporting effective programming to tackle trafficking, violence against children and other forms of exploitation Dingusių žmonių šeimų paramos centras (Missing persons families support centre) Lithuania Victims of human trafficking -- integration through the art of therapy NGO Interactiune Republic of Moldova You are not a victim -- keep yourself sustainable Association for Developing Alternative Practices for Reintegration and Education Romania Consolidating assistance services for victims of trafficking of persons in Romania Civic Assistance Committee Russian Federation Assisting the victims of compulsory labour ASTRA -- Anti-trafficking action Serbia Support to ASTRA SOS Hotline and direct victim assistance through social inclusion Public Organization "Saodat" Tajikistan Freedom Kherson oblast centre "Uspishna Zhinka" Ukraine Reintegration of 50 children -- victims of child labour and child servitude -- into the community by providing educational services and other additional services in the rural communities Americas Centro de Defesa da Vida e dos Direitos Humanos de Açailândia (CDVDH) Brazil Combating Amazon rainforest slave labour in the state of Maranhão Defensa de Niñas y Niños Internacional, DNI-Costa Rica Costa Rica Psychosocial and legal assistance for victims and potential victims of sex slavery and child trafficking in urban and rural areas of Costa Rica Fundación Nuestros Jóvenes Ecuador Support for the social reintegration of adolescent girls who have been victims of human trafficking for purposes of sexual exploitation and labour exploitation Terre des Hommes Suisse Haiti Project to help child domestic servants in Port-au-Prince Centro de derechos humanos Fray Matías de Córdova A.C. Mexico Labour litigation for the rights of migrants Middle East and North Africa Hotline for Migrant Workers Combating trafficking in persons Minority Rights Group International Mauritania Supporting Hratine Society to identify cases for strategic litigation VIVERE Trafficking of human beings for sexual exploitation and other forms of serious physical abuse Palestinian Centre for Communication and Development Strategies Occupied Palestinian Territories Child labour and child servitude Annex II Contingency list of project grants recommended by the Board of Trustees at its fifteenth session Country Amount approved (United States dollars) Pastoral Land Commission (CPTOC) Preventing enslavement in the new agribusiness frontline, in North and Central Brazil Carrefour Jeunesse Bouaké Rehabilitation and reintegration of girls and women victims of abuse of parental authority The Ark Foundation Combating commercial sex among girls Association Femmes Soleil d'Haiti (AFASDA) Speaking out against the situation of child servants in Haiti Compassion Society Liberate Mathamma children from child labour through residential bridge course Charity Association (Avesto) Stop slavery in 21st century First Children's Embassy in the World Megjashi The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Day-care centres for street children who do not go to school ODJOUGBO Combating domestic labour among underage girls through education in the Plateaux region National Foundation for Democracy and Human Rights in Uganda (NAFODU) Assisting children and other individuals whose human rights have been violated as a result of slavery in south-western Uganda 