%%%MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PROGRAMME PLANNING|PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION|COSTS|

Sixty-sixth session * A/66/150. Item 134 of the provisional agenda* Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 Strategic heritage plan of the United Nations Office at Geneva Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 64/243. It summarizes the progress made in preparing the strategic heritage plan for the Palais des Nations in Geneva since the last report of the Secretary-General on the subject (A/64/6 (Sect. 33)/Add.1). It outlines the main findings of the conceptual engineering study approved by the Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, and summarizes current facility-related problems identified in the study, which have to be addressed as a matter of urgency owing to structural, health and safety concerns. The report highlights significant efficiencies that would be achieved through the implementation of a strategic heritage plan in terms of consolidation, space management and energy conservations. It broadly describes viable options for implementing the necessary restoration and renovation works of the Palais des Nations. It also provides an analysis of project implementation options in terms of operational impact, cost implications and efficiency, and includes an estimate of the overall budget and proposed timeline. Based on the results of the study, the Secretary-General recommends that Member States consider favourably and support the proposed implementation option for the strategic heritage plan so as to ensure the continued long-term performance and operational efficiency of the Palais des Nations in Geneva. The recommended renovation and restoration implementation option, to be undertaken upon the completion of the capital master plan at Headquarters in New York, would require preparatory programme management and planning during 2012-2013. Estimates of the related resource requirements for the biennium 2012-2013 (amounting to $4.1 million) are provided in the annex to this report, should the General Assembly wish to proceed with activities in the forthcoming biennium. Contents Page Introduction Background Results of the conceptual engineering and architectural study Analysis of options for executing the restoration and renovation works Recommended implementation option Next steps Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Annex Resource requirements for the next steps in the biennium 2012-2013 (at preliminary 2012-2013 rates) 1. Following the submission of the report of the Secretary-General (A/64/6 (Sect. 33)/Add.1), which summarized the preliminary evaluation of the current physical status of the buildings and facility-related matters at the Palais des Nations, the Secretary-General proposed, as a next step, to undertake a conceptual engineering and architectural study as the first important milestone and decision point for consideration by Member States. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions recommended in its twelfth report that the General Assembly request the Secretary-General to monitor the strategic heritage plan project closely and to include in his report to the Assembly any developments, including those that might have financial implications. 2. In its resolution 64/243, the General Assembly endorsed the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requested the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly on the outcome of the proposed conceptual engineering study of the strategic heritage plan, including an estimate of the overall costs and timeline of the project. In the same resolution, the Assembly called upon the Secretary-General to ensure that the conceptual engineering and architectural study identified all viable alternatives in the most cost-effective and efficient manner. II. Background 3. The preliminary study, conducted in 2009 and reported on to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, provided an initial physical assessment of the buildings at the Palais des Nations, and highlighted the many and diverse maintenance challenges that have resulted from normal deterioration over the past 70 years of use. Since the date of construction, which was 70 years ago for the Palais des Nations and 40 years ago for building E, the buildings and their annexes have undergone only the minimal maintenance and repairs considered necessary for their remaining functional. The present deterioration of the Palais des Nations has already resulted in a steady increase in maintenance needs and costs for the Organization. 4. As noted in the same report, the progressively dilapidated buildings of the Palais des Nations pose an increasing risk to the safety, security and health of the United Nations delegates, staff and civil society representatives, and the more than 100,000 visitors per year. 5. Building upon the results of the preliminary study conducted in 2009, a conceptual engineering and architectural study was initiated in August 2010 and conducted over a period of six months. As part of the study, the consultant, accompanied by the United Nations Office at Geneva project team, visited Headquarters in New York to meet with senior management from the Department of Management, including the Office of Central Support Services and the Office of the Capital Master Plan, to be able to benefit first-hand from the lessons learned during the planning phases of the capital master plan and to incorporate the recommended best practices into the project planning process of the strategic heritage plan. The consultant submitted the final report on the conceptual engineering and architectural study in February 2011. III. Results of the conceptual engineering and architectural study 6. At the outset, the United Nations Office at Geneva established the key performance objectives for the strategic heritage plan as a benchmark for the consultant to ensure that the facilities meet the Organization's functional and operational goals, provide conference services that address the current and future needs of the United Nations, and provide space for the staff and delegates at the Palais des Nations in accordance with industry best practices. Following a series of assessments and interim reports, the consultant presented the findings and recommendations that are summarized within this report. Key performance objectives 7. The overall process is to be guided by a set of key performance objectives. Adherence to these objectives will ensure that efficient, accessible and safe conference facilities and office spaces are provided. The established key performance objectives are: (a) To optimize the use of the available interior space and conference facilities, and provide efficient office spaces and technologically functional conference rooms; (b) To meet all local and international regulations related to fire, structural and building safety, health and accessibility; and comply with all United Nations Headquarters Minimum Operating Security Standards guidelines; (c) To update the building exterior and electromechanical systems so as to reduce energy consumption costs; (d) To upgrade and expand the information and communications networks, broadcasting facilities and congress systems to meet current industry standards; (e) To prevent irreversible deterioration or damage, and restore and maintain the capital value of the Palais des Nations and its content, specifically its historic archives; (f) To guarantee and ensure business and operational continuity, that is, the maintenance of the day-to-day business at the Palais des Nations throughout any renovation and restoration implementation. 8. Given these objectives, the consultant reviewed the detailed findings of the preliminary study, which formed the bases of the report submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session and conducted an in-depth inspection and assessment of the condition of the buildings and their infrastructures. The consultant identified the major renovation and restoration works required and took into account the utilization of the premises and energy performance, while developing the appropriate implementation options for executing the recommended works. 9. In this context, the consultant also evaluated the operational implications should only limited renovation and restoration, based on the most urgent works related to safety and security requirements, be executed in the foreseeable future. Major findings of the conceptual engineering and architectural study 10. The study establishes that the state of the buildings of the Palais des Nations is undermining the efforts of the United Nations Office at Geneva not only to ensure the safety and security of its users but also to deliver its mandated services. Throughout the years, energy and maintenance demands have increased steadily owing to the age of the facilities. Even if limited timely corrective actions are undertaken, they will not prevent these costs from growing exponentially. 11. Furthermore, the consultant confirmed that the deterioration of the Palais des Nations has reached a crucial point, and that, soon, the United Nations Office at Geneva may be unable to continue to offer functional facilities to its many users, unless an overall renovation is undertaken. The consultant's major findings and recommended remedial actions with respect to each of the performance objectives are set out below: (a) Optimize the use of the available interior space and conference facilities, and provide efficient office spaces and technologically functional conference rooms: Office space (i) The study has confirmed that the utilization of the existing office space in the Palais des Nations could be improved dramatically. Comparison with current office space guidelines implemented at Headquarters suggests an underutilization of office space at Geneva in the magnitude of 25 to 30 per cent; (ii) Through a proposed entire refurbishment of the current office space, with a complete new configuration of the floors within the main office buildings, it would be feasible to accommodate up to 700 additional staff members within the existing premises; (iii) Geneva-based entities of the United Nations Secretariat have grown significantly over time. Owing to the shortage of office space within the Palais des Nations, suitable facilities had to be rented outside of the compound. The implementation of the strategic heritage plan would permit a consolidation of the United Nations entities in Geneva within the Palais des Nations. This would greatly enhance operational efficiencies and result in savings (in rent, utilities, security and other associated charges) of approximately $14 million per biennium; Conference rooms (iv) Currently, the United Nations Office at Geneva conference facility offers 34 conference rooms of various sizes and configurations and serves as one of the major conference facilities for Member States. Several conference rooms have been upgraded and refurbished over time. However, there is still an urgent need to renovate the remaining conference rooms and to install updated communication and audio-visual technologies, to modernize support areas, to improve interpreter booths and to add workspaces; (v) In order that current and future conference needs may be addressed, the consultant recommends space reconfiguration and consolidation. The conference rooms would be adjusted in their configuration to permit a more flexible utilization. Outdated equipment would be replaced through investing in current technology, including digital interpretation systems; (b) Meet all local and international regulations related to fire, structural and building safety, health and accessibility, and comply with all United Nations Minimum Operating Security Standards guidelines: (i) Currently, the compound does not comply with applicable local and international regulations, such as fire protection, structural seismic considerations, and other industry standard practices, nor does it comply with all the recommended Minimum Operating Security Standards blast safety guidelines, which guarantee the health and safety of the work environment. Compliance with local regulations is recommended and appropriate measures should be taken to ensure that current industry practices are met; (ii) The Palais des Nations currently lacks a proper fire partitioning system throughout its buildings. Appropriate measures need to be taken to minimize the associated risks; (iii) The issues of asbestos abatement and the removal of other hazardous polluting materials need to be addressed. Currently, ongoing maintenance and installation of a proper fire prevention system can take place only following asbestos abatement, requiring, in some cases, the closing of building sections, which disrupts the day-to-day business operations; (iv) The structural surveys of the buildings have revealed corrosion problems. Significant decay in the anchors of the stone facade of one building needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency; (v) While the United Nations Office at Geneva has installed new security systems around the compound to comply with United Nations Minimum Operating Security Standards, the blast vulnerability of the facilities still remains a safety concern. Shattered glazing from skylights could be a threat for delegates and other users, specifically in the Assembly Hall. The removal or replacement of the skylights is recommended; (vi) Current building accessibility for persons with disabilities does not comply with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Suitable solutions need to be implemented in accordance with General Assembly resolutions; (c) Update the building exterior and electromechanical infrastructure systems so as to reduce energy consumption costs: (i) The condition of the infrastructure within the Palais des Nations has fallen well below acceptable standards. The age of the plant machinery limits the systems' performance and efficiency. Over the years, there has been a significant increase in electrical power consumption within the Palais des Nations. As a result, the electrical power distribution network and the related infrastructure, specifically in office areas, have become insufficient. The age of this supply system necessitates a major overhaul. Additionally, there is only one heating and cooling distribution circuit within the buildings. It is more efficient to create distribution circuits by zone in order to achieve better environmental control levels and lower energy consumption, as well as improve the insulation of water and air distribution networks; (ii) The study also highlights the poor to non-existent ventilation in most office areas. An overall action plan would be undertaken regarding electricity distribution, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems, including the upgrading and replacement of the current cooling systems; (iii) The United Nations Office at Geneva works hand in hand with the host country in its efforts to implement its policies for sustainable development, decrease of energy consumption and the reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Despite continuous efforts made by the United Nations Office at Geneva to reduce energy consumption and costs, there has been limited success owing to the lack of thermal insulation of the exterior building facades and windows, combined with the outdated technical infrastructure. The strategic heritage plan would dramatically improve the thermal insulation on facades and windows in the historic building. The upgrading of the exterior insulation of the buildings would also allow the United Nations Office at Geneva to instal a low temperature system and thus replace natural gas as the primary energy source. Water from Lake Geneva is already being used for cooling part of the buildings dating from 2009, and could be further utilized for heating; (iv) The implementation of the strategic heritage plan is expected to result in a reduction in energy consumption at the Palais des Nations of approximately 25 per cent, which would translate into savings of $1.7 million per biennium; (d) Upgrade and expand the information and communications networks, broadcasting facilities and congress systems to meet current industry standards: (i) Owing to the advances in the information technology, communications and audio-visual field, there is an urgent need to replace the cabling and obsolete broadcasting facilities and conference systems. Under the strategic heritage plan, it is proposed that current technology in all of the conference rooms be installed, that local distribution equipment and outlets be replaced in order to enlarge capacity and that the capacity of the telephony system be renewed and expanded; (ii) Works relating to information technology systems include updating and installing Wi-Fi services in conference rooms. It is necessary to upgrade videoconference systems and to improve the optical fibre network throughout the campus so as to guarantee the recording and distribution of video and audio signals in every conference room. Upgrading of the existing data cabling, installation of public address systems and integration of all new services are also required; (e) Prevent irreversible deterioration or damage, and restore and maintain the capital value of the Palais des Nations and its content, specifically its historic archives: (i) The Palais des Nations is a historic building dating back to the era of the League of Nations. It is an important piece of historic architecture and houses important pieces of artwork as well as the archives of the League of Nations. The study suggests that actions be taken to prevent further deterioration of, and irreversible damage to, the buildings and its contents; (ii) The League of Nations archives are listed in the Memory of the World Register of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. The extensive archival documents in their current location are at risk of destruction and/or deterioration from the threat of fire, humidity, flooding and lack of temperature control; (iii) Under the strategic heritage plan, all possible archival options, including the use of new technology and appropriate storage space, will be assessed, and a long-term solution for the preservation of the irreplaceable collection of historic documents would be implemented in line with the preservation requirements for archival material; (f) Guarantee and ensure business and operational continuity, that is, the maintenance of the day-to-day business at the Palais des Nations throughout any renovation and restoration implementation: (i) The day-to-day operational functions of the Palais des Nations, with respect to ensuring satisfactory current and up-to-date future conference services, are fully considered and analysed within the context of the implementation options and recommendations of the consultant. IV. Analysis of options for executing the restoration and renovation works 12. The consultant reviewed a number of ways of executing the identified building restoration and renovation works. Three distinctly different project implementation options were identified, namely, a fast-track (approximately 5-year) implementation, a phased implementation over a medium-term (approximately 8-year) period, and a phased implementation a long-term (approximately 13-year) period. 13. The implementation options differ mainly in terms of the required extent and location of the swing space. The fast-track implementation option would require most, if not all, of the swing space and the relocation of operations out of the compound. The main objective of the medium-term and long-term planned approaches would be to allow all activities at the United Nations Office at Geneva to remain operational within the premises of the Palais des Nations while renovation and restoration works are being implemented. The medium-term phased implementation option requires swing space for approximately one third of the operations at the United Nations Office at Geneva which could be located within the compound. The long-term phased implementation option reduces the need for swing space, in rented space outside the compound, to a minimum. 14. The impact of these three planned implementation options and their associated costs are described further below. All costs, which were originally developed in Swiss francs (CHF) and have been converted using a current operational exchange rate of 1 United States dollar (US$) = 1.046 CHF, would need to be recalculated based on the updated exchange rate at the time the project is executed. (a) Fast-track implementation option (approximately five years): (i) Under the fast-track implementation option, the actions would be undertaken in the shortest time possible with works undertaken concurrently. This option would require relocating all of the activities of the United Nations Office at Geneva into rental space outside the compound. Finding suitable temporary rental space for offices and conferences will be highly problematic within the context of the existing and foreseeable real estate market in Geneva. The required exterior swing space would add significant costs to this option, which would not be offset by a reduction in construction costs; (ii) Under this approach, the overall estimated costs of the project for design, programme and project management, and construction and additional costs for other related items such as swing space, relocation and rental, together with contingencies, were estimated to be in the range of approximately CHF 684 million (equivalent to US$ 654 million); (b) Medium-term implementation option (approximately eight years): (i) The medium-term option would balance the advantages and savings of executing a majority of the construction works in logical groupings, and the limited swing space required to accommodate an estimated 1,000 staff members. The required temporary facilities to be constructed could be accommodated within the compound. Consequently, the buildings under construction could be isolated when work is undertaken, which would reduce the risks of exposure of staff to construction-related activities and minimize inconveniences such as construction noise and exposure to hazardous materials, among others; (ii) Under this approach, the overall estimated costs of the project for design, programme and project management, and construction and additional costs for other related items such as swing space, relocation and rental, together with contingencies, were estimated in the range of approximately CHF 618 million (equivalent to US$ 591 million); (c) Long-term implementation option (approximately 13 years): (i) A third alternative for implementation of the strategic heritage plan would be to refurbish the buildings segment by segment and, in some areas, floor by floor. The main benefit of this option would be to eliminate the need for construction of a swing-space structure on the compound; however, this one-time savings would ultimately be outweighed by the increased costs for construction over an additional five years, increased internal relocation costs, and those for the rental of a limited number of offices and conference facilities; (ii) Choosing this option could result in disruption to the work of staff and delegates, conferences and occupants in adjacent building areas, which might remain a factor for a significant period of time as construction activities were prolonged. This option would also require a greater portion of the work to be implemented during non-working hours, significantly increasing the construction costs; (iii) Under this approach, the overall estimated costs of the project for design, programme and project management, and construction and additional costs for other related items such as swing space, relocation and rental, together with contingencies, were estimated in the range of approximately CHF 651 million (equivalent to US$ 622 million). 15. The consultant also analysed the impacts of maintaining, in contrast with the above planned implementation options, the current approach to building upkeep and maintenance of the Palais des Nations. Under this approach, only immediate urgent works needed to address critical health, safety and security requirements would be carried out as and when they arose. Necessary stopgap works would be implemented during non-working hours, which would greatly increase both the duration of the projects and their cost. 16. Continued implementation of the current approach would result in: (a) Increased frequency and cost of urgent works due to the buildings' progressive deterioration; (b) Increased rental costs over time, due to inefficient space utilization and organizational expansion; (c) Progressively increasing energy costs due to outdated and inefficient systems, and poor insulation in the buildings; (d) Nominal compliance with local and international regulations and guidelines related to health, safety, security and accessibility for persons with disabilities, as these issues would be addressed only when urgent works were implemented; (e) Reduction of the capital asset value of the buildings due to limited maintenance; (f) A larger and more costly building restoration and renovation after several decades (similar to the capital master plan at United Nations Headquarters in New York), due to limited maintenance and cost escalations. 17. A comparative analysis of the projected financial implications of the different options revealed that the total costs to the Organization of continuing the current reactive building maintenance approach would far exceed those for any of the planned options outlined in paragraph 14 above. 18. During this study, construction costs, additional allowances for, inter alia, swing space and related moves, and contingencies for unforeseen urgent works, were compared, taking into account future cost escalation and inflation rates. In addition to consideration of the direct project costs, there have been assumptions made based on a 25-year period for maintenance, energy and required rental costs, providing an equal comparison of the approaches and implementation options. 19. It was estimated that the costs for continuing the current reactive maintenance approach would result in expenditures of approximately $1.4 billion over the next 25 years, while the total amount for the planned works, either the medium-term implementation option (approximately 8 years) or the long-term implementation option (approximately 13 years), over the same period of 25 years would be in the range of $1.2 billion-$1.3 billion. Therefore, the overall projected savings to the Organization in implementing the proposed planned options would be in the range of $100 million-$200 million. 20. Besides the lower capital costs of a planned renovation vis-à-vis the reactive option, there would also be significant near-term cost benefits secured from the efficiencies gained through consolidation of external rentals into space accommodation at the Palais des Nations. V. Recommended implementation option 21. Based on the consultant's findings, the medium-term multiphased renovation over a period of approximately eight years is the recommended way to proceed, as it would result in the lowest cost, would be the least disruptive renovation option and would meet all the key performance objectives and operational goals of the Organization in Geneva. 22. The need for swing space under this approach is reduced and can be accommodated within the compound, thus limiting disturbance to all the operations, as staff will remain in the compound. Pursuing this option would allow the Organization to organize and describe the means by which the required restoration and renovation maintenance programme works would be implemented, and would result in the following major advantages and benefits: (a) Consolidation of United Nations Secretariat presence in Geneva through increased office accommodation capacity within the Palais des Nations by some 2530 per cent, resulting in projected savings of $14 million per biennium; (b) Full compliance with all health, safety and security regulations and industry best practice standards, including asbestos abatement and removal of hazardous materials; (c) Provision of modern, flexible conference rooms with up-to-date industry standard technologies and efficient office and workspaces which would successfully respond to requirements of Member States in terms of effective meeting facilities; (d) Repair of all structural problems and replacement of the current skylight structures and exterior glazing so as to address pressing safety concerns; (e) Reduced utility costs and carbon footprint due to improved energy efficiency, with the installation of thermal insulation, the upgrade of building systems and the replacement of the existing glazing in recommended buildings, which would result in a savings of approximately $1.7 million per biennium; (f) Implementation of construction works in an organized and consolidated manner, which would satisfy urgent requirements and long-term needs, while taking advantage of economies of scale in construction activities; (g) Completion of most works during regular working hours, thereby reducing project duration and need for overtime; (h) Addressing of the requirements for accessibility of the Palais des Nations. 23. The table below outlines the overall schedule for the recommended medium-term phased implementation option. Proposed project schedules, 2012-2021 Timeline: medium-term approach Activities Pre-planning phase Programme management statement of work Programme management solicitation Project implementation plan Multi-annual investment plan Design phase Construction phase VI. Next steps 24. Subject to endorsement by the General Assembly of the proposed implementation option for the strategic heritage plan, the next steps would entail maintaining limited project progression by using existing internal resources to develop terms of reference for establishing a dedicated project team and senior-level advisory committee comprising the substantive offices that would be affected by the project. 25. The current Buildings and Engineering Section of Central Support Services at the United Nations Office at Geneva will continue to be dedicated to the day-to-day operations and maintenance of the existing facilities so as to ensure ongoing business continuity, and the health and safety of the Organization at the United Nations Office at Geneva. The Section is not in a position to manage this extensive project without additional dedicated staff. Securing the appropriate level of dedicated technical staff capacity from the beginning would be vital for the successful implementation of the project. The Board of Auditors, in the context of the preparatory work of the strategic heritage plan and implementation of security strengthening projects, expressed its concerns regarding the "small number of (technical) staff" in Central Support Services available for management of projects of this order of magnitude (see A/65/5 (Vol. I), paras. 346-347). 26. Subject to the approval of the General Assembly, a dedicated project management team could begin work in 2012 to supplement the existing Buildings and Engineering Section staff capacity. This team could initially prepare the documentation necessary to secure a programme management firm, consisting of specialized professionals not available within the Section, by the end of 2012. It is envisioned that during 2013, the programme management firm could develop an overall detailed project implementation and phasing plan inclusive of all financial implications. 27. Should the proposed next steps described in this report be endorsed by the General Assembly, the Secretary-General could then provide a progress report during the sixty-seventh session of the Assembly regarding the proposed ensuing steps that would be necessary to advance the renovation and restoration of the Palais des Nations. It is envisioned that the construction aspects of the project could begin following the completion of the capital master plan in accordance with the mandate of the Assembly set out in its resolution 64/243. 28. The Secretary-General is pleased to advise that the Swiss Federal Council decided in June 2011 that Switzerland, as host country, will participate in the renovation of the European headquarters of the United Nations in Geneva through a voluntary contribution of up to a maximum of 50 million Swiss francs. Subject to approval by the Swiss Federal Chambers, this single contribution, to be paid in 2012, is intended for the implementation of necessary structural measures for energy saving to be undertaken in the context of the comprehensive renovation of the Palais des Nations. As such, the contribution will result in a corresponding deduction of the total cost of the renovation works to be carried out in the context of the strategic heritage plan. VII. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 29. The General Assembly may wish to: (a) Take note of the findings and recommendations contained in the present report; (b) Endorse, in principle, the recommended implementation option, without prejudice to a final decision by the General Assembly on the strategic heritage plan; (c) Approve the next steps outlined in paragraphs 24-27 above at a total estimated cost of $4,069,700 (at preliminary 2012-2013 rates) in the biennium 2012-2013, as further detailed in the annex to this report. Section 29E, Administration, Geneva General temporary assistance ($1,164,600) 1. Resource requirement of $1,164,600 would cover an initial dedicated project management team at the United Nations Office at Geneva, comprising one P-4 Architect, one P-4 Engineer and one P-3 technical expert, during the biennium 2012-2013. This team would be hired through temporary vacancy announcements and would review the consultancy findings, validate the recommended implementation, prepare the statements of works and develop the documentation for the solicitation process for securing a programme management firm. The project management team would develop overall project management guidelines and establish communication strategies with the substantive offices that would be most directly affected by the strategic heritage plan; and would collaborate with the programme management firm on the detailed phasing, planning and budgeting process, as described below. Section 34, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance Contractual services ($2,800,000) 2. Contractual resource requirements of $2,800,000 for the biennium 2012-2013 would cover the initial services of a programme management firm in developing the overall project implementation phasing plan, the multi-annual capital investment plan inclusive of financial analyses, and a detailed project schedule with key milestones. The firm would work closely with the United Nations Office at Geneva project management team on determining the necessary expertise and consultants required for the success of the project during all the phases of its implementation; and develop an overall consultant project management structure, similar to the management structure of the capital master plan, with a robust reporting system. At the conclusion of these tasks, the firm would provide a detailed report on the means of, and detailed requirements for, implementing the renovation and restoration works at the Palais des Nations. Resource requirements (at preliminary 2012-2013 rates) (United States dollars) Section/object of expenditure 2012-2013 estimate 29E, Administration, Geneva General temporary assistance 34, Construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance Contractual services (programme management firm)a Net requirements 37, Staff assessment Staff assessmentb Total a Calculated in Swiss francs (CHF) and converted based on a rate of 1 US$ = 1.046 CHF. b To be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1, Income from staff assessment. 