%%%PROGRAMME BUDGETING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|

Sixty-sixth session Agenda item 134 Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 Revised estimates relating to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, and section 37, Staff assessment related to the strengthening of the Office of the Director-General, United Nations Office at Nairobi Report of the Secretary-General Summary The resource requirements for the Office of the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Nairobi were presented as part of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination. However, owing to the timing of the finalization of the proposed programme budget, the requirements contained therein did not reflect adjustments arising from a subsequent review of the Office by the newly appointed Director-General. Following a thorough review of the resource requirements by the new Director-General, who was appointed with effect from 1 May 2011, additional requirements for the strengthening of the Office of the Director-General have been identified. These additional requirements under section 1 amount to $427,800 net ($462,200 after recosting). 1. The proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 for the Office of the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Nairobi was included in section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 (A/66/6 (Sect. 1)). A dedicated post of Director-General at the Under-Secretary-General level was established for the Office in the biennium 2010-2011 by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/243. Following the finalization of the proposed programme budget for the forthcoming biennium and the submission of the related budget fascicle, the newly appointed Director-General joined the United Nations Office at Nairobi and the overall level of requirements of the Office was subjected to a thorough review. Owing to the timing of the issuance of the budget fascicles, the additional resources identified during the review for the strengthening of the Office were not able to be incorporated in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013. 2. The review of the totality of resource requirements for the Office indicated that, following the establishment of the post of the Director-General at the Under-Secretary-General level and the appointment of the Director-General with effect from 1 May 2011, there was a need for some limited strengthening of the Office. The related essential requirements consist of the establishment of three new posts, the upward reclassification of an existing post and some non-post resources. The revised estimates for the Office included in the present report reflect the additional requirements of the Office under section 1 of the proposed programme budget and amount to $427,800 net ($462,200 after recosting). II. Proposals 3. At present, the Office of the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Nairobi comprises four posts (1 Under-Secretary-General, 2 P-5 posts and 1 Local level post). In order to augment and strengthen the capacity of the Office in the light of General Assembly resolution 64/243, it is proposed that three new posts be established (1 P-4 Protocol Officer and 2 Local level posts for an Administrative Assistant and a Legal Assistant). The proposed P-4 Protocol Officer would be responsible for carrying out the protocol functions of the Office and ensuring that the representational and liaison mandate of the United Nations Office at Nairobi is fully implemented. He/she would work closely with the representatives of the host Government, the diplomatic community and regional and subregional organizations. The Protocol Officer would also support the Director-General in her/his diplomatic and liaison functions as the representative of the Secretary-General in Nairobi. The proposed new Administrative Assistant would be responsible for providing administrative support and assistance to the Director-General, and the Legal Assistant would be responsible for providing assistance and support to the Senior Legal Officer of the Office in dealing with various legal issues, including relations with the host country. 4. It is also proposed that the post of Chief of Office (P-5) be reclassified to the D-1 level in recognition of the expanded operational, political and representational roles of the Office following the establishment and appointment of the dedicated Director-General post, which means it can no longer rely on the support of an established Executive Office, as was the case when the Director-General was also the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme. The Chief of Office will provide support to the Director-General's oversight and coordination of the service divisions of the Office and the strengthening of its political and representational capabilities. 5. Concurrent with the request for additional posts and the reclassification of a P-5 post to the D-1 level, it is also proposed that the existing non-post resources of the Office be augmented with additional resources under other staff costs, travel, equipment and other operational requirements for the additional staff, to allow the Office to carry out its mandated functions. III. Resource requirements 6. Resource requirements for the proposals indicated above for the biennium 2012-2013 amount to $427,800 net ($462,200 after recosting) and would provide for post costs in the amount of $319,900, comprising the proposed establishment of one P-4 and two Local level posts ($272,000) and the reclassification of one P-5 post to the D-1 level ($47,900), as well as for other operational requirements amounting to $107,900. A revised organization chart of the Office reflecting the staffing changes is provided in the annex to the present report. 7. The delayed impact of the three new posts requested in the present report for the biennium 2014-2015 is estimated at $200,300. IV. Conclusion 8. It is recalled that while the General Assembly approved the post of the Director-General at the Under-Secretary-General level, it did not appropriate any other post or non-post resources in support of the new Director-General. The Secretary-General believes that, with the establishment of a dedicated post of Director-General of the United Nations Office at Nairobi, it is important to comprehensively review resource arrangements and to provide the Office with the resources necessary for it to carry out effectively the wide range of functions and responsibilities undertaken at this duty station, where the United Nations system presence is substantial. The request contained in the present report reflects the most essential needs of the Office, and would considerably strengthen the Office of the Director-General. 9. Accordingly, should the General Assembly agree with the above proposals, additional resource requirements in the net amount of $462,200 would be required, in accordance with the provisions governing the contingency fund and the terms of Assembly resolutions 41/213 and 42/211. In this regard, it is recalled that the Assembly, in its resolution 65/262, approved a contingency fund for the biennium 2012-2013 in the amount of $40.5 million. V. Action to be taken by the General Assembly 10. The General Assembly is requested: (a) To approve the proposals of the Secretary-General for strengthening the Office of the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Nairobi; (b) To approve the establishment of three new posts in the Office (1 P-4 and 2 Local level) and the reclassification of the P-5 post of the Chief of Office to the D-1 level; (c) To approve a total amount of $520,200 for the biennium 2012-2013 as follows: under section 1, Overall policymaking, direction and coordination, $462,200, and under section 37, Staff assessment, $58,000, to be offset by a corresponding amount under Income section 1, Income from staff assessment, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013. Organizational structure and post distribution for the biennium 2012-2013: Office of the Director-General, United Nations Office at Nairobi a Reclassification. b New posts. 