%%%DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|INSTITUTIONAL MACHINERY|

Sixty-sixth session Agenda item 106 Revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations Report of the First Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Archil Gheghechkori (Georgia) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled "Revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations" was included in the agenda of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly in accordance with Assembly resolution 65/93 of 8 December 2010. 2. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the First Committee. 3. At its 3rd meeting, on 3 October 2011, the First Committee decided to hold a general debate on all disarmament and international security items allocated to it, namely, items 87 to 106. The general debate on those items was held at the 3rd to 9th meetings, from 3 to 7 and on 10 and 11 October (see A/C.1/66/PV.3-9). The Committee also held 11 meetings, from 12 to 14, from 17 to 21 and on 24 and 25 October, for an exchange of views with the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs and other high-level officials, as well as panel discussions with independent experts and follow-up to resolutions and decisions adopted at previous sessions (see A/C.1/66/PV.10-20). Thematic discussions on the items were held, and draft resolutions were introduced and considered, at the 10th to 20th meetings, from 12 to 14, from 17 to 21 and on 24 and 25 October (see A/C.1/66/PV.10-20). Action on all draft resolutions and decisions was taken at the 21st to 24th meetings, from 26 to 28 and on 31 October (see A/C.1/66/PV.21-24). 4. No documents were submitted for consideration under this item. II. Consideration of proposals A. Draft resolutions A/C.1/66/L.21 and Rev.1 5. At the 19th meeting, on 24 October, the representative of Austria, on behalf of Austria, Mexico and Norway, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations" (A/C.1/66/L.21). 6. At the 24th meeting, on 31 October, the representative of Austria, on behalf of Austria, Mexico and Norway, made a statement in the course of which he introduced a revised draft resolution (A/C.1/66/L.21/Rev.1) and informed the Committee that the sponsors of the draft resolution would not press for action on the draft resolution at that time. 7. At the same meeting, the Committee decided to take no action on the draft resolution. B. Draft resolution A/C.1/66/L.39 8. At the 19th meeting, on 24 October, the representative of South Africa, on behalf of the Netherlands, South Africa and Switzerland, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations" (A/C.1/66/L.39). Subsequently, Albania, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bulgaria, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Norway, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Swaziland, Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 9. At the 23rd meeting, on 28 October, the representative of South Africa, on behalf of the sponsors, orally revised operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution by inserting the words ", in the appropriate forums," after the words "Invites States". 10. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.1/66/L.39, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 11). 11. The First Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 65/93 of 8 December 2010, Reaffirming the importance of disarmament in strengthening global security and promoting international stability, Recognizing that the political will to advance the disarmament agenda has been strengthened in recent years and that the international political climate is conducive to the promotion of multilateral disarmament and moving towards the goal of a world without nuclear weapons, Affirming the importance of multilateralism in negotiations in the area of disarmament and non-proliferation, Mindful of the continuing importance of the Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum, as stated during the first special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, Recalling the past achievements of the Conference on Disarmament in successfully negotiating arms control and disarmament instruments, Reiterating its grave concern about the current status of the disarmament machinery, including the lack of substantive progress in the Conference on Disarmament for more than a decade, and stressing the need for greater efforts and flexibility to advance multilateral disarmament negotiations, Welcoming the efforts by Member States to secure progress in multilateral disarmament and the support of the Secretary-General for such efforts, and recalling the high-level meeting on revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations, held in New York on 24 September 2010, and the follow-up plenary meeting of the General Assembly, held from 27 to 29 July 2011, Noting with concern that, despite all efforts, the Conference on Disarmament has not been able to adopt and implement a programme of work during its 2011 session, Recognizing the contribution of civil society in the area of disarmament, nonproliferation and arms control, Mindful of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular Article 11 of Chapter IV concerning the functions and powers of the General Assembly in respect of disarmament, 1. Welcomes the opportunity provided by the high-level meeting on revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations, convened at the initiative of the Secretary-General in New York on 24 September 2010, and the follow-up plenary meeting of the General Assembly, held from 27 to 29 July 2011, to address the need to advance multilateral disarmament efforts; 2. Expresses appreciation for the support voiced for the urgent need to revitalize the work of multilateral disarmament bodies and to advance multilateral disarmament negotiations; 3. Notes with appreciation the continuing efforts and suggestions made by Member States and the Secretary-General with regard to revitalizing the multilateral disarmament machinery; 4. Calls upon States to intensify efforts aimed at creating an environment conducive to multilateral disarmament negotiations; 5. Invites States, in the appropriate forums, to explore, consider and consolidate options, proposals and elements for revitalization of the United Nations disarmament machinery as a whole, including the Conference on Disarmament; 6. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to adopt and implement a programme of work to enable it to resume substantive work on its agenda early in its 2012 session; 7. Recognizes the need to take stock, during the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, of all relevant efforts to take forward multilateral disarmament negotiations; 8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session the item entitled "Revitalizing the work of the Conference on Disarmament and taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations", to review progress made in the implementation of the present resolution and, if necessary, to further explore options for taking forward multilateral disarmament negotiations. 