%%%LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|LANDLOCKED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|

Sixty-sixth session Agenda item 22 Groups of countries in special situations * The report of the Committee on this item is being issued in three parts, under the symbol A/66/443 and Add.1 and 2. Report of the Second Committee* Rapporteur: Mr. Raymond Landveld (Suriname) 1. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled: "Groups of countries in special situations: "(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries; "(b) Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation" and to allocate it to the Second Committee. 2. The Second Committee held a substantive debate on the item at its 17th and 18th meetings, on 20 and 21 October 2011. An account of the Committee's discussion of the item is contained in the relevant summary records (A/C.2/66/SR.17 and 18). Attention is also drawn to the general debate held by the Committee at its 2nd to 6th meetings, from 3 to 5 October (see A/C.2/66/SR.2-6). An account of the Committee's further consideration of the item is given in the addenda to the present report. 3. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following documents: Item 22 Letter dated 27 September 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the Ministerial Declaration adopted at the thirty-fifth annual meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of 77 (A/66/388) Item 22 (a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries Report of the Secretary-General on the ten-year appraisal and review of the implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001-2010 (A/66/66-E/2011/78) Report of the Secretary-General on the outcome of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries (A/66/134) Item 22 (b) Specific actions related to the particular needs and problems of landlocked developing countries: outcome of the International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and International Financial and Development Institutions on Transit Transport Cooperation Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action: Addressing the Special Needs of Landlocked Developing Countries within a New Global Framework for Transit Transport Cooperation for Landlocked and Transit Developing Countries (A/66/205) Letter dated 27 September 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Paraguay to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (A/66/392) 4. At the 17th meeting, on 20 October, the Under-Secretary-General, Special Adviser on Africa and High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States made an introductory statement on sub-items (a) and (b) (see A/C.2/66/SR.17). 5. At the same meeting, the Under-Secretary-General, Special Adviser on Africa and High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States responded to the comments made and questions posed by the representatives of the United Republic of Tanzania, Argentina, Mongolia, Bangladesh and Afghanistan (see A/C.2/66/SR.17). 