%%%HOST COUNTRY RELATIONS|DIPLOMATIC PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES|TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS|DIPLOMATS|CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|PERMANENT MISSIONS|DIPLOMATIC VEHICLES|AUTOMOBILE PARKING|

Sixty-sixth session Agenda item 166 Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Ms. Jacqueline Kemunto Moseti (Kenya) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country" was included in the provisional agenda of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly pursuant to Assembly resolution 65/35 of 6 December 2010. 2. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2011, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee. 3. The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 30th meeting, on 11 November 2011. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary record (A/C.6/66/SR.30). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country (A/66/26). 5. At the 30th meeting, on 11 November, the Chair of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country introduced the report of that Committee (see A/C.6/66/SR.30). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/66/L.23 6. At the 30th meeting, on 11 November, the representative of Cyprus, on behalf of Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire and Cyprus, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country" (A/C.6/66/L.23). 7. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/66/L.23 without a vote (see para. 8). III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee 8. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations and the responsibilities of the host country, Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and advise the host country on, issues arising in connection with the implementation of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations, Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel, 1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 39 of its report;1 2. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations and the observance of their privileges and immunities, which is an issue of great importance, are in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, and requests the host country to continue to solve, through negotiations, problems that might arise and to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the functioning of missions; and urges the host country to continue to take appropriate action, such as training of police, security, customs and border control officers, with a view to maintaining respect for diplomatic privileges and immunities and if violations occur to ensure that such cases are properly investigated and remedied, in accordance with applicable law; 3. Notes the problems experienced by some permanent missions in connection with the implementation of the Parking Programme for Diplomatic Vehicles, and notes that the Committee shall remain seized of the matter, with a view to continuing to maintain the proper implementation of the Parking Programme in a manner that is fair, non-discriminatory, effective and therefore consistent with international law; 4. Requests the host country to consider removing the remaining travel restrictions imposed by it on staff of certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities, and in this regard notes the long-standing positions of affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country; 5. Notes the concerns expressed by some delegations concerning the denial and delay of entry visas to representatives of Member States; 6. Also notes that the Committee anticipates that the host country will continue to enhance its efforts to ensure the issuance of entry visas, in a timely manner, to representatives of Member States, pursuant to article IV, section 11, of the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations3 to travel to New York on United Nations business, and that the Committee anticipates that the host country will continue to enhance efforts, including visa issuance, to facilitate the participation of representatives of Member States in other United Nations meetings, as appropriate; 7. Further notes that a number of delegations have requested shortening the time frame applied by the host country for issuance of entry visas to representatives of Member States, since this time frame poses difficulties for the full-fledged participation of Member States in United Nations meetings; 8. Notes the concerns over the decision by JPMorgan Chase Bank to close all bank accounts held by Permanent Missions to the United Nations by 31 March 2011, and welcomes the efforts of the host country to facilitate the opening of bank accounts for permanent missions with other financial institutions; 9. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and hopes that the issues raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law; 10. Affirms the importance of the Committee being in a position to fulfil its mandate and meet on short notice to deal with urgent and important matters concerning the relations between the United Nations and the host country, and in that connection requests the Secretariat and the Committee on Conferences to accord priority to requests from the Committee on Relations with the Host Country for conference-servicing facilities for meetings of that Committee that must be held while the General Assembly and its Main Committees are meeting, without prejudice to the requirements of those bodies and on an "as available" basis; 11. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United Nations with the host country; 12. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI); 13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session the item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country". 