%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|ABYEI (SUDAN)|SUDAN|SOUTH SUDAN|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|RESULTS-BASED BUDGETING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|PROGRAMME PLANNING|ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE|MAPS|

Sixty-sixth session Agenda item 147 Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei Budget for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Page Mandate and planned results Overall Planning assumptions and mission support initiatives Regional mission cooperation Partnerships and country team coordination Results-based-budgeting frameworks Financial resources Non-budgeted contributions Efficiency gains Vacancy factors Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment Training Mine detection and mine-clearing services Quick-impact projects Analysis of resource requirements Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Annexes Definitions Organization charts Map Summary The present report contains the budget for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, which amounts to $180,691,900. The budget provides for the deployment of 135 military observers, 4,065 military contingent personnel, 50 United Nations police officers, 97 international staff, 60 national staff and 20 United Nations Volunteers. The total resource requirements for UNISFA for the financial period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 have been linked to the mission's objective through a number of results-based-budgeting frameworks, organized according to components (security and governance in the Abyei Area, and support). The human resources of the mission, in terms of the number of personnel, have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of the mission's executive direction and management, which can be attributed to the mission as a whole. The explanations of variances in resource levels, both human resources and financial resources, have been linked, where applicable, to specific outputs planned by the mission. (Thousands of United States dollars; budget year is from 1 July to 30 June) Category Cost estimates Military and police personnel Civilian personnel Operational costs Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total requirements Human resourcesa Planned Authorized/proposeda Actual 21 September 2011 31 December 2011 31 March 2012 30 June 2012 Military observers Military contingent United Nations police International staff National staffb United Nations Volunteers a Represents highest level of authorized/proposed strength. b Includes National Officers and national General Service staff. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are set out in section IV of the present report. A. Overall 1. By its resolution 1990 (2011), the Security Council established the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and decided that UNISFA would comprise a maximum of 4,200 military personnel, 50 police personnel and appropriate civilian support. 2. The mission is mandated to help the Security Council achieve an overall objective, namely, support for the implementation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area, to allow for returns, ensure the protection of civilians and support the peaceful administration of the Abyei Area. 3. Within this overall objective, UNISFA will, during the budgetary period, contribute to a number of expected accomplishments by delivering related key outputs, shown in the frameworks below. These frameworks are organized according to two components, namely, security and governance in the Abyei Area, and support, which are derived from the mandate of the mission. 4. The expected accomplishments would lead to the fulfilment of the Security Council's objective within the lifetime of the mission, and the indicators of achievement show a measurement of progress towards such accomplishments during the budgetary period. The human resources of UNISFA, in terms of the number of personnel, have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of the mission's executive direction and management, which can be attributed to the mission as a whole. Explanations on the number of personnel have been provided under the respective components. 5. UNISFA will be headed by the Head of Mission, who also serves as Force Commander at the Assistant Secretary-General level. The mission will have an area-based and decentralized organizational structure comprising a mission headquarters in Abyei town and 10 company operating bases in the Abyei Area. The Deputy Force Commander, the Chief of Mission Support, the Principal Adviser, the Force Chief of Staff, the Senior Police Adviser, the Chief Security Adviser and the two liaison offices in Juba and Khartoum, led by two Senior Military Officers, will report directly to the Head of Mission. 6. The mission will establish a Force headquarters in Abyei town and three infantry battalions supported by two tank companies, two artillery batteries and associated enabling units, including an aviation unit, a multirole logistics unit, a level II medical facility, an engineering company with well-drilling capacity, a quick-reaction force and a demining platoon. Mine action capacity will be provided by a military demining platoon, supplemented by an operational coordination component and route verification, survey and clearance teams provided by the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), with the assistance of the United Nations Mine Action Service. 7. The headquarters will serve as the principal interface with the joint bodies outlined in the Agreement of 20 June 2011, namely, the Abyei Area Administration, the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the Abyei Police Service. The 11 company operating bases (consisting of three operating bases transferred from the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and eight new sites to be constructed) will be of sufficient size for the conduct of at least two independent patrols concurrently and will be located in Abyei town, Agok, Athony, Diffra, Dumboloya, Goli, Noong, Soheib, Tajalei, Um Khaer and Um Khariet. The bases will be established on the basis of military monitoring and verification requirements. Temporary operating bases and permanent and non-permanent checkpoints may also be established in response to emerging threats. 8. The police component will be composed of personnel from multiple police-contributing countries, organized into three units. One unit will assist with the vetting, selection and recruitment of the Abyei Police Service, the second will focus on training and development, and the third (and largest) will provide operational support. The operational component will be based in Abyei, Agok and other locations occupied by the Abyei Police Service. 9. The substantive civilian staff of UNISFA will be limited to those performing functions essential to the mandate, including providing support to the Force Commander and maintaining liaison with the Abyei Area Administration, the parties to the 20 June Agreement, local communities and humanitarian actors, as well as managerial and organizational functions, including planning and reporting. There will also be a civilian security presence, comprising 16 international and national staff deployed across the 11 locations. 10. The General Assembly, in its resolution 65/257 B, appropriated and assessed an amount of $482,460,550 for the maintenance of UNMIS for the six-month period from 1 July to 31 December 2011. The Assembly also authorized the Secretary-General to draw upon the resources approved for UNMIS in entering into commitments for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2011 for UNISFA and any other missions established by the Security Council before 31 December 2011 in support of the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. In addition, the Assembly noted the intention of the Council, as stated in its resolution 1978 (2011), to establish a successor mission to UNMIS, and authorized the Secretary-General to draw upon the resources approved for UNMIS in entering into commitments for a successor mission for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2011. 11. The Security Council, in its resolutions 1990 (2011) and 1996 (2011), decided to establish UNISFA and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), respectively. Accordingly, pursuant to authorization granted by the General Assembly in resolution 65/257 B on the financing of UNMIS, commitment authorities were provided for the deployment of UNMISS and UNISFA in the amount of $277,915,150 and $93,452,600, respectively, with the balance of appropriation, in the amount of $111,092,800, utilized for the withdrawal of UNMIS. Of the amount of $482,460,550 that the Assembly assessed upon Member States in resolution 65/257 B, the amount of $137,532,000 is to be applied to the Special Account for UNMIS, the amount of $277,915,150 is to be applied to the Special Account for UNMISS, and the balance, in the amount of $67,013,400, is to be applied to the Special Account for UNISFA. B. Planning assumptions and mission support initiatives 12. With the end of the interim period under the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the status of Abyei, an oil-rich area on the border between the Sudan and South Sudan, remains unresolved. A build-up of Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) forces beginning in early 2011 culminated in a major SAF offensive as from 20 May 2011, a population exodus to Agok and across the border into South Sudan, and widespread looting and damage. 13. On 20 June 2011, with the assistance of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) signed the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on Temporary Arrangements for the Administration and Security of the Abyei Area. The Agreement provides for the total withdrawal of armed forces, the full demilitarization of the Abyei Area and the deployment of an interim security force of up to 4,200 troops following Security Council authorization. It also provides for the establishment of an Abyei Area Administration, to be jointly administered by an SPLM-nominated Chief Administrator and a Deputy nominated by the Government of the Sudan, an Abyei Joint Oversight Committee with the power to supervise and promote security and stability, and an Abyei Police Service. 14. Resolution 1990 (2011) gives UNISFA a mandate, including to monitor and verify the redeployment of armed forces from the Abyei Area in accordance with the 20 June Agreement; to participate in relevant Abyei Area bodies as stipulated in the Agreement; to provide demining assistance and technical advice; to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and the free movement of humanitarian personnel, in coordination with relevant Abyei Area bodies; to strengthen the capacity of the Abyei Police Service by providing support, including the training of personnel, and coordinate with the Service on matters of law and order; and, when necessary and in cooperation with the Service, to provide security for oil infrastructure in the Abyei Area. The Security Council also gave UNISFA authorization under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to protect United Nations personnel, facilities, installations and equipment; to ensure the security and freedom of movement of United Nations and humanitarian personnel and members of the Joint Military Observers Committee and joint military observer teams established under the 20 June Agreement; to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence; and to protect the Area from incursions by unauthorized elements and ensure security. 15. The military contingent of 4,200 personnel will include 116 staff officers and 135 military observers. All military personnel, except for a number of staff officers and military observers, will be contributed by Ethiopia. The police component will be composed of personnel from various police-contributing countries. 16. The initial deployment of the force was completed by August 2011. The deployment of the police personnel will coincide with the establishment of the Abyei Police Service, with the exception of a small number deployed as part of an advance team for planning purposes. 17. In the initial phase of its operations, UNISFA will have the following primary goals: (a) establishing a robust presence to enhance security; (b) monitoring and verifying the redeployment of SAF and SPLA, or its successor, from the Abyei Area; (c) establishing relationships with the relevant Abyei Area bodies; (d) strengthening the capacity of the nascent Abyei Police Service; and (e) addressing the threat posed by mines and unexploded ordnance. Those activities are expected to contribute to an environment conducive to the voluntary return of the 113,000 displaced persons, the delivery of humanitarian aid and the free movement of humanitarian personnel. Furthermore, the stabilization of Abyei will build confidence between the parties to the 20 June Agreement, helping to create an environment conducive to political negotiations on the final status of Abyei and other outstanding issues. 18. It is assumed that the parties are willing to implement the 20 June Agreement and that UNISFA will have the required operating environment to support the implementation of its mandate. The successful implementation of the mandate will also depend on force deployment, the dispatch of civilian support staff, the processing by the Government of the Sudan of visas and clearances, and rapid progress in the construction of facilities that meet United Nations safety standards. 19. It can also be assumed that the security situation will remain fragile in the context of the upcoming migration season, the ongoing disputes over land use and ownership between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities, and the widespread presence of arms. The new Abyei Police Service is likely to take some time to reach operational capacity and will be dependent on the establishment of the Abyei Area Administration, as stipulated in the 20 June Agreement. Discord over the nomination of the Chief Administrator has slowed the implementation of the Agreement, despite the swift deployment of United Nations troops to Abyei. The widespread looting and damage that occurred in the context of the fighting of May 2011 will have an impact on security and returns and will require extensive communal reconciliation, especially since formal mechanisms for compensation are not in place. Contamination from landmines and explosive remnants of war is also expected, given recent hostilities and past limitations on demining activity, and will both pose a threat to civilians and humanitarian actors and place a constraint on UNISFA operations. Large-scale returns are unlikely until the armed forces withdraw, a functional administration is established and the threat posed by landmines is addressed. 20. Discussions on the final status of Abyei will continue to have inflammatory potential inside the Area and between the Sudan and South Sudan. The 20 June Agreement commits the parties to the consideration of African Union High-level Implementation Panel proposals towards the peaceful resolution of the final status of Abyei, but those negotiations will be complex and linked to a wide range of issues that remain to be addressed between the two Governments. Although UNISFA will work closely with the parties, the Abyei Area Administration and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, and will coordinate with the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan and with the Panel, the mission does not have a mandate with respect to the political process. 21. With respect to military personnel, the timeline for the deployment of the military contingent and the police component has included a 15 per cent delayed deployment factor in addition to phased deployment. As regards civilian staff, the present report reflects the proposed establishment of a total of 177 posts, comprising 97 international staff, 60 national staff and 20 United Nations Volunteers. In estimating resource requirements for civilian staffing, vacancy rates of 20 per cent for international staff, 15 per cent for national staff and 20 per cent for United Nations Volunteers have been used, in addition to phased deployment. 22. The mission will be deployed in a footprint consisting of 15 locations, including 4 taken over from UNMIS; UNISFA support staff located in Entebbe; liaison offices in Khartoum and Juba; and 8 locations to be constructed. Given the urgency of the requirement, it is expected that construction will begin on three sites within the financial year 2011/12, whereas the resources for the construction of camps in the remaining five locations will be requested in the budget proposal for 2012/13. It is expected that United Nations police personnel, international civilian staff and United Nations Volunteers will be collocated with the military contingent. 23. Contingent-owned equipment will be deployed overland from Addis Ababa to Abyei to mission locations, with contingents initially deployed to Kadugli by air, before being deployed overland and by air assets into the mission area. 24. Key assets for the mission will be transferred from UNMIS. Thus, there will be minimal acquisitions of vehicles and communications and information technology, medical and other equipment. 25. Aviation support for UNISFA will leverage mission contingent-owned equipment, United Nations contracted assets and shared regional aviation assets. Aviation assets will be used for the full range of tasks, including casualty evacuation, command and liaison, military patrol insertion and extraction, observation, resupply and movement. It is anticipated that aviation assets will include one Dash fixed-wing aircraft; one Mi-26 heavy-lift helicopter, shared among UNMISS, UNAMID and UNISFA; and two utility helicopters and two tactical helicopters located in Abyei. 26. No significant infrastructure support for the Government authorities (for example, state/county offices, police stations, prisons, equipment) is expected to be provided by the mission, and no dedicated resources are proposed. C. Regional mission cooperation 27. While the mandate and activities of UNISFA will be distinct from those of UNMISS, the mission will draw significantly on existing logistical arrangements and support structures in UNMISS, which will significantly reduce its initial presence on the ground. D. Partnerships and country team coordination 28. Given the small size of the UNISFA civilian component, strong civil-military coordination will be essential to support the delivery of humanitarian aid, ensure the safety and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel, and capitalize on synergies between the roles of the military and police components with regard to the physical protection of civilians and the programmatic roles of United Nations funds, programmes and agencies that are operational in Abyei. UNISFA will coordinate its activities with United Nations funds, programmes and agencies present in Abyei, as well as with national and international non-governmental organizations and bilateral donors, through a civilian-military coordination structure, supported by humanitarian actors in Abyei town. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs will be the primary interface for UNISFA on these issues. 29. The Security Council, in resolution 1990 (2011), requested the Secretary-General to ensure that effective human rights monitoring was carried out and the results included in his reports to the Security Council. This function will be performed by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. UNISFA will coordinate with the human rights presence on issues relevant to its mandate, including the protection of civilians, and will provide logistical support to human rights personnel. 30. The humanitarian community continues to negotiate with the authorities of the Sudan and South Sudan to ensure that assistance is provided to the extent possible to people in need in the Area. Currently, as most of the persons displaced from the conflict in Abyei are located in South Sudan, they continue to receive assistance there, and it is unlikely that they will return home before the end of the rainy season, and in any case not before the full withdrawal of SAF from Abyei and the demining of the Area. E. Results-based-budgeting frameworks Executive direction and management 31. Overall mission direction and management are to be provided by the Office of the Head of Mission/Force Commander. Table 1 Human resources: executive direction and management National staffa Total USG- ASG D-2- D-1 P-5- P-4 P-3- P-1 Field Service Subtotal Office of the Force Commander Office of the Deputy Force Commander Liaison Office Office of the Force Chief of Staff Office of the Principal Officer Total proposed a Includes national General Service staff. 32. The Head of Mission, at the Assistant Secretary-General level, is responsible for the implementation of the UNISFA mandate and the overall management of the mission, and will serve as Area Security Coordinator in the mission. The Head of Mission will also serve as Force Commander and will therefore be responsible for the operations of the military contingent, including the provision of security; the protection of United Nations personnel, facilities, installations and equipment and civilians under imminent threat of violence; the facilitation of the delivery of humanitarian aid and the free movement of humanitarian personnel; the protection of the Area from incursions; and the provision of security for oil infrastructure. He will be supported by a Special Assistant (P-4), a Personal Assistant (Field Service) and an Administrative Assistant (national General Service). 33. The Deputy Force Commander (D-2) will support the Head of Mission and will serve as Officer-in-Charge when the Head of Mission is outside the mission area. The Deputy Force Commander will be supported by an Administrative Assistant (Field Service). 34. In order to provide continuous liaison with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, liaison offices will be established in Khartoum and Juba. Each liaison office will be headed by a Senior Military Officer from the military component, and will be supported by a P-4 Liaison Officer and a national General Service staff member. The Liaison Officer will consult with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan on the deployment and operations of the mission, including the status-of-forces agreement, clearances, visas and other administrative matters. The incumbent will also serve as the civilian representative of the mission, for the purpose of information-sharing and the organization of high-level visits to the mission area. 35. The Force Chief of Staff (D-1) will direct, supervise and coordinate the work of nine military sections in the Force headquarters on day-to-day multidimensional operations, reporting directly to the Force Commander. The incumbent will also be responsible for the development and issuance of standard operating procedures, orders, plans, directives and policies in the Force headquarters. She or he will coordinate briefings in the Force headquarters and update the Force Commander on the progress of military operations. In addition, the incumbent will be responsible for the coordination of all matters concerning strategic planning, operations, personnel management, information management and civil-military cooperation, as well as other cross-cutting issues affecting UNISFA and other United Nations and non-governmental agencies. 36. The Principal Officer (D-1) will function as the primary adviser to the Head of Mission on strategic matters relevant to the implementation of the mandate and relations with external actors. She or he will conduct consultations on behalf of the Head of Mission with the Government of the Sudan, the Government of South Sudan, the Abyei Area Administration and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, towards the implementation of the 20 June Agreement. He or She will be supported by a Programme Officer (P-3). The Office of the Principal Officer will comprise a Coordination Officer (P-4) to conduct overall mission-wide coordination, including the coordination and development of mission planning, results-based-budgeting frameworks, staffing, legal affairs and conduct and discipline issues; a Reporting Officer (P-4) to fulfil Security Council-mandated reporting requirements, manage day-to-day information with sectoral offices and United Nations Headquarters, and monitor the media and developments in the humanitarian situation; a Reporting Officer (P-3) to monitor the media and developments in the humanitarian situation and provide substantive feedback on a daily basis regarding developments in the Abyei Area; a Protocol Assistant (Field Service) to provide support in all protocol-related matters, including high-level visits and relations with the Abyei Area Administration; and two Administrative Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 national General Service). Component 1: security and governance in the Abyei Area 37. Following the withdrawal of SAF, SPLA and other armed forces, UNISFA will provide the sole military presence in Abyei. In order to monitor demilitarization, deter threats, maintain situational awareness, build confidence and help create conditions conducive to the safety and security of humanitarian operations, UNISFA will conduct mobile and static operations, carry out day and night patrols and provide escorts upon request. When necessary, the mission will provide security for oil infrastructure, in cooperation with the Abyei Police Service. During the dry season, the mission will devote additional resources to key areas to ensure secure seasonal migration. To support the implementation of the security aspects of the 20 June Agreement, it will facilitate the work of the Joint Military Observers Committee and the joint military observer teams, with the Force Commander chairing the Committee. 38. To support the provision of security, the delivery of humanitarian aid, freedom of movement and the protection of civilians under imminent threat, the United Nations Mine Action Service, together with UNOPS and in collaboration with UNISFA, will undertake emergency humanitarian mine action operations. Reducing the risk of death and injury from landmines and explosive remnants of war will have the additional benefit of encouraging voluntary returns. During the first six months, mine action operations will focus on the survey of hazardous areas, the clearance and destruction of landmines and explosive remnants of war, risk education for United Nations staff, data management and coordination and quality assurance. 39. In support of the Force's mandate to strengthen the capacity of the Abyei Police Service, the police component will assist in the design of the Service, in coordination with the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee; develop criteria for vetting, selection and recruitment; provide training and mentoring; and mobilize donor support. To contribute to the enhancement of the local community's confidence with regard to the security situation, it will also assist in the development of operational plans and procedures to address migration, nomad-related issues, livestock theft, oil infrastructure protection and gender issues, and will provide guidance and assistance in implementing a community policing strategy to improve public and police relations. The component will also coordinate with the Service to support complementary improvements in the corrections system, to ensure that increases in the police presence do not lead to an overstretching of the capacity of local prisons. Expected accomplishments Indicators of achievement 1.1 Provision of security to deter violence, ensure the protection of civilians under immediate threat and facilitate safe voluntary returns, the delivery of humanitarian assistance and peaceful migration 1.1.1 Voluntary return of the majority of the 113,000 displaced persons to their places of origin 1.1.2 Reduction in the number of cases of civilian death, injury or sexual and gender-based violence as a result of armed attacks 1.1.3 Zero incidents of attacks against humanitarian actors 1.1.4 Zero reported incidents of inter-communal violence during migration 1.1.5 Reduction in the number of casualties from accidents caused by mines and explosive remnants of war Outputs :: 274,500 troop-patrol days in priority areas to provide area security, verify redeployment and prevent incursions (30 troops per patrol x 25 patrols per day x 366 days) :: 50 United Nations Military Observer patrols to maintain liaison with local communities and authorities and monitor movements at the Abyei border :: 87,840 troop-patrol days for provision of static security for oil infrastructure in the Diffra area (30 troops per patrol x 8 patrols per day x 366 days) :: 2,160 flight hours for observation of the demilitarization of armed groups and investigation of incidents (1.47 hours per helicopter per day x 4 helicopters x 366 days) :: Route verification of 450 km of road suspected of contamination from landmines/explosive remnants of war owing to the recent conflict :: Route clearance of 90 km of road suspected of contamination from mines/explosive remnants of war owing to the recent conflict :: Advice to Abyei Area Administration and Abyei Joint Oversight Committee through monthly updates, or as requested, to outline operational priorities and requirements for hazardous area survey, landmine and explosive remnants of war clearance and marking, and risk education in support of the return of internally displaced persons, and the security and freedom of movement of personnel and communities :: Daily and weekly liaison with local authorities, community representatives, civic associations and women's groups to analyse threats, address security concerns, resolve conflicts and build confidence :: Advice to the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, the Abyei Area Administration, the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and troop- and police-contributing countries, through monthly meetings, to improve understanding of the mandate, role and activities of UNISFA and address security concerns :: Regular liaison with the humanitarian community through a joint civil-military coordination structure to share information on threats to civilians, investigate protection concerns and develop coordinated protection plans :: Facilitation of implementation of and compliance with military aspects of the 20 June Agreement, through bi-monthly (twice a month) meetings of the Joint Military Observers Committee, chaired by the Force Commander 1.2 Functioning Abyei Police Service, in accordance with the 20 June Agreement 1.2.1 Deployment throughout the Abyei Area of Abyei Police Service officers with full capability to conduct basic policing activities 1.2.2 All reported cases of localized conflict, including disputes over land and migration, dealt with by peaceful means by the Abyei Police Service with the support of the Abyei Area Administration and the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee :: Advice on the composition, structure and organization of the Abyei Police Service and on the establishment of basic policing structures, through 6 meetings with the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the Abyei Administration :: Support for selection and vetting of up to 250 officers, in coordination with the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee :: Organization of 25 training-of-trainers sessions on police training development, delivery and evaluations, with a specific focus on basic policing skills, public order, leadership, human rights and gender issues, with a view to establishing a police institution in Abyei :: Training of 250 officers in the fields of basic policing, supervisory and command issues, community policing, investigations, human rights, law enforcement and gender issues :: Seven joint police patrols with Abyei Police Service per week in priority areas of Abyei and Agok :: Development of up to 4 operational plans, including procedures, and guidelines to address (a) migration and nomadic-related issues, (b) livestock theft, (c) oil infrastructure protection and (d) gender issues, in conjunction with the Abyei Police Service External factors All parties will remain committed to the Agreement and the implementation of resolution 1990 (2011). UNISFA will be accorded full freedom of movement. Table 2 Human resources: component 1, security and governance in the Abyei Area I. Military observers Proposed 2011/12 II. Military contingents III. United Nations police IV. Civilian staff National staff a Office of the Senior Police Adviser 40. A Senior Police Adviser (P-5) will be responsible for the work of the 50-strong police component and will oversee the formulation and implementation of policies, programmes and strategies for the implementation of its mandated tasks. The Senior Police Adviser will provide advice to the Head of Mission on all matters related to policing. He or she will provide technical advice to the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, which has the role of supervising and promoting security and stability, and providing guidance on the capacity-building and strengthening of the Abyei Police Service. He or she will be supported by a Reform and Restructuring Coordinator (P-4), who will provide support to the Abyei Police Service on reform and restructuring issues. Responsibilities will include liaison with senior Abyei Police Service and other national officials, and the management of capacity-building projects to support the creation of an accountable and responsive Police Service. One Administrative Assistant (Field Service) will provide administrative and logistical management support to the police component. Two Language Assistants (national General Service) will provide language assistance and facilitate the police component's daily interaction with local authorities, local counterparts and the local population. Component 2: support 41. During the budgetary period, the component will provide effective and efficient logistical, administrative and technical services to support the implementation of the mandate of UNISFA. This includes personnel administration, the maintenance and construction of office and accommodation facilities, communications and information technology, air and surface transport operations, medical services, property management, camp services, supply and resupply operations, and security services. 2.1 Effective and efficient logistical, administrative and security support for the Mission 2.1.1 100 per cent of national staff recruited before the end of the period 2011/12 2.1.2 Refurbishment and establishment of hard-wall and soft-wall accommodation for headquarters and medical facilities for mission personnel Military, police and civilian personnel :: Emplacement, rotation and repatriation of an average strength of 2,439 military contingent personnel and staff officers, 80 military observers and 38 United Nations police officers :: Verification, monitoring and inspection of contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment for military and police personnel :: Storage and supply of 130,000 tons of rations, 45 tons of combat rations and 100,350 litres of water for military contingent personnel in 3 locations :: Administration of an average of 125 civilian staff, comprising 78 international staff, 34 national staff and 13 United Nations Volunteers :: Implementation of a conduct and discipline programme for all military, police and civilian personnel, including training, prevention, monitoring and disciplinary action Facilities and infrastructure :: Construction of 3 operating bases :: Maintenance of the 4 existing bases :: Sanitation services for all premises, including sewage and garbage collection and disposal :: Operation and maintenance of 14 United Nations-owned water purification plants and 1 contingent-owned plant, in 12 locations :: Operation and maintenance of 24 United Nations-owned wastewater treatment plants, in 12 locations :: Operation and maintenance of 44 United Nations-owned and contingent-owned generators, in 12 locations :: Storage and supply of 5.4 million litres of diesel oil and lubricants for generators :: Maintenance and renovation of 155 km of road between Agok-Abyei-Diffra and other company operating bases :: Maintenance and repair of 12 helicopter landing site facilities in 12 locations and 2 airfields in 2 locations Ground transportation :: Operation and maintenance of 230 United Nations-owned vehicles and 580 contingent-owned vehicles through 2 static workshops in 2 locations and 4 mobile workshops serving the remaining 10 locations :: Supply of 1.8 million litres of diesel, oil and lubricants for ground transportation Air transportation :: Operation and maintenance of 1 fixed-wing and 5 rotary-wing aircraft, including 2 military-type aircraft :: Supply of 2.3 million litres of fuel, oil and lubricants for air operations Communications :: Support and maintenance of a satellite network consisting of 4 Earth station hubs in 2 locations to provide voice, fax, video and data communications :: Support and maintenance of 3 telephone exchanges and 10 microwave links :: Support and maintenance of 1 high-frequency and 2 very-high-frequency radio network facilities and related equipment, and 12 repeaters and transmitters for these networks Information technology :: Support and maintenance of 5 servers, 100 desktop computers, 60 laptop computers, 50 printers and 32 digital senders :: Support and maintenance of 13 local-area networks and 4 wide-area networks for 500 users in 13 locations, and 5 wireless area networks in 2 locations Medical :: Operation and maintenance of 1 United Nations-owned level I clinic, and monitoring of 6 troop-contributing country level I clinics capable of splitting into 12 forward medical teams, and 1 troop-contributing country level II hospital, as well as 1 aeromedical evacuation team, distributed across 13 locations for all mission personnel and, where collocated, for staff members of other United Nations agencies and the local civilian population in emergency cases :: Maintenance of mission-wide land and air evacuation arrangements for all United Nations locations, including evacuation to level III hospitals in Uganda, Ethiopia and the Sudan :: Operation and maintenance of HIV voluntary confidential counselling and testing facilities for all mission personnel :: Conduct of an HIV sensitization programme, including peer education, for all mission personnel Security :: Provision of security services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for the entire mission area, including access control and screening, maintenance of daily security personnel records, and conduct of security risk assessments as and when required :: Mission-wide site security risk assessment, including security surveys for 13 mission sites :: Conduct of 18 information sessions on security awareness and contingency plans for all mission staff, and induction security training and primary fire training/drills for all new mission staff Movement of staff and deployment of operational resources will not be interrupted. Vendors, contractors and suppliers will deliver goods, services and supplies as contracted. Table 3 Human resources: component 2, support D-1- P-4- Field Service National staffa Office of the Chief of Mission Support Office of the Chief of Administrative Services Administrative Services Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services Integrated Support Services Safety and Security Section a Includes National Officers and national General Service staff. Budget Unit Contracts Management Unit Aviation Safety Unit Claims and Board of Inquiry Unit 42. The Chief of Mission Support (D-1) will be based in Abyei and will be accountable to the Head of Mission for the effective management of the human, financial and physical resources of UNISFA. The Chief of Mission Support will establish controls consistent with institutional rules, regulations, policies and practices to ensure effective and efficient resource management, as well as plan, direct and evaluate the delivery of logistical and administrative support services within the mission so as to ensure the fulfilment of its mandate. He or she will ensure the effective integration of the mission's civilian, military and police administrative and logistical capabilities. 43. He or she will be assisted by two Administrative Officers (1 P-4 and 1 P-3) and two Administrative Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 national General Service), all based in Abyei. One Administrative Officer (P-4) will provide support in planning, organizing, implementing, managing and overseeing the activities of the administrative component. He or she will provide strategic, policy and implementation support and recommendations to the Chief of Mission Support while leading the development of strategies, policies, procedures, projects and implementation plans. He or she will analyse and provide options for the resolution of issues between the mission and the agencies, funds and programmes and United Nations Headquarters, as well as within UNISFA. One Administrative Officer (P-3) will support the Chief of Mission Support on various administrative issues. He or she will serve as the administrative liaison officer, maintaining liaison with all support and substantive section chiefs. He or she will also function as the mission audit focal point and undertake the assessment of reporting requirements, track deadlines and ensure responses on the part of all mission components as appropriate. He or she will provide oversight on issues relating to the mission's Board of Inquiry, ensuring that inquiries are conducted in accordance with applicable rules and policies, and will coordinate the timely implementation of recommendations. The two Administrative Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 national General Service) will be responsible for the support activities of the Office of the Chief of Mission Support. Reporting directly to the Chief of Mission Support will be the Budget Unit, the Contracts Management Unit, the Aviation Safety Unit, and the Claims and Board of Inquiry Unit. 44. The Budget Unit will be based in Entebbe and will be responsible for the preparation of the mission's budget and performance reports, and for the monitoring of expenditures on an ongoing basis. The Unit will be headed by a Chief Budget Officer (P-4) and will be supported by two Budget Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 United Nations Volunteer). 45. The Contracts Management Unit will be based in Entebbe and will be responsible for the effective implementation of service and supply contracts in order to achieve probity and proper performance of obligations by all parties. The Unit will comprise two Contracts Management Officers (1 P-3 and 1 Field Service) and one Contracts Management Assistant (United Nations Volunteer). 46. The Aviation Safety Unit will be based in Abyei and will comprise one Aviation Safety Officer (P-3), who will be responsible for advising the Chief of Mission Support and mission management on all matters related to aviation safety, promoting aviation safety awareness and implementing the mission's aviation safety programmes. He or she will also be responsible for the identification of aviation hazards and for participation in the risk evaluation and risk mitigation processes. He or she will coordinate and provide training on aviation safety and will prepare and distribute materials on aviation safety awareness. 47. The Claims and Board of Inquiry Unit will be based in Entebbe and will comprise one Board of Inquiry Officer (P-3) and two Claims Assistants (Field Service). The Officer will maintain liaison with the audit team at United Nations Headquarters to exchange information and seek guidance on related policy matters. The Claims Assistants will perform claims-related tasks, including the provision of administrative support to the Chair of the Local Property Survey Board; and the Chair of the Claims Review Board; review and analyse compensation claims; and participate in claim survey missions (on-site visits) within the area of operations. Office of the Chief of Administration Services 48. The Chief of Administrative Services (P-5) will be based in Entebbe and will be responsible for the coordination and effective delivery of administrative services to mission personnel and act as a principal adviser to the Chief of Mission Support on all management matters pertaining to administrative services. He or she will establish policies, accounting procedures, standards and tools consistent with United Nations policy and practice, and will provide the effective management of the human, financial and physical resources of the sections reporting to the incumbent. The Chief will be assisted by two Administrative Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 national General Service). Finance Section Human Resources Section Procurement Section Staff Counselling and Welfare Unit 49. The Finance Section will be headed by a Chief Finance Officer (P-4) and will be supported by four Finance Assistants (2 Field Service and 2 national General Service). The Chief Finance Officer will be based in Entebbe and will be responsible for approving the mission's disbursements and obligations, maintaining the mission's accounts and ensuring the proper implementation of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and other instructions. Two Finance Assistants (1 Field Service and 1 national General Service) will be located in Entebbe and will be responsible for maintaining the accounts and preparing monthly and annual financial statements, as well as processing staff entitlement payments. Two Finance Assistants (1 Field Service, located in Entebbe, and 1 national General Service, located in Abyei) will be responsible for monitoring the mission's cash flow, preparing monthly cash projections, acting as cashier, and processing payments to all military personnel staff officers, United Nations police, United Nations Volunteers and civilian staff. 50. The Human Resources Section will consist of one civilian Chief Personnel Officer (P-4), one Administrative Officer (P-3) and one Human Resources Officer (Field Service) and three Human Resources Assistants (1 Field Service and 2 national General Service). The Section will be located in Entebbe, with the exception of one Human Resources Assistant (national General Service), who will be located in Abyei. The Section will be responsible for all human resources matters, including staffing and recruitment, entitlements, and time and attendance of both national and international staff. The Section will provide advice and support to managers and other staff on matters related to human resources, and will coordinate the design, development, delivery and evaluation of training and development programmes for civilian field staff, including organizing and conducting development initiatives such as mentoring and capacity-building for staff. The Administrative Officer (P-3) will handle the entitlements of all staff officers and United Nations police, as well as the recruitment and entitlements of United Nations Volunteers, in liaison with United Nations Headquarters and Bonn. The Human Resources Assistant (national General Service) will be responsible for reviewing time and attendance, claims and other entitlements of staff officers and United Nations police. 51. The Procurement Section, based in Entebbe, will be headed by a Chief Procurement Officer (P-4) and will be supported by three Procurement Assistants (2 Field Service and 1 national General Service). The Section will be responsible for the procurement of goods and services for UNISFA, taking into account market and other relevant conditions. The Section will provide technical and policy advice on procurement activities to staff during all phases of the procurement cycle, will analyse and evaluate procurement requests and will ensure the appropriateness of technical specifications. 52. The Staff Counselling and Welfare Unit will be based in Abyei and will comprise one Staff Counselling and Welfare Officer, who will be responsible for coordinating the design, development, delivery and evaluation of staff counselling services for UNISFA civilian staff. He or she will perform individual assessments in the event that individual staff members experience difficulty coping with the mission environment or face other mental-health-related issues. He or she will coordinate and supervise the provision of critical-incident stress management and ensure, in conjunction with the Medical Services Section, the provision of a continuum of services (referral, short-term supportive intervention) to such staff members or to staff suffering from other serious or chronic illnesses. He or she will be responsible for establishing a staff welfare committee for the development of programmes aimed at improving the quality of life of staff members within the mission area. 53. Integrated Support Services will play a central role in ensuring the effective, efficient, economic and timely use of resources in a consolidated, centrally controlled and integrated manner. Integrated Support Services will comprise the Office of the Chief, the Property Management Section, the Supply Section, the Communications and Information Technology Section, the Engineering Section, the Medical Services Section, the Joint Logistics Operations Centre and the Surface and Air Transport Section. 54. The Office of the Chief will comprise the Chief of Integrated Support Services (P-5), a Logistics Officer (Field Service) and an Administrative Assistant (national General Service) located in Abyei, as well as an Administrative Officer (P-4) located in Kadugli. The Logistics Officer will be responsible for providing the effective and timely planning, oversight, management and coordination of logistical support operations, and for ensuring the effective and timely provision and coordination of diverse logistical support requirements. The Administrative Officer will be responsible for planning, organizing, implementing, managing and overseeing the activities of the logistical functions at the Kadugli base and for coordinating with Abyei. United Nations Volunteers Property Management Section Supply Section Communications and Information Technology Section Engineering Section Medical Services Section Joint Logistics Operations Centre Surface and Air Transport Section 55. The Property Management Section will be based in Abyei. The Section Chief (P-4) will be responsible for managing, analysing and monitoring the effectiveness and execution of asset control procedures in UNISFA. A Property Control and Inventory Assistant (Field Service) will be responsible for managing analysis and performance monitoring of the effectiveness and execution of asset control procedures in the mission, as well as for ensuring accountability and proper tracking mechanisms. A Contingent-Owned Equipment Inspector (Field Service) will act as the team leader for the contingent-owned equipment team and will be responsible for database management and the training of the team during the initial phase of mission operations. A Property Disposal Assistant (Field Service) will be responsible for the disposal of United Nations-owned non-expendable and expendable property, as well as hazardous waste produced by the mission. A Receiving and Inspection Assistant (United Nations Volunteer) will conduct physical inspections of received material. Three Contingent-Owned Equipment Assistants (national General Service) will assist in the physical conduct of inspections of contingent-owned equipment. 56. The Supply Section will comprise the following posts. A Chief Supply Officer (P-4), based in Abyei, will supervise the work of the Section and will initiate and oversee periodic reviews of policies, practices and directives to ensure best practices with regard to supply issues, standards and procedures. A Supply Officer (P-3), based in Wau, will be responsible for ensuring the adequate, timely and efficient provision of office furniture and fixtures, office and accommodation equipment, sanitary and cleaning materials, stationery and office supplies and other general supply items to the various mission components. A Supply Officer (Field Service), located in Abyei, will be responsible for the planning and implementation of the operational plans and concepts for the provision of fuel required by the mission. Two Supply Assistants (Field Service), located in Abyei, will be responsible for the planning and implementation of rations supply, and for daily quality inspections of rations. One Supply Assistant (Field Service), based in Kadugli, will be responsible for ensuring the adequate, timely and efficient provision of office furniture and fixtures, office and accommodation equipment, sanitary and cleaning materials, stationery and office supplies, and other general items to the various mission components located in Kadugli. One Supply Assistant (Field Service) will be based in Wau, where the Supply Section will be a tenant unit within the UNMISS base, and one Supply Assistant (United Nations Volunteer), based in Abyei, will be responsible for the receipt, storage, maintenance, security and issuance of stock to customers, the overall supervision of the warehouses, and the safeguarding of all supply items. Five Supply Assistants (national General Service) will be based at the warehouse facilities in Abyei (3), Kadugli (1) and Wau (1), managing ration, fuel and general stores. 57. The Communications and Information Technology Section will provide prompt, consistent and continuous support to fulfil the mission's mandate through the establishment of new telecommunications systems and the expansion and upgrading of existing systems and maintenance. Its Chief (P-4) will be based in Abyei to plan and direct all major projects and monitor the progress of the design, installation and commissioning of the various networks and systems. In Abyei, there will be four Information Technology Assistants (1 Field Service, 1 United Nations Volunteer and 2 national General Service), three Communication Technicians (2 Field Service and 1 United Nations Volunteer), two Communications Assistants (national General Service), and one Material and Asset Assistant (United Nations Volunteer). In Kadugli, there will be one Information Technology Assistant (United Nations Volunteer) and one Communication Technician (United Nations Volunteer). 58. The Engineering Section will be headed by a Chief Engineer (P-4), who will be based in Abyei and will be responsible for all engineering areas, including accommodation and office space for military, police and civilian components, and the construction of accommodation camps for the Ethiopian force elements deployed across the Abyei Area. He or she will be responsible for the overall management of engineering, building management and maintenance within the mission, as well as for the preparation and maintenance of long-term and medium-term engineering and construction plans. The establishment of UNISFA in the Abyei Area will require the construction of up to eight company operating bases. Once constructed, these and the four existing bases will require the maintenance of life support services, including electrical, water and sanitation, and of ongoing camp management services such as laundry, ablutions, cleaning, rubbish removal, office and living accommodation cleaning, fumigation, road maintenance electrical reticulation and water purification. Under the supervision of the Chief Engineer, one Engineer (P-3), based in Abyei, will review the planning, design, construction and maintenance of mission facilities and services; review and evaluate project documents; analyse design specifications and make recommendations to solve engineering problems; and develop strategies and workplans to ensure the effective integration of engineering works. He or she will also be responsible for electrical engineering. One Geographic Information Officer (P-3), based in Abyei, will be responsible for the production of information derived from satellite imagery and its integration into a geo-database to support UNISFA mapping projects. He or she will provide imagery interpretation and geospatial analysis and will consolidate geodatabases. Two Engineering Technicians (Field Service), based in Abyei, will supervise the implementation of new projects, including those for generators, sanitation, drainage, water supply, electricity supply, air conditioning, waste disposal, security facilities and fire protection devices; plan and coordinate repair and maintenance works for the mission's buildings and facilities; supervise construction sites and all works carried out by building teams or external contractors; carry out scheduled and preventive maintenance of all structures in the mission; and be responsible for the provision and installation of necessary utilities and the periodic inspection of ongoing projects. An Administrative Officer (Field Service) will be responsible for the overall control of the budget and the administration of the Section. One Material and Asset Assistant (Field Service) will monitor the physical inventory of stocked items to ensure the accuracy of records and the location of property. Two Engineering Assistants (United Nations Volunteers) will provide support in the construction phase of new camps and offices as well as maintenance on all UNISFA premises mission-wide. One Water and Sanitation Technician (United Nations Volunteer) will be based in Kadugli and will be responsible for the installation and maintenance of water purification and wastewater units in the mission. One Electrician/Generator Technician (United Nations Volunteer) will be based in Kadugli to ensure that all generators are fully operational, with timely maintenance schedules, and that generator installations meet international safety standards. Six Engineering Assistants (national General Service) will assist in the organization and development of construction sites and the oversight of all works carried out by building teams or external contracts on projects in Abyei and Kadugli. Three Material and Asset Assistants (national General Service) will be responsible for receiving and issuing materials and assets on time and for updating the Galileo system. 59. The Medical Services Section will be based in Abyei and will provide timely, reliable, customer-oriented, cost-efficient and prompt medical care. It will comprise two components: Civilian Medical Services and Military Medical Services. The Section will be headed by a Chief Medical Officer (P-4) who will be supported by a Head Nurse (Field Service), a Nurse (United Nations Volunteer), a Pharmacist (United Nations Volunteer), a Laboratory Technician (National Officer), an Administrative Assistant (national General Service) and an Ambulance Driver (national General Service). 60. The Joint Logistics Operations Centre will be based in Abyei and will have the capacity to respond to military and police deployments, continuing support for the humanitarian effort and other developments in the mission area. It will be headed by a Chief Joint Logistics Operations Centre Officer (P-4), who will be supported by a Logistics Planning Officer (P-3), responsible for planning, including deployments, relocation, repatriation and associated plans and reconnaissance, as well as for integrating logistical issues into the mission plan. A Logistics Operations Officer (P3) will be responsible for coordinating day-to-day logistical operations within the mission and with United Nations agencies and other organizations. Support will be provided by a Logistics Assistant (Field Service). 61. The functions of transport, movement control and aviation will be supervised by the Chief of the Surface and Air Transport Section (Field Service at the Principal level), based in Abyei. He or she will ensure the proper coordination and efficient movement of passenger and cargo both by air and by road. The location and terrain of Abyei during the wet season require that movement into and out of the area be predominantly by air. As at mission inception, the surface resupply route from the south (Entebbe-Juba-Wau-Agok-Abyei) was not passable owing to the damage caused to the Banton bridge during the war. The Wau-Agok portion of the road will not be able to sustain consistent heavy cargo traffic until it has been repaired. Similarly, the Kadugli-Abyei portion of the northern resupply route (Port Sudan-Khartoum-El Obeid-Kadugli-Abyei) is passable only during the dry season. During the wet season, the mission will rely heavily on air resupply, as other transportation options are often not feasible. The Section will support all air transportation, including tactical and utility cargo, transport and transport of personnel, as well as casualty and medical evacuation. The mission requires the establishment of daily shuttle passenger and light cargo services between Abyei and Wau (South Sudan). Air assets will also be required for monitoring the withdrawal of SAF and SPLA from the Abyei Area. 62. The Transport Unit will manage the vehicle fleet and service contracts, as well as the spare parts inventory. The Unit will be headed by a Transport Officer (Field Service) and will include one Transport Assistant (Field Service) for fleet management, one Transport Assistant (Field Service) for repair and maintenance, one Transport Assistant (United Nations Volunteer) for vehicle inventory, one Transport Assistant (United Nations Volunteer) for road safety and testing, two Vehicle Technicians (national General Service), one Transport Assistant (national General Service) for general and administrative activities, and three Drivers (national General Service). The Unit will be based in Abyei with the exception of one Transport Assistant (Field Service) for fleet management and one Vehicle Technician (national General Service), who will be based in Kadugli. 63. The Aviation Unit will be headed by the Chief Aviation Officer (P-3) and will be supported by two Air Operations Assistants (Field Service) at the air terminals in Abyei and Kadugli; one Flight Following Assistant (Field Service); two Air Operations Assistants (national General Service) to deal with all flights arriving at and departing from the landing site; and one Administrative Assistant (national General Service). 64. The Movement Control Unit will be headed by a Movement Control Officer (Field Service). The mission will require significant movement by air and land between Kadugli, Abyei, Agok and Diffra. Operations will demand interaction with regional offices, the deployment of military and police personnel, and the integration and provision of logistical support to local United Nations agencies, funds and programmes forming the country team. Furthermore, interaction will be required with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, including the Ministry of Finance, the Director-General of Customs and the Directors-General of Airports and Ports of both countries, and with senior representatives of troop-contributing countries. The Unit will include three Movement Control Assistants (Field Service), based in Abyei, Kadugli and Wau, for UNISFA passenger and cargo movement; one Movement Control Assistant (Field Service), located in Abyei, for the movement of personnel from Abyei to regional transportation hubs; three Movement Control Assistants (United Nations Volunteers), based in Abyei, Kadugli and Wau; one Administrative Assistant (national General Service); and four Movement Control Assistants (national General Service) for cargo and passenger booking and planning, located in Abyei, Kadugli and Wau (two will be based in Abyei). 65. The Chief Security Adviser (P-4) will serve as the principal adviser on matters affecting the safety and security of all personnel under the United Nations security management system in the Abyei Area, and will report directly to the Head of Mission/Force Commander. In the Safety and Security Section, one Field Security Officer (Field Service) will supervise work related to fire safety and logistics, investigations and training, and pass and identification issues. Another Field Security Officer (Field Service) will supervise work related to security operations, security plans and liaison, and area security coordination. These two Field Security Officers will report to the Security Adviser, and one of them will perform the duties of the Security Adviser in his or her absence. 66. Fire safety and logistics will be carried out by a Safety Officer (Field Service), who will coordinate with the military and local authorities on fire safety standards and fire mitigation and response. The incumbent will also produce fire threat and risk assessments, recommend risk mitigation measures and manage their implementation, conduct fire safety inspections, develop facility and residential fire evacuation plans, and plan and manage evacuation drills. 67. The Investigations and Training Unit will comprise two Security Officers (1 Field Service and 1 national General Service). The Unit will be responsible for investigations into all serious crimes committed by or against United Nations personnel; incidents of death or injury; incidents of theft or loss of or damage to United Nations-owned equipment or property; and road traffic incidents involving United Nations-owned vehicles or staff members. It will plan, prepare and coordinate all training programmes for the Safety and Security Section. The Unit will be responsible for the conduct of security training for all field operations staff and, as required, eligible dependants. 68. The Pass and Identification Unit will consist of one Security Officer (Field Service) and one Security Assistant (national General Service). They will issue and control United Nations identification cards for all civilian, military and United Nations police field operations personnel, as well as visitors. The Unit will be supported by staff of the UNISFA military component as required. 69. The Security Operations Unit will consist of one Security Officer (Field Service) and three Security Assistants (national General Service). They will provide day-to-day security for personnel and property within the area of field operations; coordinate the functions of the Radio Room, which will include the operation 24 hours a day, seven days a week, of the security Emergency Communications System; perform daily radio checks; track convoys and staff members outside their compound and coordinate the provision of escorts by UNISFA military personnel; maintain the staff tracking system; and conduct residential surveys. 70. A Security Officer (Field Service) will be responsible for planning and maintaining liaison, coordinating and producing the mission's security risk assessments, security plans and other contingency plans, and providing for liaison with military and host country counterparts for planning and contingency response. 71. Area security coordination will be carried out by an Area Security Coordinator (Field Service) and two Security Assistants (national General Service). The Area Security Coordinator will advise United Nations staff members in the sectors on the security situation and actual or potential security risks; plan, prepare and implement measures to ensure the security and safety of all persons under the United Nations security management system; maintain liaison with local security officials and other international and local organizations in the mission area; collect, collate and analyse security-related information and communicate such information to the Security Operations Centre; and conduct investigations into security incidents and accidents in the Area. (Thousands of United States dollars; budget year is 1 July to 30 June) Cost estimates (2011/12) Military contingents Formed police units National staff General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Naval transportation Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment B. Non-budgeted contributions 72. The estimated value of non-budgeted contributions for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 is as follows: (Thousands of United States dollars) Estimated value Status-of-mission agreement Voluntary contributions in kind (non-budgeted)a a Inclusive of land. C. Efficiency gains 73. The cost estimates relating to efficiency initiatives will be included in the budgetary proposal for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013. D. Vacancy factors 74. The cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 take into account the following vacancy factors: (Percentage) Projected 2011/12 National Officers National General Service staff Temporary positionsa a Funded under general temporary assistance. 75. The delayed deployment factors for military and police personnel and the vacancy rates for civilian staff applied to the cost estimates for the period 2011/12 take into consideration phased deployments of both military and civilian personnel. E. Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment 76. Requirements for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 are based on standard reimbursement rates for major equipment (wet-lease) and self-sustainment in the total amount of $27,133,100, as follows: Estimated amount Major equipment Self-sustainment Mission factors Percentage Effective date Last review date A. Applicable to Mission area Extreme environmental condition factor 27 June 2011 Intensified operational condition factor Hostile action/forced abandonment factor B. Applicable to home country Incremental transportation factor (Ethiopia) F. Training 77. The estimated resource requirements for training for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 are as follows: Training consultants Official travel, training Training fees, supplies and services 78. The number of participants proposed for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 is as follows: (Number of participants) Internal Externala a Includes United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and outside the mission area. 79. Training will be provided to international and national staff as well as UNISFA military and police personnel in order to upgrade various substantive and technical skills in such areas as communications, information technology and human resources management. G. Mine detection and mine-clearing services 80. The estimated resource requirements for mine detection and mine-clearing services for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 are as follows: Mine detection and mine-clearing equipment Mine detection and mine-clearing supplies 81. Landmines were an integral part of the civil war in the Sudan during the period 1983-2005, with all parties using significant quantities of them to disrupt enemy operations. The types of these mines ranged from old to modern; they were manufactured by a number of countries and were often used in small quantities in operationally important areas or routes, rather than in formal tactical minefields. 82. During the conflict, records were rarely kept; those that have been recovered are often inaccurate. Insecurity in Abyei during the period of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement severely limited mine action survey, clearance and risk education. As a result, information on the scope of contamination is extremely limited. Since May 2011, the United Nations has received reports of the laying of new mines in Abyei. A mine accident on 2 August 2011 led to the deaths of four UNISFA peacekeepers and the injury of an additional seven. The identification of new hazardous areas has severely restricted freedom of movement and endangered the safe return of internally displaced persons. The United Nations Mine Action Service will plan, coordinate and facilitate the implementation of, and provide quality assurance for, mine action operations to reduce the risk of death and injury from landmines and explosive remnants of war. Focus areas will include the clearance and destruction of landmines and explosive remnants of war, the survey of hazardous areas, risk education for United Nations staff, data management, and the coordination and quality assurance of all humanitarian mine clearance. 83. The proposed resource requirements of $6,731,900 for mine detection and mine-clearing services include funding for international and national staff ($1,387,000); contracts for route assessment and clearance capacity, and mine action support teams for technical survey capacity, explosive-ordnance disposal and targeted demining ($4,105,400); official travel ($90,700); equipment ($264,100); and operational expenses ($386,000). The balance represents UNOPS support and management fees, amounting to $178,100 and $320,600, respectively. H. Quick-impact projects 84. The estimated resource requirements for quick-impact projects for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 are as follows: Period Amount Number of projects 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 (proposed) 85. The mission will be in a start-up mode during the first budgetary cycle, a period when personnel are being deployed, thereby limiting the ability of the mission to identify, manage and implement projects. A provision of $150,000 is proposed for the implementation of six projects, in the areas of humanitarian assistance (3 projects) and reconciliation, outreach and conflict resolution (3 projects). The implementation of quick-impact projects across the Abyei Area will create a positive environment for the start-up of the mission and will make a more effective contribution during in the critical phase of peace consolidation upon the return of internally displaced persons and during the migration season. The quick-impact projects will not only focus on building confidence between the communities in the Abyei Area, but will also result in improved mutual understanding between the local population and UNISFA, through infrastructure-rebuilding projects for schools and health centres, the repair of water pumps, the provision of equipment, and the conduct of training and sensitization activities. It is expected that the mission will have greater capacity to manage quick-impact projects in the 2012/13 budgetary period. III. Analysis of resource requirements 86. The standard terms applied with respect to the analysis of resource requirements in this section are defined in annex I B of the present report. The terminology used is the same as that used in previous reports. The analysis of resource requirements presented below reflects justifications from a zero base. Cost estimate :: Mandate: establishment of the mission 87. The proposed requirements reflect resources for the phased deployment of 135 military observers, with a delayed deployment rate of 15 per cent. The estimate reflects mainly requirements for the payment of mission subsistence allowance, for which the daily rates of $188 for the first 30 days and $136 thereafter have been adjusted to lower rates of $159 and $115, respectively, because accommodation is provided by UNISFA ($2,944,100); and travel on emplacement, which is based on commercial rates ($301,100). 88. The cost estimate includes the cost of the phased deployment of 4,065 troops and staff officers, with a delayed deployment factor of 15 per cent, comprising mainly the reimbursement of troop costs to troop-contributing countries ($32,442,800); contingent-owned equipment costs based on applicable rates ($16,888,800); the cost of rations ($10,547,100); and the freight and deployment costs of contingent-owned equipment ($10,097,500). 89. The provision provides for the phased deployment of 50 civilian police officers, with a delayed deployment rate of 15 per cent. It includes mainly mission subsistence allowance, for which the prevailing daily rates of $188 (first 30 days) and $136 (after 30 days) have been adjusted to lower rates of $159 and $115, respectively, because accommodation is provided by UNISFA ($1,398,400); and travel on emplacement, based on commercial rates ($111,500). 90. The cost estimate is based on the phased deployment of 97 international staff, with a delayed deployment factor of 20 per cent. It includes staff salaries ($5,787,400); common staff costs ($4,657,800); staff assessment ($1,280,200); and hazardous duty station allowance for all international staff located in Abyei, Kadugli and Wau ($851,800). 91. The provision is for the phased deployment of 60 national staff, with a delayed deployment factor of 15 per cent. It covers mainly costs for staff salaries ($334,000); hazardous duty station allowance for all national staff located in Abyei, Kadugli and Wau ($162,100); and common staff costs ($106,800). 92. The cost estimate provides for the phased deployment of 20 United Nations Volunteers, with a delayed deployment factor of 20 per cent. The estimate is costed at standard rates, including hazardous duty station allowance for all United Nations Volunteers located in Abyei, Kadugli and Wau. 93. The provision reflects requirements for 63 trips for within-mission travel and for various meetings and conferences, and 25 trips for travel outside the mission area ($180,400), as well as training-related travel ($31,900). 94. The estimate provides mainly for the construction of three camps to accommodate 360 persons each, the construction and upgrading of a logistics base, the upgrading of the headquarters in Abyei to minimum operating security standards, the construction of eight helipads, the repair and maintenance of 50 km of gravel road, the construction of living and office accommodation for civilian staff, and the construction and rehabilitation of airstrips ($12,750,000); petrol, oil and lubricants, with fuel for generators at $1.29 per litre ($11,290,700); the self-sustainment of contingent-owned equipment ($5,290,000); maintenance services including engineering and general services ($561,400); and maintenance supplies ($552,800). 95. The estimate provides mainly for petrol, oil and lubricants, with diesel fuel at $1.29 per litre ($3,786,800); the acquisition of five vehicles not available from UNMIS ($523,000); spare parts ($370,900); and the acquisition of one containerized workshop and vehicle workshop equipment to maintain the fleet ($345,600). 96. The estimate covers mainly the rental and operation of four full-time and one part-time rotary-wing aircraft ($12,457,200); petrol, oil and lubricants, with aviation fuel at $1.29 per litre ($4,459,500); the rental and operation of one fixed-wing aircraft ($3,158,500); equipment and supplies such as fire trailers, a civil airfield lighting kit, a mobile control tower and portable light towers ($1,159,500); and a management service agreement with the International Civil Aviation Organization for airfield and air terminal construction and rehabilitation, equipment and ground services, airfield inspection and quality assurance, and a satellite tracking system ($1,076,300). 97. The estimate provides mainly for the self-sustainment of contingent-owned equipment ($2,325,500); commercial communications such as one transponder lease, INMARSAT charges and Internet services ($1,700,800); and communications support services including contractors, centralized videoconference services and centralized wide-area-network support ($1,299,400). 98. The resources are proposed in order to cover mainly information technology services such as contractual personnel, centralized information technology services and centralized data storage ($1,282,800); licence fees ($197,500); and software packages such as PhoneSoft, Ringmaster and information technology forensic kits ($112,300). 99. The estimate includes provision for the self-sustainment of contingent-owned equipment ($1,482,400); medical services such as aeromedical evacuations, consultations and hospitalizations ($343,100); and supplies such as blood, medical supplies and drugs ($205,700). 100. The estimate provides for the self-sustainment of contingent-owned equipment. 101. The estimate covers mainly demining services in accordance with an agreement with UNOPS ($6,731,900); freight and related costs ($3,640,700); and bank charges ($500,000). 102. The provision reflects requirements for six planned quick-impact projects, as detailed in section II.H above. IV. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 103. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of the mission are: (a) Establishment of a Special Account for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei for the purpose of accounting for the income received and expenditure incurred in respect of the mission; (b) Appropriation of the amount of $180,691,900 for maintenance of the mission for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012; (c) Application to the Special Account for UNISFA of the total amount of $67,013,400 from the amount of $482,460,550 previously assessed under the terms of its resolution 65/257 B for UNMIS, UNISFA and UNMISS; (d) Taking into account the amount of $67,013,400 applied to the Special Account for UNISFA in accordance with subparagraph (c) above, assessment of the additional amount of $21,389,626, for the maintenance of the mission for the period from 1 July to 27 December 2011; (e) Assessment of the amount of $92,288,874 for the period from 28 December 2011 to 30 June 2012 at a monthly rate of $15,057,658, should the Security Council decide to continue the mandate of the mission. A. Terminology related to proposed changes in human resources The following terminology has been applied with respect to proposed changes in human resources (see sect. I of the present report): :: Post establishment: a new post is proposed to be established when additional resources are necessary and when it is not possible to redeploy resources from other offices or otherwise accommodate specific activities from within existing resources :: Post reassignment: an approved post that was intended to cover a certain function is proposed to implement other priority mandated activities unrelated to the original function. While a post reassignment may involve a change of location or office, it does not change the category or level of the post :: Post redeployment: an approved post is proposed to be redeployed to cover comparable or related functions in another office :: Post reclassification: an approved post is proposed to be reclassified (upgraded or downgraded) when the duties and responsibilities of the post have changed substantially :: Post abolishment: an approved post is proposed to be abolished if it is no longer needed to implement the activities for which it was approved or to implement other priority mandated activities within the mission :: Post conversion: three possible options for post conversion are as follows:  Conversion of general temporary assistance positions to posts: approved positions financed under general temporary assistance are proposed for conversion to posts if the functions being performed are of a continuing nature  Conversion of individual contractors or individuals on procurement contracts to national staff posts: taking into account the continuing nature of certain functions, in line with section VIII, paragraph 11, of General Assembly resolution 59/296, individual contractors or individuals on procurement contracts are proposed for conversion to national staff posts  Conversion of international staff posts to national staff posts: approved international staff posts are proposed for conversion to national staff posts B. Terminology related to variance analysis Section III of the present report indicates the single largest contributing factor of each resource variance according to specific standard options encompassed in the four standard categories listed below: :: Mandate: variances caused by changes in the scale or scope of the mandate, or changes in the expected accomplishments as driven by the mandate :: External: variances caused by parties or situations external to the United Nations :: Cost parameters: variances caused by United Nations regulations, rules and policies :: Management: variances caused by management actions to achieve planned results more effectively (e.g., by reprioritizing or adding certain outputs) or efficiently (e.g., by taking measures to reduce personnel or operational inputs while maintaining the same level of outputs) and/or from performance-related issues (e.g., by having underestimated the costs or quantities of inputs required to produce a certain level of outputs, or by delayed recruitment) Annex II A. Substantive offices Abbreviations: FS, Field Service; NPO, National Police Officer; NS, national General Service; OL, Other level; PL, Principal level; UNV, United Nations Volunteer(s). 