%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|COTE D'IVOIRE|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|PROGRAMME EXPENDITURES|STAFFING|

Sixty-sixth session Agenda item 149 Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire Budget for the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012: supplementary estimates Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions I. Introduction 1. The recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions contained in paragraphs 15, 25 and 37 below would entail reductions of $381,500 to the proposed supplementary estimates for the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 (A/66/529). The Committee has made additional recommendations and observations, where appropriate, in the paragraphs below. 2. During its consideration of the proposed supplementary estimates, the Advisory Committee met with representatives of the Secretary-General, who provided additional information and clarification. The documents reviewed and those used for background by the Committee in its consideration of the financing of UNOCI are listed at the end of the present report. 3. The Advisory Committee considers that the report of the Secretary-General lacks sufficient explanation and does not adequately justify the additional requirements in certain areas, specifically regarding posts and positions, in relation with the activities mandated for UNOCI under Security Council resolution 2000 (2011). A. Mandate and planned results 4. The mandate of UNOCI was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1528 (2004). The Secretary-General indicates in his report that the Council, in its resolution 2000 (2011), decided to extend the Operation's mandate until 31 July 2012, and he emphasized its mandate to assist the Government of Côte d'Ivoire in addressing the security situation it continues to face. The Council, in the same resolution, determined that the situation in Côte d'Ivoire continued to pose a threat to international peace and security in the region and decided that the authorized strength of the UNOCI military component should remain at 9,792 personnel, comprising 9,600 troops and staff officers, including the 2,400 additional troops authorized by its resolutions 1942 (2010) and 1967 (2011), as well as 192 military observers. The Council also decided that the authorized strength of UNOCI's police component should remain at 1,350 personnel, including the eight posts for customs officers previously authorized; to authorize an increase of the individual police personnel by 205 advisers, to be accommodated through adjustments to the military and police strength of UNOCI; and that, pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 1933 (2010) and previous resolutions, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General shall certify that all stages of the upcoming legislative elections provide all the necessary guarantees for open, free, fair and transparent elections, in accordance with international standards and the agreed criteria. B. Coordination with the United Nations country team 5. Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that the United Nations system in Côte d'Ivoire coordinates its activities through the Strategic Coordination Group, which is chaired by the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Humanitarian Coordination, Recovery and Reconstruction and includes the heads of agencies, funds and programmes as well as UNOCI section chiefs. The Committee was also informed that the Coordination Group meets on a monthly basis to discuss strategic issues related to the political situation and the peacebuilding process in the country. 6. The Advisory Committee was further informed, upon enquiry, that in July 2011 UNOCI and the United Nations country team, in order to align their activities with Security Council resolution 2000 (2011), had updated the integrated strategic framework and had identified the following priorities for all United Nations activities in the country: (a) elections; (b) restoration of State authority throughout the country and of the rule of law; (c) disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform activities; (d) land tenure issues and social cohesion; (e) protection of civilians; and (f) social and economic recovery. UNOCI and the United Nations country team also collaborate in the review of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (2009-2013), for which the first priority is in areas relating to peace consolidation, including rule of law, and in security support provided to United Nations humanitarian agencies to ensure the security of United Nations installations. C. Resource requirements 7. The Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, by its resolution 65/294, initially appropriated $486,726,400 for UNOCI's activities for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. The Committee notes that the supplementary estimates for period 1 July 2011 to 30 July 2012 proposed by the Secretary-General provide additional funding of $165,735,000 gross ($164,913,300 net) for the additional 2,400 military and 1,350 police personnel authorized by the Security Council in its resolutions 2000 (2011), 1967 (2011) and 1942 (2010), and to implement additional activities mandated under Council resolution 2000 (2011). Military and police personnel Category Initial approved 2011/12 Proposed 2011/12a Military observers Military contingent personnel United Nations police Formed police units Total a Represents the highest authorized strength for the period. 8. The requested supplementary resources amounting to $65,459,400 for military and police personnel pertain to the deployment of 2,335 additional military contingent personnel ($56,063,800), inclusive of requirements under contingent-owned equipment for major equipment ($1,441,200) and for self-sustainment ($11,644,400); an additional 145 United Nations police personnel, inclusive of eight customs officers ($4,642,100); and the deployment of an additional 20 police personnel in formed police units ($4,753,500). 9. The Advisory Committee was provided with updated information on the actual deployment of uniformed personnel in UNOCI (see table 1). The Committee notes that the budget reflects an overall vacancy rate of 5.8 per cent for police personnel during the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 (see A/66/529, para. 67). The Committee notes that the vacancy rate for individual United Nations police in the month of October 2011 was 40.8 per cent, and the vacancy rate for police in formed units stood at negative 21.5 per cent, with an over-incumbency of 176 police in formed units. The Committee also notes that of the 1,415 police personnel authorized (comprising 595 individual police and 820 police in formed units), a total of 1,348 police personnel were actually deployed at 31 October 2011, reflecting an overall actual vacancy rate of less than 5 per cent. The Committee was informed, upon enquiry, that the high vacancy level for individual United Nations police will enable UNOCI to commence the planned phased deployment of additional individual United Nations police concurrently with the phased reduction in the number of police personnel in formed units deployed during the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, in accordance with the mandate of UNOCI set out in Security Council resolution 2000 (2011), which authorizes an increase in individual police personnel by 205 advisers, to be accommodated through adjustments to the military and police strength of UNOCI. Authorizeda Encumbered Vacancy rate (Percentage) Military contingents Formed police 10. The Advisory Committee was further informed, upon enquiry, that, pursuant to the authority granted by the Security Council in the letter from the President of the Council to the Secretary-General dated 27 September 2011 (S/2011/594) in response to the request contained in the letter from the Secretary-General to the President dated 15 September 2011 (S/2011/577), the Secretary-General deployed 120 military contingent personnel and 100 police in formed units from UNOCI to the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) for a period of up to eight weeks to provide support during elections in Liberia, and that those uniformed personnel had returned to UNOCI by 30 November 2011. Upon further enquiry, the Committee was also informed that the UNOCI budget would continue to finance the reimbursement to troop-contributing and police-contributing countries for the UNOCI uniformed personnel deployed to UNMIL, while UNMIL would finance the operational costs of the movement of such personnel and their related contingent-owned equipment to and from Liberia. Civilian personnela Initially approved 2011/12 Proposed 2011/12 International staff National staff United Nations Volunteers a Includes both posts and temporary positions. 11. The proposed requirements under civilian personnel result from the increase of 60 international posts and positions, 28 national posts and positions and 177 United Nations Volunteers; the reclassification of one national General Service post to the National Professional Officer level; and the increase in the number of hazardous duty stations, which now include Abidjan and San-Pedro, as compared to the approved 2011/12 budget, which included only Guiglo. 12. The Advisory Committee was provided with updated information on the actual deployment of civilian personnel in UNOCI (see table 2). The Committee notes that, as at 31 October 2011, the actual deployment of United Nations Volunteers numbered 264, as compared to the authorized level of 176. The Committee notes that the Secretary-General had authorized the additional United Nations Volunteers positions under general temporary assistance in support of the elections. Table 2 UNOCI: incumbency of civilian personnel as at 31 October 2011 Posts Government-provided personnel General temporary assistance Executive direction and management Postsa Level Approved for 2011/12 1 Under-Secretary-General, 2 Assistant Secretary-General, 1 D-1, 5 P-5, 4 P-4, 7 P-3, 3 Field Service, 4 National Professional Officer, 12 national General Service, 1 United Nations Volunteer Proposed under supplementary estimates 2011/12 1 Under-Secretary-General, 2 Assistant Secretary-General, 2 D-1, 5 P-5, 4 P-4, 9 P-3, 3 Field Service, 5 National Professional Officer, 11 national General Service, 1 United Nations Volunteer Proposed posts and positions 1 D-1, 2 P-3 Reclassifications 1 national General Service to National Professional Officer a Includes posts and positions. 13. Under executive direction and management, the Secretary-General proposes a total of three new posts, comprising one D-1 and two P-3 posts and the reclassification of one national General Service post to a National Professional Officer, for the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Joint Mission Analysis Centre and the Embargo Cell, as described in the following paragraphs. 14. In the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Secretary-General proposes the establishment of one D-1 Senior Security Sector Reform Officer (Principal Adviser), who will effectively be placed in the Office of the Prime Minister of Côte d'Ivoire to provide advice and support to that Office and relevant ministries and agencies on the planning and implementation of a comprehensive sector-wide review of security institutions in the country. An existing national General Service post of Language Assistant and Interpreter or Translator is proposed for reclassification to the National Officer post within the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General (see A/66/529, para. 10). The Advisory Committee has no objection to the proposed post of Senior Security Sector Reform Officer (D-1) and to the reclassification of the national General Service post to the National Professional Officer level in the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. 15. In the Joint Mission Analysis Centre, the Secretary-General proposes to establish one post of Information Analyst (Political) at the P-3 level to develop integrated strategies and analyses and contribute to information gathering and reporting, in particular those tasks related to the monitoring of border-related security challenges (A/66/529, para. 12). The Advisory Committee was informed that the Joint Mission Analysis Centre plays a critical role in producing mission-wide integrated analyses, including strategic information assessments to support senior leadership in planning, decision-making and implementing UNOCI's mandated tasks with a view to supporting national authorities in stabilizing the security situation in the country and in monitoring and addressing cross-border security issues as well as other challenges along the borders. The Committee was also informed that the current staffing of the Joint Mission Analysis Centre comprises one P-5 post and one P-3 post, as well as five military and three police personnel. The Advisory Committee does not consider that the requirement for the establishment of an additional post has been fully justified, particularly in view of the existing capacity. The Committee therefore does not recommend approval of the P-3 post of Information Analyst for the Joint Mission Analysis Centre. 16. The Secretary-General proposes one P-3 Programme Officer post for the Embargo Cell to ensure continuity of UNOCI's customs expertise in the Integrated Embargo Unit, as this function is currently delivered through a consultancy. The P-3 Programme Officer, to be based in Abidjan, will be under the supervision of the Chief of the Integrated Embargo Unit and will assist in the monitoring of potential violations of the embargo on importation of arms and related material into Côte d'Ivoire (see A/66/529, para. 13). Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that the proposed post is needed because of an increase in customs-related monitoring activities, in keeping with UNOCI's embargo monitoring mandate. The Committee was also informed that the establishment of this post would respond to a recommendation contained in the report of the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire pursuant to paragraph 11 of Security Council resolution 1946 (2010) (S/2011/272). It was indicated that the Group of Experts had recommended that, in order to ensure continuity and experience, UNOCI should have a permanent customs monitoring expertise to assist in the monitoring of potential violations of the embargo on importation of arms and related material into Côte d'Ivoire (S/2011/272, para. 331). The Advisory Committee has no objection to the proposed post for a Programme Officer (P-3) in the Embargo Cell. Component 1: safe and secure environment 1 D-2, 2 D-1, 3 P-4, 5 P-3, 3 Field Service, 8 national General Service, 17 United Nations Volunteers 1 D-2, 3 D-1, 3 P-5, 6 P-4, 10 P-3, 1 P-2, 4 Field Service, 1 National Professional Officer, 8 national General Service, 21 United Nations Volunteers 1 D-1, 3 P-5, 3 P-4, 5 P-3, 1 P-2, 1 Field Service, 1 National Professional Officer, 4 United Nations Volunteers 17. Under component 1, safe and secure environment, the Secretary-General proposes a total of 19 new posts and positions (1 D-1, 3 P-5, 3 P-4, 5 P-3, 1 P-2, 1 Field Service and 1 National Professional Officer) as well as four United Nations Volunteers positions for the Joint Operations Centre, the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section and the Security Sector Reform Section, as described in the paragraphs below. 18. For the Joint Operations Centre, one P-5 post is proposed for a Senior Operations Officer to ensure that it functions as an effective situation centre 24 hours a day, seven days a week and, in the event of a crisis, as a crisis management centre, providing an uninterrupted communications link between the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Senior Management Group, the components of UNOCI, sector offices, the United Nations country team, United Nations Headquarters, neighbouring missions, regional United Nations offices and non-United Nations partners, as necessary. The Advisory Committee notes that the Joint Operations Centre currently comprises two Field Service posts. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the P-5 post of Senior Operations Officer for the Joint Operations Centre. Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section 19. The Secretary-General proposes a total of 10 posts and positions for the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section, comprising eight new international posts (1 P-5, 2 P-4, 4 P-3 and 1 P-2) and two United Nations Volunteers positions. It is indicated in the report that UNOCI is revising its concept of operations for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration to include, not only dealing with the manifold increase in the number of combatants who remobilized to engage in the conflict, but also to focus on an expansion of the scope of intervention required to address the impact of the recent violence on security sector entities and affected communities. 20. The Secretary-General indicates in his report that, in coordination with the Government of Côte d'Ivoire and other partners, efforts to support disarmament, demobilization and reintegration initiatives, at an estimated cost of approximately $25,813,200, will involve the development and implementation of community weapons collection programmes as well as assistance with the implementation of a national programme for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of combatants and the dismantling of militias and self-defence groups. UNOCI will support the registration and screening of former combatants and the disarmament and repatriation of foreign armed elements and will assist national authorities in collecting, registering, securing and disposing of weapons and clearing of explosive remnants of war. UNOCI also plans to establish four static disarmament, demobilization and reintegration assembly sites in Yamoussoukro, Bouaké, Korhogo and Duékoué and four mobile community disarmament units, with one based in Abidjan, two in Sector West and one in Sector East of the country, to manage incoming cases (A/66/529, para. 4). 21. The Advisory Committee was informed, upon enquiry, that each demobilization site will have: (a) an assembly area; (b) a disarmament area; (c) an area devoted to medical screening; (d) an area devoted to voluntary HIV/AIDS screening; (e) an area for socio-economic profiling; and (f) an area for counselling activities. The demobilization sites are designed for the former combatants to be registered, screened and profiled before returning to their communities to receive reinsertion and reintegration benefits. The sites will also have secure areas for databases, technical equipment, weapons and ammunition; storage for fuel and supply items; areas for sanitary and medical services and food distribution; and accommodations for United Nations staff. The representatives of the Secretary-General also informed the Committee that the demobilization sites are crucial for the implementation of disarmament and demobilization activities in Côte d'Ivoire as the Government does not have the capacity to undertake these activities without the support of UNOCI. The Advisory Committee trusts that UNOCI will ensure that the facilities for the demobilization sites will be adequate to meet the requirements of the beneficiaries of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. 22. The Secretary-General proposes a P-5 post for Chief Operations Officer for the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section to develop and oversee operational plans for the new, more complex programme that will be reoriented from a primarily reinsertion-based approach to a multidimensional programme, which, the Advisory Committee was informed, would have at least four major components: (a) traditional disarmament and demobilization of formed units, including weapons verification; (b) community violence reduction programmes in volatile violence-affected areas where fighting was most intense during the conflict and which target militia and self-defence groups; (c) stop-gap measures for foreign armed elements pending a regional mechanism to manage their cases; and (d) small arms and light weapons collection/civilian disarmament exercises. 23. The Advisory Committee was further informed that the approved D-1 post in charge of the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section advises the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the development, formulation and promotion of UNOCI's strategy and policies in this area in support of a more comprehensive mandate than before the crisis, and in this regard UNOCI will be closely engaged with the Government at the ministerial level on a regular basis, as well as with regional government interlocutors, in relation to foreign combatants, and key stakeholders. In addition, as a result of the expansion in the size of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme and of the team that will be required to address an increase in eligible combatants from 3,720 beneficiaries prior to the onset of the crisis context to an estimate of 40,000 to 60,000 beneficiaries following the crisis, there will be an equally large increase in the management challenge that the D-1 Chief will need to meet. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the post of Chief Operations Officer at the P-5 level for the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section. 24. The Secretary-General proposes a P-4 Liaison Officer for the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section to handle specialized subregional aspects, in particular to address the threat of cross-border movements of armed groups and weapons and support the disarmament and repatriation of foreign armed elements (A/66/529, para. 16). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the post of Liaison Officer at the P-4 level for the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section. 25. The Secretary-General proposes three new P-3 posts and two new United Nations Volunteer positions for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers to deal with community reconciliation forums and committees and labour-intensive early recovery projects, and to ensure the functioning of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and community violence reduction programmes (A/66/529, para. 17). The Advisory Committee was informed, upon enquiry, that the additional staff are required in light of the higher number of beneficiaries following the crisis and for operations in the western part of the country to enable UNOCI to conduct disarmament and demobilization operations, including sensitization campaigns, negotiations with armed groups, the establishment of equipped and staffed assembly areas to stage larger disarmament and demobilization operations, and to conduct the community violence reduction programme, which will be developed in partnership with UNOCI's conflict resolution initiatives and the United Nations country team. The Advisory Committee does not find sufficient justification for the three additional P-3 posts proposed for the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section. The Committee points out that UNOCI has been undertaking substantive activities in the area of security sector reform, as reflected in the relevant strategic frameworks in previous budgets, and that the proposed establishment of the Security Sector Reform Section should reduce the volume of work in the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section, even in the context of the demands of an increased number of beneficiaries of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme (see also para. 28 below). The Committee is of the view that UNOCI could have considered the redeployment of existing posts from the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section to the proposed Security Sector Reform Section. The Committee therefore recommends approval of one P-3 post and the two United Nations Volunteers positions for this area. 26. Two posts for Information Systems Officers at the P-4 and P-2 level are proposed for the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section for profiling combatants and managing and tracking the record of reinsertion beneficiaries. It is indicated in the report that the P-4 Information Systems Officer will oversee the accuracy and reliability of the registration of all caseloads as well as ensure the critical linkage between the registration of disarmed ex-combatants and the reinsertion benefit. The P-2 Associate Information Systems Officer will provide technical support in addition to day-to-day management of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration database (A/66/529, para. 18). The Advisory Committee has no objection to the two proposed posts for Information Systems Officers (one P-4 and one P-2) for the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section. 27. One Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officer (Gender) post is proposed at the P-3 level to ensure that the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme is gender mainstreamed and that linkages are made with the appropriate partner organizations, including those dealing with sexual violence. The Officer will work within the community on community violence reduction programmes; liaise with the UNOCI gender section; work on reinsertion matters related to communities and sexual and gender-based violence and monitor the reinsertion process for female combatants (A/66/529, para. 19). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the proposed P-3 post of Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officer (Gender). Security Sector Reform Section 28. It is indicated in paragraph 20 of the Secretary-General's report that a new Security Sector Reform Section is proposed to be established within UNOCI, which is proposed to comprise eight posts and positions, including five new international posts (1 D-1, 1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 Field Service), one new National Professional Officer post and two new United Nations Volunteers positions. While support to security sector reform was previously provided by the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section, the new political and security context of Côte d'Ivoire calls for a distinct security sector reform capacity to be developed in coordination with, but separate from, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration function (see para. 25 above). 29. The Secretary-General indicates that UNOCI is mandated under Security Council resolution 2000 (2011) to support the Government in developing and implementing a national security strategy, a national justice sector strategy and a multi-year joint United Nations justice support programme in order to develop the capacity of the police, judiciary and prisons and improve access to the justice system in Côte d'Ivoire. UNOCI will also support capacity development through technical assistance, co-location and mentoring programmes for the police, gendarmerie, justice and corrections officers and contribute to restoring their presence throughout Côte d'Ivoire. The Secretary-General indicates that the estimated cost of assistance to the Government of Côte d'Ivoire in the reform of its security and rule of law institutions is $1,907,300 (A/66/529, para. 7). 30. In addition to continuing to monitor and deter the activities of militias, mercenaries and other illegal armed groups and supporting the Government of Côte d'Ivoire in monitoring and addressing cross-border security, it is envisaged that UNOCI would also participate in other targeted efforts to stabilize the security situation throughout the country. For that purpose, the deployment of military and police personnel, as well as an aviation unit comprising two MI-8 military utility helicopters is required. The Secretary-General indicates that the estimated overall cost in this area will be $121,414,500 (A/66/529, para. 8). 31. It is proposed that the new Security Sector Reform Section be headed by a Chief at the D-1 level, who will assist the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in developing, formulating and promoting mission strategy, policy and proposals related to national security sector reform efforts and provide leadership and overall management of the new Security Sector Reform Section (A/66/529, para. 21). The Advisory Committee has no objection to the proposed D-1 post for Chief of the Security Sector Reform Section. 32. The Secretary-General proposes one P-5 post for a Senior Security Sector Reform Officer to engage actors and partners on security sector reform issues and provide expertise and advice on strategy and implementation issues to national authorities. The Security Sector Reform Officer will monitor the reform of the defence sector and civil security matters, including aspects of criminal justice, and ensure cohesion and consistency among the relevant and related UNOCI sections on security sector reform matters. A Security Sector Reform Officer at the P-4 level is also proposed to advise on customs management and restoration of civilian management and to monitor weapons circulation and population movements, with a focus on the western region of Côte d'Ivoire. In addition, one P-3 post for a Security Sector Reform Officer is proposed to coordinate national actors and stakeholders in the security sector reform process, specifically liaising with colleagues in the Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section on matters pertaining to justice and corrections as well as with the United Nations police component on police issues. The Advisory Committee has no objection to the three proposed posts for the Security Sector Reform Section (1 P-5, 1 P-4 and 1 P-3). 33. Two United Nations Volunteer positions for Security Sector Reform Officers are requested to reinforce the Security Sector Reform Section and assist the proposed P-5 and P-3 Security Sector Reform Officers discussed above. In addition, a National Programme Officer is requested to build local capacity in security sector reform matters, as well as a Field Service level Administrative Assistant to fulfil general clerical and organizational needs of the Security Sector Reform Section (A/66/529, para. 23). The Advisory Committee has no objection to the two proposed United Nations Volunteers positions for the Security Sector Reform Section. Component 2: humanitarian and human rights 1 D-1, 3 P-5, 6 P-4, 15 P-3, 1 Field Service, 38 National Professional Officers, 27 national General Service, 22 United Nations Volunteers 1 D-1, 3 P-5, 8 P-4, 20 P-3, 1 Field Service, 42 National Professional Officers, 31 national General Service, 34 United Nations Volunteers 2 P-4, 5 P-3, 4 National Professional Officers, 4 national General Service, 12 United Nations Volunteers 34. Under component 2, humanitarian and human rights, the Secretary-General proposes a total of 27 new posts and positions, comprising two P-4, five P-3, four National Professional Officers and four national General Service posts, as well as 12 United Nations Volunteers for the Human Rights and Civil Affairs Sections, as described in the following paragraphs. Human Rights Section 35. The Secretary-General proposes a total of four new international posts (1 P-4 and 3 P-3), one National Professional Officer post, two national General Service posts and six United Nations Volunteers positions for the Human Rights Section. 36. It is indicated in the Secretary-General's report that the proposed resources in the amount of $3,739,700 will be used to promote national reconciliation and human rights and to ensure that a greater number of Ivorian stakeholders have the required tools and knowledge to participate in national reconciliation efforts. Outreach initiatives, training sessions and other related media initiatives will also be undertaken, including expanding the broadcast of the UNOCI FM radio station to the western part of Côte d'Ivoire. The Advisory Committee was informed that, in view of the severe impact of the crisis on the social fabric of the country and the weakened capacity of national authorities in transitional justice issues, the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission will require substantial support from UNOCI. The Committee was further informed that UNOCI will provide technical support in judicial and non-judicial mechanisms, mapping the justice sector, advising on institutional reforms, developing and conducting human rights training for the future new national army and offering support for the establishment of a vetting process. In addition, UNOCI plans to strengthen its human rights monitoring, investigation and reporting capacity following the violations of human rights committed during the post-elections crisis (A/66/529, para. 5). 37. In the Human Rights Section, a total of five posts and positions are proposed to establish a Transitional Justice Unit, comprising one P-4 post, one P-3 post, one National Professional Officer post, one national General Service post and one United Nations Volunteer position, to provide technical and substantive support to the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission and to ensure that the Commission is established and operates in accordance with international principles and standards. A P-4 Human Rights Officer is proposed to lead the Unit along with the support of one P-3 Human Rights Officer, one United Nations Volunteer and one National Professional Officer to assist victims and witnesses. A national General Service post is also proposed to support the Human Rights Officers. The Advisory Committee was informed that, in light of the severe impact of the crisis on the social fabric in the country and the weak capacity of national authorities in transitional justice issues, the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission will require substantial support to effectively fulfil its mandate (A/66/529, para. 24). While the Advisory Committee recognizes that UNOCI has additional responsibilities related to the support of the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission under the mandate, it does not consider that all the posts requested for the Transitional Justice Unit have been fully justified, and therefore recommends approval of one P-4 post, one United Nations Volunteer position, one National Professional Officer post and one national General Service post for the Unit. 38. A total of five new posts and positions are proposed for the Special Investigation Unit within the Human Rights Section, comprising one P-3 Human Rights Officer to serve as the head of the Special Investigation Unit and the Human Rights Call Centre, and four Human Rights Officers (United Nations Volunteers) to support the unit head (A/66/529, para. 25). Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that Special Investigation Unit will be tasked with monitoring, investigating and reporting on violations of human rights and international humanitarian law that were committed in Côte d'Ivoire and that the Unit will be critical in providing timely and accurate information on human rights violations to ensure that the Security Council is kept regularly informed on the human rights situation in Côte d'Ivoire. The Committee was further informed that the situation in Côte d'Ivoire remains highly fragile and violations of human rights and international humanitarian law continue to be reported, and the human rights situation risks further deterioration during the upcoming elections. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the proposed posts (1 P-3 and 4 United Nations Volunteers) for the Special Investigation Unit. 39. The Secretary-General proposes three posts and positions for the Toulépleu Regional Office, comprising one Human Rights Officer at the P-3 level, one United Nations Volunteer Human Rights Officer and one national General Service level Administrative Assistant/Driver/Interpreter, to strengthen the implementation of UNOCI's human rights mandate in an area along the border with Liberia, which was heavily affected by the post-electoral crisis (A/66/529, para. 26). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the proposed posts for the Toulépleu Regional Office (1 P-3, 1 national General Service and 1 United Nations Volunteer). Civil Affairs Section 40. For the Civil Affairs Section, the Secretary-General proposes a total of 14 posts and positions, comprising one P-4 post, two P-3 posts and three National Professional Officers; two Administrative Assistants at the national General Service level; and six United Nations Volunteers positions. 41. The Secretary-General indicates in his report that the Civil Affairs Section is expected to play a more active role in implementing tasks related to the redeployment of State administration and the extension of State authority throughout the country, in addition to performing tasks related to the promotion of national and community reconciliation, including the establishment and functioning of mechanisms to prevent, mitigate or resolve conflict, in particular at the local level to foster social cohesion (A/66/529, para. 27). 42. It is indicated that the mandated tasks of UNOCI to assist national authorities in the resumption of fiscal and customs services require professional experience in public finance, which is currently not available within the UNOCI Civil Affairs Section. The Advisory Committee was informed that a P-4 post of Public Finance Coordinator and one P-3 post for Public Finance Officer are proposed in the Civil Affairs Section to conduct activities in support of the restoration of State authority and specifically related to the reunification of the treasury. The Public Finance Coordinator will head a newly created Public Finance Unit in the Civil Affairs Section and will be based in Abidjan, whereas the P-3 Public Finance Officer will be based in Bouaké, in the northern part of the country. The eight seconded customs officers, authorized by the Security Council in paragraph 3 of its resolution 2000 (2011), will report through the Public Finance Coordinator to the Head of the Civil Affairs Section. 43. The Advisory Committee was further informed that the P-3 Civil Affairs Officer post and three National Professional Civil Affairs Officer posts are proposed to implement tasks related to the redeployment of State administration and the extension of State authority in the west and south of the country, in addition to performing tasks related to the promotion of national and community reconciliation, including the establishment and functioning of mechanisms to prevent, mitigate or resolve conflict, in particular at the local level, and to foster social cohesion. The P3 post of Civil Affairs Officer will be based in Abidjan to support all civil affairs activities in the Abidjan district and the Lagunes, Agnéby and Sud Comoe regions, while the three National Professional Civil Affairs Officers are proposed to support the implementation of activities in sensitive areas in the west and south of the country. 44. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the proposed posts for the Civil Affairs Section (1 P-4, 2 P-3, 3 National Professional Officers, 2 national General Service and 6 United Nations Volunteers). 3 D-1, 1 P-5, 14 P-4, 13 P-3, 1 P-2, 5 Field Service, 30 National Professional Officers, 81 national General Service, 18 United Nations Volunteers 4 D-1, 3 P-5, 14 P-4, 20 P-3, 2 P-2, 5 Field Service, 30 National Professional Officers, 81 national General Service, 169 United Nations Volunteers 1 D-1, 2 P-5, 7 P-3, 1 P-2, 151 United Nations Volunteers a Includes posts and temporary positions. 45. Under component 3, peace process, the Secretary-General proposes a total of 162 new posts and positions, comprising one D-1, two P-5, seven P-3 and one P-2 post, as well as 151 United Nations Volunteers for the Electoral Assistance Office. The recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the proposed staffing of the Electoral Assistance Office is provided in paragraph 53 below. 46. In accordance with its mandate to support the coordination of legislative elections and associated certification activities, UNOCI will provide logistical and technical assistance to the Government of Côte d'Ivoire at an estimated cost of $12,860,300 (A/66/529, para. 6). Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that, in accordance with the electoral support plan, UNOCI will be responsible for the dispatching of both non-sensitive and sensitive electoral material from the Abidjan and Yamoussoukro logistics bases to 70 departments, as well as retrieving tally sheets (procès verbaux) from the departments and delivering them to Abidjan. 47. The Secretary-General proposes a total of 152 new positions for the Electoral Assistance Cell, comprising one P-5 position, five P-3 positions, one P-2 post and 145 United Nations Volunteers positions. It is indicated in the Secretary-General's report that, as a result of the post-electoral crisis, there is a need to organize awareness-raising campaigns to sensitize voters on the legislative elections and ensure the same high level of voter turnout as witnessed during the presidential elections. This work will require the production of posters, leaflets, special broadcasts both on national and local radio stations, including UNOCI FM, as well as outreach and large-scale awareness campaigns. It is therefore proposed to establish 145 United Nations Volunteers positions, comprising three Operations Assistants, three Research Assistants, 138 Electoral Officers and one Associate Electoral Officer within the Electoral Assistance Cell within the Electoral Assistance Office (A/66/529, para. 28). 48. A P-5 Chief Electoral Officer position is proposed for the Electoral Assistance Cell under the Electoral Assistance Office to coordinate support for the upcoming legislative elections. It is indicated in the report that the Chief Electoral Officer will advise and assist the Independent Electoral Commission in developing operational programmes and processes to support electoral activities; provide policy advice to the Independent Electoral Commission on development of appropriate strategies for electoral operations; be responsible for providing guidance and technical advice on the development of operational plans and timelines and on the preparation of estimated budgets for electoral activities, as necessary; and facilitate proper coordination to ensure needed preparations are undertaken to hold election activities (A/66/529, para. 29). Five P-3 Electoral Officer positions are also proposed for managing the Regional Electoral Office's day-to-day operations, as well as the coordination and management of the electoral process at the regional level at Abidjan, Daloa, Daoukro, Korhogo, San Pedro and Yamoussoukro. One P-2 Electoral Officer position is proposed to support the electoral process at the regional level in Abengourou. 49. The Secretary-General proposes a total of 10 posts and positions for the Certification Assistance Cell of the Electoral Assistance Office, comprising one D-1 Chief Electoral Officer position, one P-5 Senior Electoral Affairs Officer position, one P-3 Electoral Officer position and one P-3 Public Information Officer position to manage the coordination of the legislative elections, in addition to six United Nations Volunteers positions for one Administrative Assistant, three Public Information Officers, one Information Analyst, and one Public Information Officer to assist in the central coordination office as well as the 16 regional electoral offices during the upcoming legislative elections. 50. The Advisory Committee was informed that the proposed staffing will give the Certification Assistance Cell the capacity to closely monitor the different stages of the electoral process and provide the Special Representative of the Secretary-General with the necessary assistance to certify the results of the parliamentary elections. Because the parliamentary elections involve 255 members of parliament, spread across more than 205 electoral constituencies, the tasks and activities of the Certification Assistance Cell are anticipated to increase as it covers a greater number of candidates for the legislative elections, as compared to the presidential elections. 51. The Advisory Committee recalls that the Secretary-General had informed the Committee that he had authorized the extension of all the temporary positions in the Electoral Assistance Office, comprising one D-1, two P-5, seven P-3, one P-2 and 151 United Nations Volunteers, through 31 December 2011 under general temporary assistance in support of the elections. 52. Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that all of the posts and positions proposed under component 3 are linked to the electoral calendar and, as they are temporary in nature, will not be required beyond 30 June 2012. 53. Bearing in mind the explanation provided in paragraph 52 above, the Advisory Committee recommends approval of the Secretary-General's proposals for the temporary posts and positions for the Electoral Assistance Office (one D-1, two P-5, seven P-3, one P-2 and 151 United Nations Volunteers). Component 4: law and order 1 D-1, 2 P-5, 6 P-4, 2 P-3, 1 P-2, 3 Field Service, 7 National Professional Officer, 18 national General Service, 4 United Nations Volunteers 2 D-1, 3 P-5, 6 P-4, 10 P-3, 1 P-2, 3 Field Service, 7 National Professional Officer, 18 national General Service, 5 United Nations Volunteers 1 D-1, 1 P-5, 8 P-3, 1 United Nations Volunteer 54. Under component 4, law and order, the Secretary-General proposes a total of 11 new posts and positions, comprising one D-1, one P-5 and eight P-3 posts, as well as one United Nations Volunteer; in addition to 26 Government-provided personnel, for the Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section. 55. It is indicated in the report that a new post of Chief of the Section at the D-1 level is proposed under the direct supervision of the Principal Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Operations and Rule of Law to manage the overall administration and implementation of activities within the Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section, which includes the Justice Support Component and the Corrections Support Component (A/66/529, para. 33). The Advisory Committee was informed, upon enquiry, that the Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section post should be headed at the D-1 level, rather than the current P-5 level, because of the greater focus on issues pertaining to providing support to judicial and prison institutions in Côte d'Ivoire and the complex nature of tasks under the new mandate. In addition, the functions of the post demand that the incumbent interact at the ministerial level with Government representatives, donors, Member States and civil society. 56. The Secretary-General proposes a total of six new posts for the Corrections Support Component of the Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section, comprising one P-5 post and five P-3 posts, in addition to 25 Government-provided personnel. The P-5 Senior Corrections Officer is proposed as head of the Corrections Support Component, who will work under the authority of the D-1 Chief of Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section. The incumbent will lead and manage the overall development and implementation of UNOCI strategies related to the strengthening and development of the prison system in Côte d'Ivoire (A/66/529, para. 34). The Advisory Committee notes that the Corrections Support Component is currently headed by a P-4 Corrections Officer, and that this post will become part of the new Rule of Law Liaison and Coordination Cell within the Section, where the Officer will provide direct technical support to the Cell in order to ensure that the National Prison Service forms part of the justice sector reform (ibid, para. 35). Working under the supervision of the proposed P-5 Senior Corrections Officer, five new Corrections Officers at the P-3 level will coordinate assistance provided to the 33 local detention facilities by region. It is further indicated in the report that five additional P-3 Correctional Officer posts are proposed. Each officer is to manage one local facility in addition to providing more comprehensive coverage to priority prison sites. An additional 25 Government-provided Corrections Officers are requested to cover a total of 33 detention facilities to ensure that one Government-provided person is available for each facility. 57. The Secretary-General proposes two new posts and positions for a Rule of Law Liaison and Coordination Cell, comprising one P-3 Judicial Affairs Officer and one United Nations Volunteer Judicial Affairs Officer, in addition to one Government-provided officer, to assist the Ministry of Justice in developing and implementing a national justice sector strategy and related initiatives. The Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section is now expanding its activities in the judiciary throughout the country, in particular in Abidjan and in the western part of the country where the most serious fighting and destruction took place. The Secretary-General is proposing one P-3 Judicial Affairs Officer post for each of these two field offices to provide support to national authorities for capacity development through technical assistance, co-location and mentoring programmes for judicial personnel (A/66/529, para. 38). 58. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the Secretary-General's proposals for 37 posts and positions for the Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section (1 D-1, 1 P-5, 8 P-3, 1 United Nations Volunteer and 26 Government-provided personnel). Component 5: support 1 D-1, 3 P-5, 25 P-4, 46 P-3, 10 P-2, 228 Field Service, 13 National Professional Officers, 571 national General Service, 114 United Nations Volunteers 1 D-1, 3 P-5, 25 P-4, 47 P-3, 10 P-2, 242 Field Service, 15 National Professional Officers, 588 national General Service, 123 United Nations Volunteers 1 P-3, 14 Field Service, 2 National Professional Officers, 17 national General Service, 9 United Nations Volunteers 59. Under component 5, support, the Secretary-General proposes a total of 43 new posts and positions, comprising one P-3, 14 Field Service, two National Professional Officer and 17 national General Service posts, as well as nine United Nations Volunteers positions. 60. Under Administrative Services, the Secretary-General proposes a total of 12 positions, comprising one Field Service, two National Professional Officer and eight national General Service posts, as well as one United Nations position, as follows: (a) Office of the Chief, Administrative Services: one National Officer Translator or Interpreter position to manage the increased need for communications and document production activities; (b) Personnel Section: one national General Service to provide assistance in the administration of the additional 265 civilian staff; (c) General Services Section: five national General Service and one United Nations Volunteer Assistant to provide maintenance services to the new camps, including cleaning, fumigation and other sanitation-related work; (d) Staff Counselling Unit: one National Professional Officer to provide assistance to the additional 265 civilian staff in terms of counselling services, in addition to the anticipated increase in cases handled by the Unit as a result of the post-election crisis. 61. Under Integrated Support Services, the Secretary-General proposes a total of 31 positions, comprising one P-3, 13 Field Service, 9 national General Service and 8 United Nations positions, as follows: (a) Transport Section: two national General Service Vehicle Mechanics to perform the maintenance work for the proposed additional 53 vehicles; (b) Contingent-owned Equipment Section: one P-3 Contingent-owned Equipment Officer and two Field Service Contingent-owned Equipment Assistants to facilitate scheduled inspections of contingent-owned equipment of the additional troops; (c) Supply Section: one Field Service Rations Assistant and two Field Service Rations Quality Control Assistants to be assigned to the Bouaké warehouse to facilitate the quality control and management of all food rations supplied from the Bouaké logistics base, and one national General Service Fuel Assistant for the maintenance of the additional fuel log systems installed in both United Nations-owned and contingent-owned equipment owing to the increase in the number of troops; (d) Joint Logistics Operation Centre: national General Service and two Field Service Joint Logistics Operation Assistants to facilitate proper coordination and movement of the additional troops that will be deployed to new camps; (e) Engineering Section: one Field Service Geospatial Information Assistant to provide geo-information to the additional troops and provide training on the Global Positioning System; one Field Service Engineering Assistant, two United Nations Volunteers Engineering Assistants, one Field Service Electrician, one United Nations Volunteer Electrician, one Field Service Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Technician, one United Nations Volunteer Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning Technician to perform required maintenance works at new camps; and one United Nations Volunteer Material Management Assistant to provide support to the expanded warehouse in Daloa; (f) Movement Control Section: one Field Service Rotation Monitor and one United Nations Volunteer Flight Monitor to facilitate the increased number of rotations due to additional troops; one United Nations Volunteer deployed to Bouaké to assist in the rotation of troops in Sector East; one United Nations Volunteer to assist at the helipad with the movement of troops between new camps and one national General Service Warehouse Manager for the transit cargo; (g) Air Operations Section: one Field Service Terminal Supervisor, one United Nations Volunteer Fire Marshall Supervisor and four national General Service Fire Marshall Assistants following the adoption of the International Civil Aviation Organization Standard requiring that each fire truck needs to have at least three firefighters; and one national General Service Ramp Manager to coordinate the ramp activities in Bouaké airport during the rotation of additional troops. 62. The Advisory Committee was informed that the 43 posts and positions under the support component are proposed as temporary positions required to support the additional uniformed personnel and related activities under the new mandate only through 30 June 2012. 63. Bearing in mind the explanation provided in paragraph 62 above, the Advisory Committee recommends approval of the Secretary-General's proposals for temporary posts and positions under the support component (1 P3, 14 Field Service, 2 National Professional Officers, 17 national General Service and 9 United Nations Volunteers). 64. Subject to the observations and recommendations contained in paragraphs 15, 25 and 37 above, the Advisory Committee recommends approval of the supplementary resources proposed by the Secretary-General for civilian personnel in UNOCI. Operational costs (Thousands of United States dollars) Variance 65. The Secretary-General proposes additional operational requirements for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 in the amount of $76,895,000, comprising: (a) Official travel ($444,900); (b) Facilities and infrastructure ($34,510,800): mainly attributable to (i) the acquisition of prefabricated facilities and related construction ($14.2 million); (ii) reimbursement for self-sustainment of contingent-owned equipment ($6.0 million); (iii) the acquisition of fuel tanks and pumps as well as petrol, oil and lubricants ($4.7 million); (iv) rental of premises ($4.1 million); (v) field defence supplies ($1.4 million); and (vi) utilities ($1.3 million); (c) Ground transportation ($3,370,100): for the acquisition of 52 additional general purpose vehicles and one additional medium bus to cater for additional staff. Upon enquiry, the Advisory Committee was informed that UNOCI currently has an inventory of 1,053 vehicles, and that the 53 additional vehicles are required due to the additional staffing proposed, based on the established ratios, and that the required vehicles were not available from liquidating missions; (d) Air transportation ($4,844,700): attributable to air rental and operation costs and associated fuel consumption costs for three MI-24 attack helicopters until 30 September 2011, and for two MI-8 military utility helicopters until 30 June 2012, which were not budgeted in the current period; (e) Naval transportation ($30,000): attributable to increased requirements resulting from the rental and operation of three boats for a period of two months for the transportation of electoral cargo to areas in Côte d'Ivoire that are inaccessible by road in support of the legislative elections; (f) Communications ($6,215,500): primarily attributable to provisions for reimbursement for self-sustainment of contingent-owned equipment ($3.0 million); the acquisition of equipment to provide telephone and data services, including the acquisition of additional satellite equipment and FM radio transmitters and related accessories to extend UNOCI FM radio coverage in the western part of the country ($1.4 million); (g) Information technology ($2,548,600): due to the acquisition of information technology equipment required for additional staff; (h) Medical services ($1,570,500): for reimbursement for self-sustainment of contingent-owned equipment; (i) Special equipment ($1,117,800): for reimbursement for self-sustainment of contingent-owned equipment; (j) Other supplies, services and equipment ($20,346,200): primarily attributable to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme ($12.8 million); and to costs associated with the initiation of programmes relating to the clearing of unexploded ordnance and the management of weapons and ammunition ($5.0 million). Facilities and infrastructure 66. The Advisory Committee was informed that UNOCI has already completed the construction of seven out of the nine proposed camps and that it is therefore currently operating from a total of 61 camps distributed in Abidjan Sector (16), in Sector West (26) and in Sector East (19). UNOCI had been operating from 54 locations and, as part of UNOCI's strategy to focus on Sectors West and South, the nine new camps will bring the total number of premises to 63. The two camps remaining under construction include one in Sector West and one in Abidjan Sector. 67. In addition to the construction of nine new camps and eight disarmament, demobilization and reintegration camps, the Advisory Committee was also informed that resource requirements related to facilities and infrastructure include provision for prefabricated structures to be installed in Anyama camp to be used for office accommodations, communications and information technology facility shelters and the establishment of a level II hospital. Water tanks will also be required to ensure availability of bulk water storage for the additional troops, and septic tanks for sewage containment and installation of wastewater treatment facilities and lift stations will need to be installed in Anyama and Yopougon to ensure that the wastewater from the camps are treated according to the required environmental standards. The major construction projects in progress in UNOCI are listed in annex III to the present report. 68. The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the Secretary-General's proposals for operational costs, as summarised in the preceding paragraphs. Bouaké logistics base 69. The Advisory Committee recalls that it had been informed that, in response to the post-election crisis in Côte d'Ivoire, a revised concept of mission support was developed, which included the designation of Bouaké as the main airport of entry and exit in the mission area (see A/65/743/Add.14, para. 29). During its consideration of the Secretary-General's proposed supplementary estimates, the Committee was informed that UNOCI's main logistics base has since reverted to Abidjan, as the ports and airport have resumed normal operations. It was indicated, however, that Bouaké now serves as a secondary logistics base. Following the enhancement of the airport facilities in Bouaké, rotations of uniformed personnel are now conducted through Bouaké, as the usage of Yamoussoukro airport is restricted to aircraft not exceeding 50 tons. The Transport Mechanized Unit is accommodated in Bouaké following the upgrade of its facilities. The Bouaké logistics base is also used for warehousing fresh rations for some 6,000 troops located in Sectors East and West. Quick-impact projects 70. It is indicated in the report that, in addition to the total of 40 quick-impact projects approved in the context of the UNOCI budget for the period 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, a provision of $1 million is proposed in 2011/12 to implement 40 additional quick-impact projects in the areas of restoration of public order (20); justice and corrections (10); and outreach, reconciliation and conflict management (10). 71. Upon enquiry on the status of implementation of the 40 quick-impact projects approved for the 2011/12 UNOCI budget, the Advisory Committee was informed that the UNOCI Quick-impact Project Review Committee has, as of November 2011, approved 37 projects, one of which has been completed and the remaining 36 were ongoing, representing expenditure and commitment of $801,831, or 80 per cent of the allocated $1 million. Thirteen of the 37 projects approved by the Review Committee are in Sector West, while 20 are in Sector South and four in Sector East. The areas to which the approved projects are directed are in the fields of human rights (two projects), in child protection (one project), internally displaced persons (five projects), HIV/AIDS and gender (three projects), rule of law (12 projects) and reconciliation and outreach (14 projects). 72. The Advisory Committee was further informed that the 40 additional quick-impact projects comprise: (a) 20 projects in a new area related to the restoration of public order ($500,000); (b) 10 projects for the strengthening of the two existing areas of justice and corrections ($250,000); and (c) 10 projects in support of the promotion of national reconciliation ($250,000). The Advisory Committee recommends approval of the Secretary-General's proposals for the 40 additional quick-impact projects and expects that UNOCI will make every effort to implement all planned projects within the remaining timeframe of the budget for the period 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. Current expenditure and cash position 73. The Advisory Committee was informed that total expenditure at 30 November 2011 amounted to $281,356,000 equivalent to 57.8 per cent of the appropriation of $486,726,400 for the period 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. Regarding the cash position of the mission, the Committee was informed that, as at 30 November 2011, the amount of $114,500,000 remained available to the mission in cash, which translates into a balance of $42,332,000 in excess of the three-month operating reserve of $72,168,000. II. Recommendations of the Board of Auditors and other issues 74. The Advisory Committee recalls the recommendation contained in its report on the proposed budget for the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire for the period 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 regarding the implementation of recommendations of the Board of Auditors on UNOCI (A/65/743/Add.14, para. 33), which are also contained in its report on the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 (A/64/5 (Vol. II), chap. II). The Committee made a further enquiry about the issues raised by the Board that (a) there was no clear and auditable trail to demonstrate that the Operation's budget was properly allocated to the planned outputs, and (b) on the use of a new database to improve tracking of implementation of recommendations of local committees on contracts in peacekeeping operations. The Committee notes that no updated information on those recommendations were contained in the Secretary-General's report, and was informed that the report was prepared on the understanding that those issues would be addressed in the context of UNOCI's 2012/13 budget proposals. The Advisory Committee reiterates that the issues raised by the Board of Auditors, and the recommendations contained in its previous report on the budget for UNOCI for the period 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 remain valid. The Committee expects that they will be satisfactorily addressed in the context of the proposed budget for the period 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013. 75. The Advisory Committee also recalls that in paragraph 35 of its report on the UNOCI budget for the period 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011 (A/64/660/Add.7) it had requested that information on efficiency gains that could be expected as a result of mission support initiatives should be included in future budget submissions for UNOCI. Upon enquiry, the Committee was informed that the procurement process for solar-powered pumps is expected to be finalized by the first quarter of 2012, that environmentally friendly wastewater equipment has been procured and that its installation at the Daloa and Korhogo camp sites will be finished by February 2012. The Committee was informed that the solar-powered pump project is expected to result in financial efficiencies in UNOCI in that it will reduce the usage and consumption of normal city power and backup generator power supply systems. The Advisory Committee encourages UNOCI to continue to seek efficiencies and looks forward to receiving further information in this regard. 76. The Advisory Committee was informed that a total of two death and disability claims remained outstanding as at 30 November 2011. The Advisory Committee expects that UNOCI will ensure the expeditious settlement of death and disability claims. III. Conclusion 77. The action proposed by the Secretary-General to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNOCI for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 is indicated in paragraph 99 of the report of the Secretary-General (see A/66/529). Subject to the observations and recommendations contained in paragraphs 15, 25 and 37 above, the Advisory Committee recommends that the General Assembly: (a) Appropriate the amount of $165,353,500 for the maintenance of UNOCI for the 12-month period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, in addition to the amount of $486,726,400 already appropriated for the period; (b) Assess the additional amount of $165,353,500 for the 12-month period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. Documentation :: Budget for the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012: supplementary estimates (A/66/529) :: Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 and proposed budget for the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011: report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/64/660/Add.7) :: Security Council resolution 2000 (2011) :: Security Council resolution 1942 (2010) :: Security Council resolution 1967 (2011) :: Report of the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire pursuant to paragraph 11 of Security Council resolution 1946 (2010) (S/2011/272) :: Financial report and audited financial statements for the 12-month period from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 and report of the Board of Auditors, volume II, United Nations peacekeeping operations (A/64/5 (Vol. II), chap. II) Current and projected expenditures of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 1 July-30 November 2011 Projected 1 December-30 June 2012 Apportionment Actual expenditure Unencumbered balance Expenditure Total expenditure including projected Estimated unencumbered balance as at 30 June 2011 Variance (percentage) Uniformed police unit Subtotal Civilian personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Ground transportation Air transportation Naval transportation Communications Information technology Medical Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total requirements Annex II Proposed additional staffing for the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 FS NPO GS UNV Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General Language Assistant and Interpreter or Translator for the National Professional Officer Senior Security Sector Reform Officer (Principal Adviser) Joint Mission Analysis Centre Information Analyst (political) Embargo Cell Programme Officer Subtotal, Executive direction and management Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Office Chief Operations Officer Liaison Officer Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officers Information Systems Officers Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Officer (gender) Chief Security Sector Reform Officer Senior Security Sector Reform Officer Security Sector Reform Officer Administrative Assistant Joint Operations Centre Senior Information Analyst Subtotal, component 1 Office of Human Rights Human Rights Officer, Chief of Transitional Justice Unit Human Rights Officer (Transitional Justice Unit) Administrative Assistant/Driver/Interpreter (Transitional Justice Unit) Human Rights Officer (Head of Special Investigation Unit and Human Rights Call Centre) Human Rights Officer (Special Investigation Unit) Human Rights Officer (Head of Toulépleu Regional Office) Human Rights Officer (Regional Office Toulépleu) Administrative Assistant/Driver/Interpreter (Toulépleu) Civil Affairs Officer Subtotal, component 2 Component 3: peace process Electoral Assistance Office Electoral Assistance Cell Chief Electoral Officer Operations Assistant (for logistics) Research Assistant Electoral Officer Electoral Officer (regional coordination) Electoral Officer (UNV) Certification Assistance Cell Senior Electoral Affairs Officer Public Information Officer (media monitoring analyst) Public Information Officer (media monitoring) Reporting Officer Information Analyst Public Information Officer Subtotal, component 3 Rule of Law, Judicial System and Prison Advisory Section Chief Rule of Law Judicial Affairs Officer Project Management Officer (Chief Corrections Officer) Corrections Officer Associate Judicial Affairs Officer Subtotal, component 4 Administrative services Office of the Chief, Administrative Services Translator or Interpreter Counselling Unit Staff Counsellor Human resources Human Resources Assistant Procurement Procurement Officer Procurement Assistant General services Facilities Management Assistant Subtotal, Administrative services Integrated support services Contingent-owned equipment Contingent-Owned Equipment Officer Contingent-Owned Equipment Assistant Transport Vehicle Mechanic Joint Logistics Operation Centre Logistics Assistant Supply Supply Assistant Quality Control Assistant Fuel Assistant Engineering Geographic Information System Assistant Engineering Assistant Electrician Technician HVAC Technician Material and Assets Assistant Movement Control Movement Control Officer Air Operations Assistant Movement Control Assistant Material and Assets Officer Air operations Air Operations Officer Ramp Assistant Subtotal, Integrated support services Subtotal, component 5 Abbreviations: FS, Field Service; GS, General Service; NPO, National Professional Officer; UNV, United Nations Volunteer. Annex III Summary of construction projects in progress The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions was informed that the following construction projects were in progress in the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire: :: The construction of facilities for accommodating the Malawi battalion and other elements (1,000-person camp) at Anyama in Abidjan :: The construction of a level II hospital at Anyama Camp in Abidjan :: The dismantling of all facilities and the closing of the camp at the Golf Hotel :: The construction of accommodation and related facilities at the American School and the Riviera School for redeployed troops from Golf Hotel :: The installation of additional prefabricated offices at the Sebroko compound :: The construction of storage facilities for medical and emergency rations stores at the Sebroko compound :: The construction of a new camp at Aboisso in Sector Abidjan :: The installation of United Nations tents for accommodating the Moroccan battalion at Tai Camp in Sector West :: The rehabilitation of the transit camp at Yamoussoukro :: The expansion of the level II hospital at Sector West headquarters :: The installation of prefabricated structures and ablution units for the deployment of new United Nations police at Toulépleu, Tabou and Issia :: The construction of a guardhouse at the Bouaké logistics base :: The construction of ablution blocks at Korhogo and Bondoukou in Sector West and the installation of prefabricated structures at the Bouaké logistics base 