%%%JUDGES|ELECTION OF MEMBERS|

President: Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) In the absence of the President, Mr. Körösi (Hungary), Vice-President, took the Chair. The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m. Agenda item 113 (continued) Election to fill vacancies in principal organs (c) Election of five members of the International Court of Justice Memorandum by the Secretary-General (A/66/182) List of candidates (A/66/183) Curricula vitae (A/66/184) The Acting President: As members will recall, on 10 November 2011, the Assembly convened five plenary meetings for the purpose of electing five members of the International Court of Justice. Having obtained the required absolute majority of votes both in the General Assembly and the Security Council, four candidates, namely, Mr. Giorgio Gaja (Italy), Mr. Hisashi Owada (Japan), Mr. Peter Tomka (Slovakia) and Ms. Xue Hanqin (China), were elected members of the International Court of Justice for a term of office of nine years beginning on 6 February 2012. As members will also recall, there remains one vacancy on the Court to be filled. The Assembly will now proceed to fill the remaining vacancy. This election will be held in accordance with the Statue of the Court, in particular Articles 2 to 4 and 7 to 12 and rules 150 and 151 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. I should like to confirm that, at this time, the General Assembly and the Security Council will proceed, in dependently of one another, to elect one member of the Court to fill the remaining vacancy with Article 8 of the Statute. According to Article 2 of the Statute, members of the Court are to be elected, regardless of their nationality, from among persons of high moral character who possess the qualifications required in their respective countries for appointment to the highest judicial offices, or are jurisconsults of recognized competence in international law. Article 9 requires electors to bear in mind not only that the person to be elected should individually possess the qualifications required, but also that, in the body as a whole, the representation of the main forms of civilization and of the principal legal systems of the world should be assured. In accordance with Article 10, paragraph 1 of the Statute, those candidates who obtain an absolute majority of votes both in the General Assembly and in the Security Council shall be considered as elected. The consistent practice of the United Nations has been to interpret the words "absolute majority" as meaning a majority of all electors, whether or not they vote or are allowed to vote. The electors in the General Assembly are all 193 Member States. Accordingly, for the present election, 97 votes constitute an absolute majority in the General Assembly. Only those candidates whose names appear on the ballot papers are eligible for election. The electors in the General Assembly will indicate the candidate for whom they wish to vote by placing crosses against his or her name on the ballot papers. Each elector may vote for not more than on candidate. I should like to remind representatives that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of procedure, "After the President has announced the beginning of voting, no representative shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order in connection with the actual conduct of the voting." Any announcements, including those concerning withdrawals of candidatures, should therefore be made prior to the commencement of the voting process, that is, before the announcement of the beginning of the voting process. We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot papers will now be distributed. Ballot papers will only be given to the representatives seated behind the country name plates. Representatives are requested to use only the ballot papers that are being distributed. Only those candidates whose names appear on the ballot papers are eligible. The names of those candidates who have already obtained an absolute majority of votes, namely, Mr. Giorgio Gaja, Mr. Hisashi Owada, Mr. Peter Tomka and Ms. Xue Hanqin, as well as the names of the candidates who have withdrawn, namely, Ms. Tsvetana Kamenova and El Hadji Mansour Tall, have been deleted from the ballots. Representatives will indicate the one candidate for whom they wish to vote by placing a cross at the left of his or her name on the ballot papers. Ballot papers on which more than one name is marked will be considered invalid. Votes may only be cast for the names that appear on the ballot papers. At the invitation of the Acting President, Ms. Bonkoungou (Burkina Faso), Ms. Shiolashvili (Georgia), Ms. Mannion (Ireland), Mrs. Azmee (Malaysia), Ms. Martínez (Mexico) and Ms. Kloeg (Netherlands) acted as tellers. A vote was taken by secret ballot. The meeting was suspended at 3.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.50 p.m. The Acting President: The result of the voting is as follows: Number of ballot papers: 189 Number of invalid ballots: 0 Number of valid ballots: 189 Abstentions: 0 Number of members voting: 189 Required absolute majority: 97 Number of votes obtained: Ms. Julia Sebutinde (Uganda) 96 Mr. Abdul G. Koroma (Sierra Leone) 93 Since no candidate has obtained an absolute majority in the previous round of balloting, the Assembly will proceed to another unrestricted ballot to fill the remaining vacancy. We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot papers will now be distributed. Only those candidates whose names appear on the ballot papers are eligible. May I once again remind delegations that only the name of one candidate should be marked with a cross. Ballot papers on which more than one name is marked will be considered invalid. Votes may only be cast for the names that appear on the ballot papers. The meeting was suspended at 4 p.m. and resumed at 4.30 p.m. Number of ballot papers: 191 Number of valid ballots: 191 Number of members voting: 191 Ms. Julia Sebutinde (Uganda) 99 Mr. Abdul G. Koroma (Sierra Leone) 92 Ms. Julia Sebutinde has obtained an absolute majority in the General Assembly. I have communicated the result of the voting to the President of the Security Council. I have received a letter from the President of the Security Council, which reads: "I have the honour to inform you that at the 6665th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 November 2011, for the purpose of electing five members of the International Court of Justice for a term of office beginning on 6 February 2012, Mr. Abdul G. Koroma obtained an absolute majority of votes." As a result of the voting that has taken place independently in the General Assembly and the Security Council, no candidate has obtained an absolute majority in both bodies. The 65th plenary meeting will be held immediately to vote on the remaining vacancy. The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m. 