%%%GOVERNANCE|INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|

Sixty-sixth session Second Committee Agenda item 17 (b) Macroeconomic policy questions: international financial system and development Letter dated 3 October 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Singapore to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit to you, on behalf of the informal Global Governance Group (3G), comprising the following States Members of the United Nations: Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Costa Rica, Finland, Guatemala, Jamaica, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, San Marino, Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia, Switzerland, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay and Viet Nam, a document entitled "Global Governance Group (3G) inputs to the G-20 on global governance" (see annex). On behalf of the 3G, I would be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 17 (b). (Signed) Albert Chua Ambassador and Permanent Representative Global Governance Group (3G) inputs to the G-20 on global governance 1. The Global Governance Group (3G) recognizes the important role played by the Group of 20 (G-20) in stemming the worst effects of the 2008 global economic and financial crisis and in addressing aspects of global economic governance related to the rebalancing of the global economy and achieving a stable recovery. The 3G also welcomes the engagement of the G-20 on the important topic of global governance. The 3G believes that sound global governance is vital in dealing with the complex and interconnected global challenges of today. 2. Two competing principles have to be balanced in order to achieve a sustainable global governance architecture. The first is legitimacy. This is necessary if global governance is to truly address the interests and gain the support of the entire community of nations, whether large, medium or small. In this regard, the 3G recalls its position stated in the annex to document A/64/706 entitled "Strengthening the Framework for G-20 Engagement of Non-members", that the United Nations is the only global body with universal participation and unquestioned legitimacy. The second is effectiveness. This is necessary if global governance is to successfully tackle time-sensitive problems that can have serious global consequences. Neither principle can be sacrificed for the other. 3. The 3G advocates the concept of "variable geometry" as a possible means of striking a balance between these two principles. The crafting of solutions to urgent global challenges should involve varying subsets of countries which either have specific interests or established expertise in the subject matter. In this manner, "variable geometry" provides a means through which the overall global governance framework can help to ensure the consideration of all key perspectives on any given issue, without forgoing the option of a swift response where necessary. We call on the G-20 to continue to adopt this approach and expand it to all levels of discussion in order to further enhance the transparency, inclusiveness and accountability of its work. This will ensure that concerns of the wider international community are better taken into account. 4. The 3G believes that the G-20 could provide valuable impetus for the broader economic governance reforms that the international community as a whole needs to address, by strengthening and expanding consensus within the grouping to address flaws in the global economic and financial system. The 3G notes that there is a gap between the stated goals of the G-20 and their full implementation in this regard, and encourages the G-20 to focus on completing delivery. 5. The 3G is of the view that the G-20 could contribute to a stronger and more coherent framework of global governance by ensuring that the G-20 process complements the United Nations system. The 3G calls on the G-20 to regularize the practice of informal consultations with the wider United Nations membership adopted by the current and past G-20 Chairs, as this will enable Member States to systematically provide feedback to the G-20 process. Both the General Assembly and the G-20 would benefit from regular briefings on how these consultations have shaped G-20 deliberations and decisions. 6. The 3G also calls on the G-20 to work with and through other relevant international organizations, including the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the World Trade Organization, the International Labour Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme, not only when dealing with issues that are economic and financial in nature but also with those related to other aspects of global governance, such as development. The G-20 should invite the participation of representatives from those organizations on a regular basis. The Group of 20 and those organizations should maximize transparency in their respective areas of work and in their dealings with one another, so as to enhance mutual trust. International organizations are solely accountable to their respective governing bodies. In order to ensure complementarity, the G-20 should also provide a systematic account of how its initiatives tie in with the relevant existing processes in international organizations. 7. Looking ahead, the 3G is of the view that the G-20 should maintain its informal nature and set-up as a Leaders' Summit. This will enable the G-20 to retain its efficiency in responding to crises, its flexibility to include relevant States that are not members of the G-20 on specific issues, and its ability to muster the political will to advance difficult agendas. The G-20 should also stay focused on global economic and financial issues, where many problems remain and which must be fully addressed if the world is to continue on the road to sustained recovery. 8. Amid the evolving global governance landscape, the 3G emphasizes that efforts to improve the global governance structure should complement, not compete against each other. Competing initiatives would only spawn overlapping mandates and bureaucracies that would frustrate attempts at improving global governance. As the only forum with universal participation and legitimacy, the United Nations is at the heart of the global governance architecture. It thus plays a pivotal role in coordinating the different players in the global governance system and in tackling institutional reform. The United Nations is uniquely placed to ensure that existing and new mechanisms work for the benefit of the entire international community, and to shape a common political vision that meets the needs of all nations. 9. The 3G reaffirms that real and lasting reform of global governance can be achieved only in close collaboration with the United Nations, with the United Nations retaining its central role in the evolution of the framework. At the same time, the 3G also recognizes that the United Nations system should reform its own internal processes to stay relevant and sufficiently nimble to respond to key challenges of the day. As States Members of the United Nations, we need to implement our multilateral commitments, and be focused and pragmatic in steering the work of the United Nations. It is also important that we equip the United Nations agencies on the ground with the necessary resources and capabilities to carry out their mandates. 