%%%SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|CLIMATE CHANGE|FINANCIAL CRISIS|FOOD SECURITY|LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|GENERAL DEBATE|

Second Committee Summary record of the 3rd meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 3 October 2011, at 3 p.m. Chair: Mr. Momen (Bangladesh) Contents General debate (continued) The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m. 1. Mr. Wetland (Norway) said that the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, to be held in Rio de Janeiro, would offer a unique opportunity to renew and reinforce the global partnership for sustainable development and arrive at a strategy towards sustainable energy for all. Norway, for its part, was already taking steps to boost sustainable energy generation and achieve energy efficiency. Similarly, the forthcoming seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the seventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (the Durban Climate Change Conference) should offer an opportunity to make the Copenhagen Green Climate Fund operational and move towards a new and more ambitious climate regime that would include all major emitters. 2. Member States had a crucial role to play in strengthening the United Nations by achieving greater system-wide coherence. While it was true that the United Nations development system required increased financial resources, including from emerging economies, better use must also be made of the potential lying within that system. Norway, as a member of the Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Development, believed that such financing would usefully supplement official development assistance (ODA) and was accordingly promoting the introduction of a currency transaction levy. Moreover, since the financial crisis had made it more difficult for poor countries to borrow, it would be useful to hold a debate on existing debt cancellation instruments, including the issue of a new international debt resolution mechanism. His delegation welcomed the initiative of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) to promote more responsible lending and borrowing. 3. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) had proved to be a powerful tool for improving the lives of millions of people and would be further advanced if individual States tapped their own resources by broadening the tax base, making tax collection more effective, halting illegal capital flows and fighting corruption. Goals 4 and 5 were of particular political and financial importance to Norway, which welcomed further efforts to achieve them by 2015, in particular the "Every Woman Every Child" initiative launched by the Secretary-General in 2010 and the increased focus of the United Nations Population Fund on sexual and reproductive rights. 4. Mr. Takahashi (Japan) expressed his country's gratitude for the help it had received from all over the world in the aftermath of the recent earthquake. Japan had thus become all the more aware of the importance of international cooperation in disaster risk reduction and would itself be taking a leading role in creating a disaster-resistant world society. In that connection, it proposed to host the third World Conference on Disaster Reduction in 2015. 5. Despite the challenges thus facing it, Japan remained faithful to its international commitments, particularly the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, with a special focus on health and education. The United Nations must continue to play a central role in advancing the Goals which were interlinked with sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth. Japan looked forward to further discussions on ways of mutually reinforcing the two processes, as well as to further discussions on the international development agenda beyond 2015. 6. Japan was also hoping to make a useful contribution to discussions in preparation for the 2012 Conference on Sustainable Development. It attached great importance to making a transition to a green economy through green and technological innovations without exacerbating social inequity. Human security should be a guiding principle for the green economy. 7. Turning to the issue of climate change, he said that the ultimate goal should be the adoption of a single comprehensive document that would establish a fair and effective international framework. To that end and as a matter of urgency, the agreements reached at the Cancun Climate Change Conference needed to be made operational. Moreover, while not in favour of a second commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol, Japan believed that elements of that instrument could, once improved, be incorporated into a new framework. 8. In the meantime, all Parties should keep up their efforts to reduce emissions: the key was green innovation. In that regard, it was important to provide assistance to developing countries, particularly those most vulnerable to climate change. Japan would continue to do its part, including through the early establishment of the Green Climate Fund. In view of the parallel need for environmental conservation and economic growth, Japan was also seeking to promote low-carbon growth, particularly in Africa, within the framework of the Tokyo International Conference on African Development. Similar efforts should be made in other regions. 9. In conclusion, he stressed the importance of accommodating realities on the ground and taking a bottom-up approach in operational activities for development. 10. Mr. Sammis (United States of America) recalled that the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries had highlighted the lack of progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, particularly in fragile States and countries emerging from conflict. It was crucial to expand partnerships in support of those countries and broaden the donor base to include emerging economies, civil society and the private sector. As the world's largest donor, the United States continued to target poverty, in particular through the multi-billion dollar Global Health and Feed the Future Initiatives launched by President Obama in 2010, which invested in national health systems and helped countries to accelerate inclusive agriculture sector growth, respectively. 11. The United States was also gravely concerned about the impact of the drought in the Horn of Africa and, in cooperation with the Governments of the affected countries, the United Nations and regional organizations, was providing humanitarian support and seeking to mitigate the effects of future droughts. Moreover, under its Global Climate Change Initiative, foreign assistance took due account of climate change concerns, particularly through the establishment of mechanisms to foster low-carbon growth, promote sustainable development and reduce carbon emissions from reforestation and land degradation. New budget constraints affecting all Governments and multilateral institutions made a results-based approach to development more necessary than ever. In that context, his delegation looked forward to the Fourth High-level Forum on Aid Effectiveness to be held in Busan, and the 2012 high-level Development Cooperation Forum. 12. The United Nations development system must be made more transparent and more efficient and aid effectiveness must be enhanced. To that end, the United States continued to call for the full public disclosure of audits of United Nations funds and programmes, including by way of the Internet. 13. Ms. Morgan (Mexico) said that multilateralism provided an indispensable means for countries to unite their efforts to build a just and inclusive international economic and financial system conducive to development. Mexico, as the next chair of the Group of Twenty (G-20), recognized the central role of the United Nations in the promotion of global economic and financial governance, while firmly believing that the G-20 had a complementary part to play; there was therefore all the more a need for strong coordination and communication between them. More than ever, Member States must continue to advance the Doha Development Agenda and meet their ODA commitments. The forthcoming fifth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development would provide a welcome opportunity to impart renewed momentum to that endeavour and to discuss the possibility of holding a further International Conference on Financing for Development in 2013. 14. Middle-income countries, which had managed to withstand the worst effects of the economic and financial crisis, were well placed to promote global economic growth and recovery. However, to meet the numerous challenges they faced, such as widespread poverty, social inequality and distributive inequity, they needed the sustained support of the United Nations development system. Mexico therefore welcomed the recent strategic cooperation agreement it had concluded with the United Nations Development Programme. 15. Mexico also attached paramount importance to food security, which required the adoption of measures by the international community to provide equal access to agricultural markets, ensure worldwide food supplies and promote sustainable development. It was to be hoped that the forthcoming Rio Conference would take the necessary decisions to reverse environmental degradation and the unsustainable use of natural resources. Mexico was likewise looking to the 2012 Durban Climate Change Conference to operationalize the Cancun Agreements, including the Green Climate Fund, which would offer a means of maximizing the contribution of developing countries to the fight against global warming. Her delegation hoped for a comprehensive and balanced outcome of the Durban session that would ensure the adoption of a second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol and an agreement based on the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention. In conclusion, she said that World Habitat Day was being celebrated that very day in the Mexican city of Aguascalientes; its theme was "Cities and Climate Change". 16. Mr. Raza Bashir Tarar (Pakistan) said that the current sovereign debt crisis and the declining creditworthiness of the developed economies raised the spectre of double-dip recession, while at the same time the expanding world population was increasingly draining ecological resources. Some frontier economies, such as Pakistan, were seeking to meet the external and internal challenges thus arising by reconfiguring their development pathways. In that context, his delegation believed that the Committee's work should provide support for national development strategies, enhance the ability of developing countries to achieve poverty reduction and growth, strike an appropriate balance between sustainability and economic growth, identify ways of better enabling developing countries to manage new and emerging challenges and foster a strong political consensus on issues germane to the forthcoming major conferences on climate change and sustainable development. 17. At the national level, Pakistan was considering a number of key reforms in support of a new endogenous approach to economic growth that would be driven by the private sector in open market conditions, while the Government would serve public interests and rights, public goods and laws. At the global level, the best way of meeting the challenges lay in efforts to achieve sustainable energy for all, spearheaded by the Secretary-General; at the same time, and with declining resources, the United Nations must continue to seek maximum progress towards achieving the MDGs. 18. In the face of the global economic crisis, countries needed to cooperate more closely and be unstinting in their support for one another and their pursuit of global development. The decisions taken at the Cancun Climate Change Conference must be operationalized, while unresolved issues such as the flow of finance, the future of the Kyoto Protocol and the very existence of the Adaptation Fund must be addressed. Those issues should not be postponed any further but rather should be resolved in Durban in December. 19. The forthcoming Rio Conference on Sustainable Development would offer a further major opportunity to forge a collective response to the challenges facing most of the developing world. Efforts to achieve a green economy must, however, be predicated on the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and be supported by enabling conditions at the international level under an agreement on green policy space. That would call for adjustments to the intellectual property regime, greater flexibility for developing countries in multilateral trading rules, international financial and technical support under the auspices of the United Nations and globally funded guarantees or price supports to subsidize investment in developing countries and speed up the greening process. It would also require a viable reconfiguration of the institutional arrangements needed to achieve sustainable development. 20. In conclusion, Pakistan proposed that under the new institutional framework for sustainable development, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) should promote norms, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) should oversee implementation at the national level, and the Commission on Sustainable Development should monitor compliance. 21. Ms. Dunlop (Brazil) said that the root causes of the current economic and financial crisis could only be addressed through collective action. The United Nations must redouble its efforts to ensure a coordinated response to the worsening economic crisis, while taking into account the special needs of developing countries. Developed countries should implement plans to boost their economies and address the looming sovereign debt problems affecting the world economy. She urged countries with a current account surplus to allow their currencies to appreciate, thus contributing to a rebalancing of global demand. The ongoing currency war should be curbed and controlled through the adoption of a system of flexible exchange rates. In addition, national economic policies would benefit from mutual scrutiny in order to avoid trade conflicts. 22. Developing countries were entitled to a higher quota share, at least equal to that of developed countries, in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Her delegation hoped that the review of the IMF quotes formula and the general review of quotas would be completed by January 2013 and January 2014, respectively. Without a greater voice for developing countries, international financial institutions would lack legitimacy in the future global economy. Sufficient political commitment could ensure an ambitious and balanced, development-oriented outcome of the Doha Round, thereby stimulating world growth and development for the benefit of poor countries. 23. Despite the deterioration of world economic prospects, the eradication of poverty and hunger should remain the top priority of the international community. Recalling that the foundations for international cooperation on sustainable development had been laid at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, she said that the international community must renew its commitment to multilateralism and coordinated action at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, to be held in Rio in 2012. The Conference would provide a framework for addressing the issues of sustainable development and poverty eradication, an instructional framework for sustainable development and global sustainable development goals. 24. Developed countries should adopt stringent new targets for emissions reductions, regardless of whether they were parties to the Kyoto Protocol, and developing countries must receive support for their own mitigation and adaptation efforts. 25. In order to achieve common goals, the international community should make a commitment to provide additional financial resources to those countries most in need. While ODA had increased in 2010, shortfalls were predicted and the developed countries had, as a whole, not provided the amounts they had pledged at the 2005 Group of Eight (G-8) Summit in Gleneagles. South-South and triangular cooperation had the potential to contribute significantly to a global partnership for development but should complement, rather than replace, ODA. The upcoming quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development would provide a welcome opportunity to evaluate past policies and determine the priorities for future action. 26. Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt), said that the world was in a state of flux. Countries in North Africa and the Middle East, following the example of Tunisia and Egypt, were turning the page on an autocratic past. As preparations unfolded for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, many voices were calling for new patterns of economic development around which consensus could be built. That Conference would have an international, long-term, action-oriented agenda that would include the establishment of clear mechanisms for the implementation of commitments. Expressing deep concern over the reluctance of developed countries to adhere to their commitments, he said he was also alarmed by attempts to renegotiate commitments already agreed to by consensus. 27. Climate change had catastrophic implications for food production and prices and had contributed to the return of a devastating food crisis, particularly in East Africa. There had been a collective failure to address climate change in a responsible and integrated manner. The response to climate change must be founded on the implementation of commitments, based on the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, through joint international efforts led by the developed countries. 28. Energy production was another priority issue. The United Nations must move urgently towards shaping a comprehensive energy agenda that included an effective mechanism for the transfer of advanced energy technologies, including renewable energy sources. In that connection, Egypt welcomed the declaration of 2012 as the International Year of Sustainable Energy for All. 29. Priority must also be given to the problems of hunger and starvation in Africa. It was troubling that many of the agreements reached in 2008 at the High-level Meeting on Africa's Development Needs had yet to be implemented. At the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Egypt had called for an increase in ODA for those countries and the cancellation of their debts, as well as for a precise timetable for developed countries to fulfil their development aid commitments. 30. Concerted efforts were needed to reform the international financial institutions to ensure that developing countries had a bigger say in decision-making processes. In addition, Egypt called on the United Nations system to provide improved support to the middle-income countries. 31. Since 2010, Egypt had called for the consideration of an MDG framework that would extend past 2015. The elaboration of a set of global sustainable development goals was worth considering, provided that the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities was respected. 32. Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) said that in view of the numerous natural disasters caused by climate change, developed countries should promote genuine international solidarity based on the principle of common but differentiated responsibility. The United Nations Climate Change Conference to be held in Durban should lead to a comprehensive and binding international framework for the post-2012 period. The international community should remedy the substantial shortcomings of the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference and reaffirm the commitments made at the Bali Climate Change Conference, and under the Kyoto Protocol and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 33. The drain on Syrian agricultural, human and water resources by the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan continued to endanger the environment and the livelihoods of the region's Syrian inhabitants. The Committee should highlight the adverse economic and environmental impacts of foreign occupation, which had been acknowledged repeatedly in United Nations resolutions. The outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals at its sixty-fifth session (A/RES/65/1) had acknowledged the need to take concerted actions, in conformity with international law, to remove the obstacles to the full realization of the rights of peoples living under foreign occupation to promote the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. 34. The unilateral sanctions imposed by certain industrialized States undermined the international trade system, hindering developing countries' efforts to confront the global economic and financial crises. General Assembly resolution 64/189 reaffirmed that no State could use or encourage the use of unilateral economic, political or any other type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights. General Assembly resolution 65/142 expressed deep concern at the imposition of laws and other forms of coercive economic measures, including unilateral sanctions, against developing countries. Influential States within the World Trade Organization (WTO) must not politicize or make coercive use of the WTO application process. 35. Mr. Djusupov (Kyrgyzstan) said that insufficient financial resources hindered the efforts of smaller countries, especially those without access to the sea, to fulfil their obligations under Agenda 21. In that context, it was extremely urgent that assistance programmes should be bolstered and that access to transportation corridors should be guaranteed. For Kyrgyzstan, transportation was essential to its proper functioning as a nation. It considered the development of the railway line originating in Southern Europe and the Near East, travelling through Central Asia and terminating in China to be of vital importance for regional integration. 36. While his delegation recognized the gravity of the issues addressed by the Second Committee, such as climate change, soil degradation, desertification, food security and access to technology and water, it wished to call attention to other outstanding issues relating to mountainous regions and hoped that all delegations would support the relevant draft resolution, of which Kyrgyzstan would again be a sponsor. It also hoped that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development would reinforce the political commitment to the development of mountainous regions, taking into account existing challenges and threats. 37. Further efforts were needed to address issues relating to access to food and food security. While the Government of Kyrgyzstan had made every effort to increase its agricultural production, 88 per cent of its farmland had degraded and was affected by desertification, resulting in an up to 60-per-cent drop in agricultural production. Any solution would require balancing the water, agricultural and energy sectors. International organizations, including the United Nations, should work to build consensus on the effective use and equitable sharing of water resources. In that regard, large hydroelectric stations were central to clean development; by way of example, the construction of five proposed hydroelectric plants in Kyrgyzstan in the near future would reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 4 million tons per year. 38. Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) said that in order to foster sustainable development and emerge from the current economic and financial crisis, pragmatism and creativity would be required. 39. Natural disasters were a major concern, particularly in the mountain ecosystems of Central America, which were vulnerable to flooding. It was essential to strengthen national capacities to prevent and respond to the disasters caused by extreme rainfall in mountainous areas, and to redouble efforts to establish and improve monitoring and early warning systems for those ecosystems. The drought in the Horn of Africa was another example of a disaster wrought by climate change. Costa Rica strongly supported the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, and called for its prompt ratification. Desertification and land degradation indicators and a strengthened Committee on Science and Technology would also be crucial. 40. The international community must move away from oil and find cleaner and renewable sources of energy. Over the course of several decades and by dint of much sacrifice, Costa Rica had achieved an energy model in which more than 80 per cent of its electrical power was generated by hydraulic resources. However, in the next 10 years, Costa Rica would be faced with the challenge of generating the same amount of power that it had generated in the past 60 years. Consequently, its Government promoted an energy policy based on universality, solidarity, public and private participation, efficiency, innovation and environmental, social and economic viability. 41. Progress in fulfilling the commitments made in 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development had fallen far short of expectations. Costa Rica remained committed to ensuring a successful outcome to the forthcoming United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. It was the responsibility of the Committee to work towards practical, effective, action-oriented resolutions in order to lay the foundation for equitable, inclusive and truly sustainable development for the common well-being of future generations. 42. Mr. Gerus (Belarus) said that ahead of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, developed and developing countries were moving towards a green economy and sustainable development at different speeds and with varying capacities. Favourable conditions were therefore required in order to develop and utilize energy-saving technologies and renewable sources of energy, particularly in the developing countries. There was also a need for a coordinated global energy strategy, as proposed by the Secretary-General in his report on the promotion of new and renewable sources of energy (document A/66/306). It was key for that strategy to make new energy technologies more accessible to developing countries and countries with economies in transition. The costs of renewable-energy technologies had decreased, and in some cases they were competitive with those of traditional technologies; however, their use was uneven. 43. The upcoming quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities should aim not only to meet donor expectations but also to satisfy the needs of recipient countries. Middle-income countries had huge potential for growth, which could positively impact the global economy. His Government had considered with great interest the Secretary-General's proposal to establish a high-level panel or ad hoc working group to elaborate a framework for tackling the challenges facing middle-income countries, taking into account their heterogeneity and the positive spillover effects of their development on low-income countries. 44. In conclusion, he drew the attention of the Committee to a letter dated 25 August 2011 addressed to the Secretary-General (document A/66/323), concerning the position of the Republic of Belarus regarding the sanctions imposed on Belarusian companies by the United States of America. His Government believed that those sanctions were unjustified, illegal, politically motivated and damaging to the economic foundation of bilateral cooperation. 45. Mr. Hassen (Ethiopia) said the further deterioration of the precarious global economic situation could substantially undermine the hard-won development gains of poor countries which already were under threat of inflation as a result of the surge in commodity prices. Moreover, the vulnerability of those countries to external shocks was also limiting their efforts to rebuild their fiscal buffers and protect social spending. His delegation called on the international community to provide additional concessional refinancing to those countries to enable them to cushion the impacts of the crisis. Political institutions in the advanced economies must address weaknesses in the public and financial sectors to restore confidence and halt the economic downturn. 46. Besides suffering from the ongoing economic turmoil, countries in the Horn of Africa were experiencing the worst food security crisis in almost 60 years. It was therefore critically important for development partners to seek to reduce poverty and build resilience by investing more, which would not only obviate the need for emergency relief in the future but also help those affected to break out of the cycle of disasters and lead productive lives. His delegation reminded partners of the need for timely delivery on commitments under the Global Agriculture and Food Security Programme and immediate implementation of measures to minimize food price volatility. 47. Concrete measures also needed to be taken to address the effects of climate change in the Horn of Africa and elsewhere on the continent. African countries hoped to see all related pending issues resolved at the Durban Conference through the immediate operationalization of the Green Climate Fund. The outcome of that Conference would also be decisive for the success of the Conference on Sustainable Development to be held in Rio de Janeiro. The development of a green economy, which had rightly been placed on the agenda of the Rio Conference, was a vital part of Ethiopia's five-year strategy; driven by national objectives, it offered a means of achieving sustainable development, job creation, growth and poverty reduction. Greater international cooperation on issues of financing, access to technology and capacity-building would be crucial to a successful transition. 48. He concluded by urging that the specific development needs of the least developed countries should remain high on the international development agenda, particularly through the establishment of a follow-up mechanism to ensure the timely and effective implementation of the Istanbul Programme of Action. 49. Ms. Rojas (Peru) said that in the current context of global economic uncertainty, there was a pressing need for consensus-based reform of the international financial system with a view to worldwide economic recovery; Peru therefore looked forward in that spirit to a speedy and successful conclusion to the Doha Round. The consequences of the current crisis could be overcome only through political leadership, with due regard for existing good practices and lessons learned and a larger role for developing countries and emerging economies. She took up the call recently made by the Global Governance Group for the promotion of free trade and the rejection of protectionist measures. 50. Notwithstanding their efforts and successes, middle-income countries were unable to eradicate existing inequalities, which set significant limits on human development. Those countries accounted for more than 70 per cent of the world's poor, who always suffered disproportionately from economic crises. It was therefore imperative for countries like Peru to work for social inclusion through public policies, aided by the United Nations. Such a comprehensive approach must take account of cultural diversity, as a cross-cutting factor in human development. Culture was a source of identity and also a tool for combating poverty and thus a potential means of national empowerment. 51. Looking ahead to the Rio Conference on Sustainable Development, she noted that, since 20 years had elapsed since the Earth Summit, it would be worthwhile exploring the reasons why commitments had not been translated into reality while seeking ways of ensuring effective implementation in the future. The Rio meeting offered a unique opportunity to renew international political momentum towards the achievement of sustainable development, based on the principles set out in the Rio Declaration, Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. For Peru, however, there were also other concerns to be taken into account, including the need for new sustainable patterns of production and consumption, technology transfer and related capacity-building, access to markets, the role of the State and the private sector and social inclusion. Biodiversity was also of particular importance in that context, in view of its ever-growing contribution to economic growth; there was accordingly an urgent need to ensure compliance with States' obligations under the Convention on Biodiversity. Lastly, her country assigned the highest priority to negotiations on climate change and looked forward to the achievement of a consensus around the Framework Convention and the Kyoto Protocol in the form of a binding instrument serving the goal of effective mitigation. 52. Ms. Al-Hadid (Jordan) said that the ongoing financial and economic crisis, together with the adverse effects of climate change, natural disasters and environmental degradation, could undermine progress towards the internationally agreed development goals unless mitigation and adaptation measures were taken. Strengthened international cooperation was essential for tackling those challenges and the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, notably the forthcoming Durban session, must be the primary forum for doing so. The Conference on Sustainable Development, to be held in Rio de Janeiro, would offer an opportunity to renew political commitment, make a comprehensive assessment of progress achieved over the previous 20 years and address new and emerging challenges. In that context, predictable and adequate financing to assist developing countries in achieving sustainability was a vital concern. Global and regional partnerships were the cornerstone of efforts to that end; South-South and triangular cooperation could thus usefully complement ODA, together with innovative financing mechanisms. 53. Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda) said that appropriate global actions were needed in order to accelerate progress towards eradicating poverty and achieving sustainable development. In spite of the steady progress made by a number of least developed countries towards the realization of the MDGs, many of those countries faced severe structural constraints. While the gross domestic product (GDP) of Uganda was projected to grow by 6 per cent in 2011-2012, dwindling ODA and foreign direct investment (FDI), along with other obstacles, were proving challenging. Development efforts, including those of Uganda and other least developed countries, required targeted support measures from the international community, and the commitments made or renewed in the Istanbul Programme of Action needed to be implemented in a timely manner. His Government looked forward to the forthcoming fifth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development, and hoped that it would generate appropriate recommendations in areas of special interest to developing countries. In addition, developed countries should show the flexibility and political will needed to break the current impasse in the Doha Round. It was important to keep in view the benefits that many countries would enjoy by opening up their markets. 54. It was critically important to provide the developing countries, especially the least developed countries and small island developing States, with the financial and technological resources needed to mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change. The General Assembly must send a strong message of political will to the forthcoming Durban Climate Change Conference in order to spur progress in areas vital to reaching a legally binding agreement. In addition, preparations for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development must be sufficient to ensure that progress would be achieved on its main themes. 55. Lastly, he stressed the importance of scaling up the impact and contribution of South-South and triangular cooperation as a way of sustaining the development efforts of developing countries and enhancing their participation in the global economy. 56. Ms. Tohme (Lebanon) said that World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) data from the last month showed that a second global recession might be unavoidable. With the United States, the euro area and the United Kingdom effectively in recession, there were fears that the development gains made since the 2008 crisis would be reversed. The Committee should work to help avert a second global recession by ensuring that actions agreed upon at the United Nations Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development were implemented in a full and timely manner. Calls for a more equitable international financial system must also be addressed. In particular, the Bretton Woods institutions must be reformed to increase the participation of developing countries in norm-setting and decision-making. 57. Sustainable development and poverty eradication were fundamental to the growth of developing countries. Lebanon therefore looked forward to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, to be held in Rio de Janeiro in 2012, and hoped it would assess progress towards achieving the MDGs by identifying successes and failures. 58. Developed countries had a historic responsibility to adhere to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol as the primary negotiating forum for climate change issues, and to the principles of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities it set out. Financial resources were needed to support mitigation, adaptation and technical cooperation measures. The key to a successful global partnership was sincere political will on the part of the developed countries to fulfil their promises. 59. Mr. Oussein (Comoros) noted that the current economic, financial, political, food and energy crises had been exacerbated by deadly environmental disasters resulting from climate change. While Africa had made great progress towards achieving the MDGs, the current crises threatened to wipe out hard-won gains in the fight against hunger and malnutrition, particularly in light of the World Bank's warning that a spike in food prices could plunge 100 million more people around the world into poverty. According to some forecasts, those prices would remain at their current high levels until 2015. The situation of the world's most vulnerable populations remained particularly alarming, especially that of women, children and poor households, for whom the unfailing support of the international community was indispensable. 60. To tackle problems associated with the current crises, its Government had made attempts to curb inflation; finalized its poverty-reduction strategy paper focused on the MDGs, food security and renewed economic growth; and introduced new public finance guidelines. National-level efforts, however, would not suffice; the international community should increase aid to the agricultural sector and help develop productive capacity, basic infrastructure and human resources while ensuring preferential trade terms for the agricultural products of the least developed countries. It was also vital to strengthen existing commitments to promote duty-free and quota-free market access for the manufactured and agricultural products of developing countries, and that access must be both lasting and predictable. 61. The time was ripe for a complete overhaul of the international financial system by establishing fair and transparent rules and closely involving developing countries in decision-making. In addition, all G-8 and G-20 commitments to promote development in Africa must be kept, particularly with regard to ODA. His delegation welcomed the adoption of the Istanbul Programme of Action, calling for a strengthened global partnership for the development of the least developed countries. 62. The rise in global temperatures was a key issue with particular relevance to small island States like the Comoros, which would disappear within 50 years unless quick and effective action was taken against climate change. Historical responsibility for the phenomenon lay with the countries of the North, which must act urgently to alter their modes of production and consumption. Moreover, it was their responsibility to provide substantial support to the developing countries and small island States within the framework of their national climate change adaptation programmes. His delegation hoped that negotiations within the framework of the forthcoming United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development would be fruitful. The transition to a green economy required capacity-building and low-cost access to technologies so as to avoid a widening of the development gap between the countries of the North and South. The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m. 