%%%DRUG CONTROL|DRUG TRAFFIC|ORGANIZED CRIME|CRIME PREVENTION|COUNTER-TERRORISM|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|

Third Committee Summary record of the 7th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 5 October 2011, at 3 p.m. Chair: Mr. Haniff (Malaysia) Contents Agenda item 107: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued) Agenda item 108: International drug control (continued) The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m. Agenda item 107: Crime prevention and criminal justice (continued) (A/66/131; E/2011/30-E/CN.15/2011/21; A/66/303; A/65/92) Agenda item 108: International drug control (continued) (A/65/130) 1. Mr. Brownfield (United States of America) said that the challenge posed by drugs and crime was not new. Drug use, particularly abuse of prescription drugs, and its related ills was a continuous problem in his country, although long-term use had fallen by 30 per cent over the last 30 years. The National Drug Control Strategy had therefore been developed, applying a comprehensive and balanced public health and safety approach to further reduce drug use and its consequences. Over $10.3 billion had been allocated to early intervention, treatment and support of recovering addicts, with additional funding for domestic law enforcement, interdiction and international cooperation. 2. Under that pressure, drug traffickers had adapted, modernizing and widening their scope of illicit operations to manufacturing synthetic drugs, infiltrating financial institutions to launder money and corrupting political institutions. They used the global economy and modern communication technology to their advantage, exploiting the extraterritorial jurisdictional limitations of law enforcement agencies. International cooperation, the keystone of the United Nations, was fundamental for overcoming those shared challenges -- creating synergy, setting standards and pooling resources and expertise would deny criminals their safe havens. Transnational criminal organizations were not invincible, as evidenced by the successful restoration of public safety, economic stability and rule of law in Colombia after years of violence by drug cartels. 3. The United States was forging new alliances with nations throughout the Western Hemisphere: the Merida Initiative with Mexico, to confront violent transnational gangs and organized narcotics cartels; the Central America Regional Security Initiative (CARSI), to which $361 million had been allocated since 2008 to provide modern law enforcement techniques, strengthen criminal justice, security and border control and divert the youth from criminal gangs; and the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative, with financial assistance increased from $45 million to $75 million in 2011 to ensure that institutions there could combat transnational crime. 4. Weak demand for cocaine in the United States had caused drug traffickers to target lucrative European markets, using West Africa as a trans-shipment point to Europe and beyond. To counter the increased risk of corruption, violence, weakened public institutions and distortion of the economy, a new partnership, the West Africa Cooperative Security Initiative (WACSI) had been launched with several West African countries. As of September 2011, $61.6 million in funding had been earmarked to build accountable institutions, improve security and justice and address the socio-economic causes and consequences of organized crime. The United States was also supporting Afghan Government efforts to improve security and governance, countering the links between narcotics, insurgency and corruption. Those efforts were critical to ensure transfer of security matters to the Afghan Government, and continued and increased support of coalition partners and donors was vital. The Central Asia Counternarcotics Initiative (CACI) had recently been launched to address the significant threat caused by the transit of illicit drugs in that region, by improving the effective investigation, prosecution and conviction of drug traffickers by counter-narcotics agencies. 5. The United Nations treaty framework was critical to cooperation. The key 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs remained a touchstone for the General Assembly. The United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime was the first of its kind, and Parties to that Convention were committed to staying ahead of the crime threat: strengthening and facilitating cooperation, extradition and mutual legal assistance, and conducting joint investigations. He looked forward to the adoption, at the next Conference of Parties in 2012, of the review mechanism that was in preparation. The United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC), which entered into force in 2005, provided a framework to attack corrupt officials and those who corrupted them. The review mechanism was the first step in assessing implementation and the United States was honoured to be among the first countries reviewed. 6. None of those treaties would be effective without the research, technical assistance and general support of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and its staff. Member States must support that body both politically and financially. His Government had contributed $34 million in 2010, but the magnitude of the work continued to exceed resources. He urged Member States to step up contributions to protect their society, culture, human rights, and their children. 7. Mr. Malme (Norway) recalled that the World Drug Report had valued the global trade in cocaine and heroin at $153 billion -- a figure roughly equivalent to the global total of official development assistance. Recurrent violence was perpetrated by organized criminal groups, enemies who were not easily identifiable. A concerted, effective response was thus needed. Acceptance of corrupt practices made it easier for criminal groups to operate and thrive, and more had to be done to end corruption. United Nations Conventions against drugs, transnational organized crime and corruption and international legal instruments to combat terrorism had been developed as a collective response and they must be implemented. 8. Norway welcomed the Mechanism for the Review of Implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, intended to assist countries in the effective implementation thereof, and hoped that the final adjustments -- particularly concerning the important role of civil society -- would be agreed on during the next Conference of Parties. Norway also supported work begun on terms of reference for a review mechanism for the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and hoped for a mechanism that was strong, effective, transparent, inclusive and impartial. The General Assembly had decided that drug control, crime prevention and combating international terrorism would be one of the United Nations' eight priorities in 2012-2013, underlining the important work of UNODC and the wider United Nations system. Norway welcomed the decision to establish a United Nations Task Force against Transnational Organized Crime, to develop a system-wide approach integrating responses thereto in the Organization's peacekeeping, security and development activities. 9. Experience in Norway had shown that measures to increase transparency and identify illicit financial movements had contributed substantially to the fight against organized crime. More focus should be placed on the organizers of crime, including efforts to freeze and confiscate their assets. Norway applauded work by the Financial Action Task Force to counter money-laundering and implement standards, the UNODC study on illicit financial flows from drug trafficking and other organized crime and the resolution adopted by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on strengthening international cooperation in combating the harmful effects of illicit capital flows. 10. The fight against drugs, transnational organized crime and terrorism must take into account the protection of human rights and follow the rule of law. Those offences must not incur the death penalty, nor should offenders and victims be denied their basic rights. The spread of drug-related HIV infections among drug addicts and in prison populations caused concern. Measures to reduce demand should go hand in hand with measures to reduce harm, in order to promote the health and dignity of drug users. 11. He saluted the role of UNODC as technical assistance provider and its move towards an integrated method based on regional and thematic programmes. Those programmes opened the door for a holistic and more effective line of attack for the entire United Nations family to address the huge challenges ahead. 12. Ms. Fahmy (Egypt) said that Egypt remained fully committed to its obligations as a State party to the main international treaties on drug trafficking, transnational organized crime, corruption and terrorism. The National Coordinating Committee for combating and preventing trafficking in persons was preparing a number of initiatives and had launched a comprehensive plan of action with capacity-building for law enforcement and health service officials. Egypt was following closely the progress made towards the full implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and reiterated the need to appoint a focal point in the Secretariat to follow up the implementation process. Having played a leading role in the preparation of the Convention against Corruption and the adoption of its review mechanism, Egypt believed that implementation of the Convention was of great importance for all States, particularly developing countries, and looked forward to the outcome of the fourth session of the Conference of the Parties to that instrument. A long-standing victim of illegal trafficking in its cultural property, Egypt continued to collaborate with UNODC to have that new form of organized crime included in its priorities and was encouraged by the adoption of draft decisions it had submitted at the fifth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime and to the twentieth session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. 13. Deeply concerned by the recent trends highlighted in the World Drug Report of the use of substitutes for illicit stimulant drugs and the production of amphetamines, Egypt reiterated the need for an effective framework of cooperation at all levels, ensuring mutual legal assistance and information exchange to apprehend the criminal networks responsible and confiscate their assets and monitor import and export activities. Egypt was committed to combating terrorism and would continue to respect its international obligations. While strongly condemning all terrorist acts, it reaffirmed its belief that security measures alone could not be relied on to combat terrorism successfully. The conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism must be effectively addressed. It was also important to avoid linking that crime to any religion, culture or ethnic group, for that, in itself, was an incitement to terrorism. 14. Egypt was at the start of a new era of democracy, respect for human rights and dignity and social justice. The Revolution of 25 January had represented a strong motivation to accelerate national efforts to improve the welfare and living standards of all Egyptians, reflecting the political will to promote and respect human rights and freedoms and to guarantee a secure and stable society. The nation's priorities in combating organized crime would thus be to apply UNCAC, with the invaluable cooperation of Member States, in current cases involving some former Government officials that aimed to recover assets; develop a national plan of action for combating corruption, promoting a culture of responsibility, monitoring the implementation of international obligations and ensuring their translation into domestic legislation; recover illegally exported cultural property through mutual legal assistance with Member States; adopt an alternative development strategy to provide alternatives to criminal activity, mainly narcotic cultivation; intensify efforts against trafficking in persons; and combat cybercrime, especially when related to terrorism. Egypt was working with UNODC on a new comprehensive country programme, based on those priorities, to achieve desired goals. 15. Mr. Valero (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) said that community participation and co-management was fundamental in his Government's drug prevention strategies. The fight against drugs must also be shared by consumer and producer countries, based on the principle of mutual responsibility. Cooperation, both in the form of technical and financial assistance and committed, coordinated action to address a shared problem, was not only necessary, but complementary to national efforts. It should also be based on strict compliance with domestic legislation and international law; the fundamental principles of sovereignty and non-intervention must be adhered to rigorously. In the view of his Government, the global drug problem fell within the purview of the General Assembly and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, a subsidiary body of ECOSOC; the Security Council was in no way competent to address drug trafficking. 16. Venezuela had become a country of reference as a result of the successful, sovereign policies and strategies implemented to tackle drug trafficking aggressively. Bold measures were taken to prevent the country from becoming a stronghold of powerful cartels smuggling drugs to the United States and Europe, where the demand was the highest in the world. In application of the Policy Statement and Action Plan to fight the global drug problem, the Government had adopted a number of plans and promulgated legislation. The success of those measures was beyond doubt: Venezuela ranked fifth in the world in number of drug seizures; 262 clandestine airfields had been put out of service; 17 drug cartel capos had been deported, with over $105 million in assets seized; and demand had been reduced through more than 9,000 operations to prevent drug use. 17. His delegation reiterated its firm opposition to unilateral and politically motivated reports used by some countries to attack sovereign States that did not bow to imperialist policies. The Government of the United States of America had, once again, published an unsanctioned and defamatory drug report, in reply to which Venezuela cited tangible actions confirming the unwavering determination of the Revolutionary Government to address the drug scourge. The 2011 World Drug Report had confirmed that Venezuela was not a drug producing country, acknowledging the Government's efforts to combat drug trafficking, and that it was no longer a transit country in the international drug trade. Venezuela had signed some 52 cooperation agreements with 38 countries, forming alliances with relevant multilateral bodies to share responsibility in the fight against drugs. It had made significant achievements as a result of sovereign policies, international cooperation and solidarity among nations. In that spirit, there was no room for one country's superiority over another. 18. Mr. Sellos (Brazil) said that to fight crime, especially transnational organized crime, it was necessary to step up efforts for effective cooperation, including South-South cooperation. Efficient action against crime must encompass crime prevention, the promotion and protection of human rights, and sustainable development. Repression alone would not suffice: the underlying socio-economic causes had to be addressed. It was equally important to fight poverty and promote social inclusion -- empowering people through economic opportunities prevented them from turning to crime. The United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime was the cornerstone of that fight, and it was important to achieve universal ratification. 19. Crime prevention, particularly among youth, was paramount for the Brazilian Government, and significant headway had been made in implementing prevention-oriented public policies. Of particular note was the National Public Security and Citizenship Programme (PRONASCI), which coupled traditional public safety strategies with actions to address the root causes of violence, gave special attention to protecting children in vulnerable situations and encouraged greater involvement of the community in crime reduction efforts. 20. Cybercrime was a global problem that entailed significant technical difficulties. For solutions to be truly effective worldwide, they must be considered in the appropriate multilateral forum, and the entire international community must participate. In that regard, Brazil welcomed the convening of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to conduct a comprehensive study on cybercrime. 21. Brazil endorsed the principle of shared responsibility in tackling the global drug problem and cautioned against a strictly security-based view that ignored underlying socio-economic issues. Domestically, Brazil had updated legislation and policies to integrate public health and human rights aspects. The Brazilian Drug Law established a legal difference between drug traffickers and users and criminalized the financing of drug trafficking. Internationally, efforts were being made to strengthen multilateral, regional and subregional cooperation in the fight against drugs, with particular focus on its South American neighbours, with whom it maintained constant dialogue and had signed agreements. 22. Lastly, noting with concern the current financial situation of UNODC, he urged Member States to increase their financial support through unearmarked contributions. 23. Mr. Mokin (Russian Federation) said that a unified anti-crime strategy under the aegis of the United Nations and reinforced by decisions of such bodies as the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice was needed. The Russian Federation would participate in the Convention against Corruption implementation review of Lithuania and Niger in the near future and would itself undergo review. It welcomed the agreement on parameters for setting up a review mechanism for the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. 24. The United Nations should step up efforts to address cybercrime, and a relevant convention should be elaborated. The United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons needed effective implementation. Illicit trafficking in organs required attention as well. A set of integrated measures was being adopted in the Russian Federation to combat human trafficking. 25. There was a pressing need to achieve the goals and targets laid out in the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on International Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem, adopted at a high-level segment of the fifty-second session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna, in 2009. 26. Efforts under the Paris Pact to halt the spread of drugs originating in Afghanistan should be strengthened. The work of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to build capacity in Afghanistan and the countries most affected by the Afghan opiates problem was welcome. In 2011, the Russian Federation had quadrupled its annual voluntary contribution to the Office on Drugs and Crime and had also made a lump sum contribution of $7 million. 27. Drug trafficking and terrorism were increasing in Afghanistan, and the Taliban were becoming directly involved in drug production. In that connection, Security Council resolutions 1735 (2006), 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009) were highly relevant. They contained provisions on placing the names of individuals and organizations which used funds from illicit trafficking in drugs from Afghanistan to support terrorism on the list established and maintained by the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) with respect to individuals, groups, undertakings and other entities associated with Al-Qaida. 28. At its recent Summit, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization had made important contributions to the regional drug threat response. It had adopted the Astana Declaration, marking the tenth anniversary of the founding of the Organization, and had approved the member States' anti-drug strategy 2011-2016. The Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the United Nations should work together closely on drug control. 29. Through preventive law enforcement operations, the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) had contributed to the response to the threat of drugs from Afghanistan and the spread of synthetic drugs. Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan were cooperating to halt drug smuggling. The Russian Federation was addressing illicit drug trafficking jointly with Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan. 30. The harm reduction approach had significant shortcomings and should not become a United Nations standard. Nor should there be any changes to the provisions on the coca leaf in the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. 31. Mr. Butt (Pakistan) said that a balanced, comprehensive and collective approach was the only effective way to fight transnational organized crime and trafficking. There was a two-way relationship between international organized crime originating in the developing world and in the developed world. In developing countries, crime had its roots in poorer, less privileged socio-economic milieus, with poverty and unemployment acting as catalysts. In developed countries, criminals exploited access to advanced technology and resources to their advantage. The laws of supply and demand also applied to transnational organized crime. Increased demand for drugs, cheap labour or illegal money transfers in the developed world resulted in increased supply from the developing world. Pakistan therefore welcomed and supported the Secretary-General's call to the international community to focus more on demand, especially for consumer countries, where demand was strongest, to strengthen their own efforts to reduce drug use domestically. 32. Pakistan was party to all United Nations conventions on drug control and had taken effective legislative and legal measures to implement the provisions of those instruments. Though the country still suffered the adverse effects of being a transit country, a multipronged strategy comprising strict law enforcement and alternative development had enabled remarkable success in eliminating the illicit opium crop. In cooperation with UNODC, Pakistan had successfully launched its Country Programme 2010-2014, a comprehensive plan of action addressing all facets of the drug problem, while the Regional Programme for Afghanistan and Neighbouring Countries was being finalized. Besides those national initiatives, it had actively contributed to regional and international efforts to stop the outflow of drugs and inflow of precursor chemicals, and participated in the Triangular Cooperation Initiative with Afghanistan and Iran to address the narcotics trade. The enormity and scale of the problem called for comprehensive assistance, including the provision of requisite technical equipment in the fight against drugs. 33. Pakistan welcomed the adoption of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons and had promulgated an ordinance which gave civil society a role to play, in collaboration with law enforcement agencies, in rehabilitating the victims of human trafficking. Having also adhered to the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, it had promulgated anti-money-laundering legislation to provide a structure to curb illegal financial transactions and created a Financial Monitoring Unit in the central bank, which cooperated with other countries. 34. Crime, whether international or local, could not be fought without an effective judicial system. With the help of the Asian Development Bank, the Access to Justice programme had helped to reform Pakistan's criminal justice system and transform the police force into an accountable and responsive law enforcement agency. Secure borders were also a deterrent, and the Personal Identification Secure Comparison and Evaluation System (PISCES) -- implemented with international help -- provided immigration and law enforcement authorities with systematic and accurate identification of individuals entering or leaving the country. Solving the problem of international crime required firm long-term political and financial commitments. Pakistan therefore supported the Secretary-General's call for a sustainable, predictable and stable funding model which could serve the needs of Member States for requisite technical assistance. 35. Mr. Kimura (Japan) said that despite sustained efforts to combat transnational organized crime and drug trafficking, the international community was confronted with a number of obstacles: the weakening rule of law, as illicit proceeds were used to fund armed conflicts or to bribe corrupt officials; the difficulty in ensuring a sound economy because of the diversion of capital; and the repercussions on human beings, as crime often targeted and exploited vulnerable individuals, especially youth. Japan believed that all States had a common and shared responsibility and that regional and international cooperation was indispensable. 36. Japan fully endorsed the Political Declaration and Action Plan adopted by the Ministers responsible for the fight against drug trafficking, which emphasized that shared responsibility. The country also continued to implement the three United Nations drug control conventions and was considering adherence to the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention against Corruption. Several provisions of those conventions had already been incorporated into domestic legislation. Japan recognized the important role of UNODC and continued to support its activities, contributing $11.3 million in 2010, with the majority of that amount allocated to programmes in Afghanistan and neighbouring countries. Other international cooperation efforts included support to South-East Asian countries through capacity-building, awareness-raising and equipment supply; direct contributions to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS); and joint operation of the United Nations Asia and Far East Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, which provided training programmes to criminal justice practitioners and officials. 37. On the domestic front, the Japanese Government had taken action in a number of areas: it had adopted Comprehensive Measures to Eliminate Child Pornography, enhancing the ability of the police to crack down on child pornography; amendments to the Penal Code and other legislation tackled cybercrime, criminalizing the creation of computer viruses and improving investigative techniques; measures to eliminate trafficking in persons and protect victims; and a zero tolerance policy in combating drug-related crime. Japan continued to be fully committed to the fight against international and domestic crime, in close cooperation with Member States, UNODC and other international agencies and relevant partners. 38. Ms. Velichko (Belarus) said that growing links between transnational organized crime and terrorism made it necessary to cooperate on those matters in the context of the General Assembly, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, the International Organization for Migration and other organizations. 39. Belarus was implementing programmes to put an end to various phenomena related to organized crime through the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the Union State of Belarus and the Russian Federation. The Union State had organized exchanges and training for staff of the two countries' Ministries of Internal Affairs. 40. Belarus was actively addressing trafficking in persons through its State Programme to Combat Trafficking in Persons, Illegal Migration and Related Illegal Actions 2011-2013. It had initiated the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted by the General Assembly in 2010. At the initiative of Belarus, the General Assembly had also adopted a number of resolutions on trafficking in persons. Belarus also addressed human trafficking through the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and was the coordinator of the Group of Friends United against Human Trafficking, which had become a catalyst for responding to the issue. 41. The Group of Friends had recently held its second ministerial meeting, attended by the President of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly and representatives of United Nations agencies and international organizations involved in responding to trafficking in persons, such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Organization for Migration and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. The declaration which had resulted from the meeting (A/66/398) had been distributed as an official document of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly. 42. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime had the support of Belarus in the preparation of its forthcoming report on human trafficking. The Office had the potential to play a prominent role in strengthening contacts between the Group of Friends and other relevant groups. 43. Mr. Al-Awadhi (Yemen) said that his country, out of its belief that combating corruption was fundamental to development, had ratified the United Nations Convention against Corruption in 2005, put in place anti-corruption legislation and enforcement mechanisms, and organized comprehensive awareness-raising campaigns on corruption and its dangers. 44. Over the previous five decades, Yemen had acceded to a number of international anti-drug conventions and enacted relevant domestic legislation, in addition to setting up units to prevent drug trafficking and smuggling in marine and land ports and concluding bilateral agreements with other countries on bringing drug smugglers to justice. His Government had also worked to sensitize the population to the dangers and harmful effects of drugs. 45. In response to the heinous violation of human rights that trafficking in persons constituted, Yemen had ratified a number of relevant international conventions and protocols, enacted laws that criminalized all forms of the offence, and cooperated with neighbouring countries to combat it. Concerted efforts would be required to halt the spread of human trafficking and eradicate it altogether, as would a focus on hunger and poverty as root causes of the phenomenon. 46. Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the Syrian Arab Republic was a party to most international instruments on crime prevention. Her Government's firm commitment to combating all forms of crime was evinced by the steps it had taken to bring domestic legislation in line with the relevant international agreements and standards. Moreover, as an early member of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the Syrian Arab Republic had actively participated in its conferences and had implemented the various resolutions adopted by INTERPOL and other international bodies. 47. While incidents of human trafficking in her country were isolated, a comprehensive law to prevent and prosecute that crime, in addition to providing care for its victims, had been enacted in 2010. Other domestic legislation passed over the previous decade specifically addressed a number of contemporary crimes, including a law on electronic signatures and another concerning money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. 48. The use by gangs of technological advances to commit transnational organized crimes required a multipronged response that drew upon best practices and employed specialized police units. In that connection, her country had hosted an international INTERPOL conference on combating human trafficking in 2010, and in 2009 had organized a workshop on establishing an international legal framework to combat terrorism. 49. Her Government had intensified its efforts to combat drug use and smuggling on its territory and fully supported international efforts and cooperation to that end. Moreover, the Syrian Arab Republic worked closely with UNODC and welcomed the technical support that its Regional Office for the Middle East and North Africa was providing to the countries of the region. She stressed the need to grant the Office additional resources in order to enable it to carry out its mandate. The United Nations and Member States should address the root causes of drug-related and other crime and, in so doing, adopt a preventive approach that entailed working to resolve regional and international conflicts and supporting the economies of poor countries. 50. Mr. Chuguihuaria (Peru) said that drug trafficking was a substantial problem for many countries, whether producer, consumer or transit countries. Peru had stressed in a number of forums that the drug trade was linked to violence and organized crime, and even terrorism, and had many adverse repercussions, not least of which was on the environment. The cultivation of narcotics caused deforestation, soil impoverishment, pollution of soil, rivers and seas by chemical inputs -- all of which threatened biodiversity. 51. The war on the illicit drug trade must be waged on several fronts and in a coordinated manner and it was fundamental for legislative measures to be accompanied by preventive measures and programmes for alternative development. With thousands of people living off coca leaf production who seldom had other viable alternatives, the endless fight to eradicate illegal coca plantations had to incorporate alternative development programmes for the peasant producers. The San Martín model, which had reoriented populations towards the production of coffee and cocoa, was one such success. 52. As part of its commitment to address the scourge of drugs, Peru had decided to host in 2012 a meeting of ministers of foreign affairs and agency heads to define tangible actions to combat drugs and improve the relevant cooperation mechanisms. Some 15 countries had already confirmed their participation. Peru invested a significant part of its own budget in the fight against that global problem, but enhanced international cooperation was necessary. 53. Special attention must be paid to precursor chemicals and to improved collection of data, areas in which international cooperation could bolster national efforts. The only way to fight drug trafficking was through collective, transparent action including the sharing of experiences and good practices and exchange of information and intelligence on transnational criminal networks. Peru confirmed its willingness to cooperate with the international community in that regard. 54. Mr. Chir (Algeria) expressed Algeria's concern given the complexity of the drug scourge, which was compounded by its increasing ties with other criminal activities. The time had come for States to show their determination in the fight against those global menaces. It could not be left to producer countries or consumer countries alone to eradicate drugs. Supply and demand must be reduced simultaneously. There should be active cooperation between all regional and international partners to develop practical and effective measures based on an integrated, multidisciplinary and complementary approach. The time was right for an implementation mechanism for the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime. He also underlined the need to give real substance to the Salvador Declaration, adopted at the Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, which underscored that crime prevention must be an integral part of all socio-economic development approaches. 55. His delegation welcomed the conclusions in the Secretary-General's report (A/66/91) on the need to strengthen the role of UNODC in providing technical assistance to Member States to build capacity in crime prevention. He underscored Algeria's will for progress in other areas including the fight against money-laundering, funding of terrorism, piracy, cybercrime, and environmental crimes. Algeria was pleased with mobilization of African leaders to address those challenges, which undermined Africa's development, and was keen to implement the five-year African action plan to fight drugs and prevent crime. 56. As a transit country given its geographical location, Algeria was also committed to implementing the three United Nations conventions on drug control. The Government had implemented a number of measures and mechanisms to combat drugs, among them a national office for drugs and drug dependency, and a five-year strategy (2011-2015) focusing on prevention, through a deterrent law to prevent and crack down on the use and trafficking of narcotics; treatment, with social and health care provided to drug users; and dissuasion, through the implementation of awareness-raising programmes. Algeria highlighted its commitment to the fight against human trafficking, evidenced by strengthened legislative and institutional measures to deal with victims. 57. Mr. González (Cuba) said that all countries, regardless of their economic might, land mass or population size, were vulnerable to crime and new forms of criminality. No country was capable of fighting terrorism, drug trafficking, human trafficking or money-laundering unaided. Combating those crimes first required fighting underdevelopment and promoting a more equitable world economic order. International cooperation based on respect for the sovereignty, domestic legislation and territorial integrity of States was essential to prevent and combat transnational organized crime effectively. Cuba rejected any attempts, under the pretext that such crime affected regional or international peace and stability, to impose the national agendas of powerful countries on those that refused to bend to their will. It was therefore not within the purview of the Security Council to deal with those matters. 58. Cuba reiterated its readiness to collaborate in any serious, coherent effort to combat drug trafficking, on the understanding that consumer countries should assume the greater responsibility. It also rejected the drafting of spurious lists of countries alleged to have committed transnational criminal acts, such as the politically motivated lists complied by the United States Department of State to bring political pressure to bear on countries or to justify unilateral sanctions such as the embargo against Cuba. While the United States Government proclaimed itself a paradigm in the fight against human trafficking, it supported illegal and unsafe migration and the trafficking of Cuban citizens into its territory under the Cuban Adjustment Act. Thousands of Cuban citizens had been injured or killed as a result of terrorist acts committed against Cuba for half a century, and the confessed perpetrators roamed free in the United States of America. In contrast, five Cubans were being arbitrarily and unjustly held in high security American prisons for having tried to save the lives of American and Cuban citizens by investigating terrorist groups operating out of Miami. Cuba had never been and would never be used to organize, fund or carry out terrorist acts and reiterated its willingness to cooperate with all countries, even the United States of America, to prevent and combat international terrorism, on the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality and other principles and standards outlined in international law. 59. Cuba met all its international obligations concerning collaboration in the fight against organized crime, and had an outstanding record in tackling major crimes. All crimes related to transnational organized crime were regulated and punishable under existing Cuban legislation and the ratification of the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime was proof of Cuba's strong commitment to fight such activity. It was party to 13 international anti-terrorism instruments, had a general counter-terrorism act, had adopted a host of non-legislative counter-terrorism measures, and scrupulously complied with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). Cuba reiterated its unwavering commitment to continue combating transnational organized crime and strengthening cooperation with the international community. 60. Mr. Muchemi (Kenya) said that crime and drugs continued to hamper the achievement of MDG targets, and despite the concerted efforts of the international community, crime levels and the narcotics trade continued to spiral almost out of control. 61. Kenya remained concerned about the continued proliferation of small arms and light weapons, which fuelled conflict and crime in many parts of Africa, particularly the Horn of Africa, and had a devastating effect on socio-economic development: essential services were disrupted; investors were scared away by insecurity; and Government resources were diverted to security. The international community must do more to stem the flow of those deadly weapons. Increasingly lucrative piracy on the coast of East Africa also continued to pose economic challenges to Kenya and its neighbours. The dual problem of piracy and small arms proliferation would only be resolved through bold action to address and end the conflict in Somalia. 62. The partnership between UNODC and the Kenyan Government in the Counter-Piracy Programme and in the Governance, Justice and Legal Sector Reform Programme were good examples of capacity-building to deal effectively with crime prevention and criminal justice. The reform, signifying the Government's resolve to continue improving Kenyans' quality of life through access to justice and upholding the rule of law, had involved review of the legal framework, training of law enforcement officers and refurbishing of court and prison facilities. The widest-ranging judicial reform since independence, it had been undertaken, with UNODC support, out of a need to promote high standards of conduct and discipline among judicial officers, address the backlog of cases and improve administration, and enhance performance and accountability. The powers and independence of the judiciary had been included in the new Constitution; a Supreme Court had been established as the highest court in the land; a new Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice and judges of the Supreme Court and High Court had recently been sworn in after an unprecedented open call for candidates and a rigorous selection process; various specialized courts had been established, even in rural areas, and training programmes had been specially designed for judicial service officials. 63. The Kenyan Government had also enacted the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Act, to promote responsible leadership, ethics and integrity within and outside the Government, combat corruption, and prevent unethical conduct. With renewed political will, a revamped anticorruption body and a zero tolerance approach, Kenya was poised to deal firmly with corruption. It remained committed to regional and international efforts to find solutions to the challenges posed by crime and the proliferation of drugs, and urged the international community to continue to provide more resources. 64. Ms. Tan (Singapore) said that the devastating consequences of drug abuse and illicit trafficking were everywhere and, citing some factors contributing to the increasing magnitude of the global drug abuse problem, stated that international and national efforts to fight it must be unrelenting. Singapore understood that each country must employ strategies specific to their situation and needs, but its own policy had been a "zero tolerance" approach towards drug abuse. The country waged a head-on battle against the drug problem, using an integrated multiagency and multipronged approach to provide a safe and healthy community where its citizens, especially youth, could flourish to their full potential. That included tough legislation, high-profile preventive education, vigorous enforcement, comprehensive treatment and rehabilitation, and aftercare for the reintegration of reformed addicts. 65. Preventive education programmes were pivotal in the fight against drug abuse. Singapore focused on helping young people to resist drugs in a concerted effort involving the whole society. Combined with the country's tough laws and enforcement, the programme kept the local drug situation under control despite Singapore's proximity to the Golden Triangle and methamphetamine production centres. There had been a general decline in arrests over the past 16 years, and a 5 per cent drop in the number of new drug abusers arrested in the first half of 2011 compared with 2010. 66. Singapore was not a producer of narcotics and there were no systemic or organized large-scale trafficking operations, but the country's regional importance in finance and transportation made it an attractive target for trans-shipment. International cooperation was therefore critical. The success of the Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB) was underpinned by strong bilateral ties with foreign law enforcement agencies, through which they shared best practices and expertise and conducted a number of joint operations. 67. Singapore would continue to devote efforts to reducing the demand for drugs and helping users to return to society. It reaffirmed its commitment and support to United Nations efforts in fighting drugs and would continue to cooperate actively with strategic partners. 68. Mr. Murongwana (South Africa), observing from the 2010 International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) report that no country was immune to the hazards of drug trafficking and that there was an increase in the abuse of almost all types of drugs, particularly on the African continent, said that there was a pressing need for technical assistance in the region to build sustainable, cost-effective monitoring capacity. It was also essential to enhance data collection and build capacity in designing, implementing and evaluating prevention and treatment services that were evidence-based and country-specific. 69. Recognizing the negative impact of crime and corruption on socio-economic development, the South African Government had placed fighting them among its core priorities. In addressing the scourge of crime, it was also important to address its root causes. Tackling those challenges required the support and cooperation of the international community. The Government had taken various initiatives to deal with drug abuse, particularly among youth, which included restricting the availability of specific precursor chemicals by making them prescription-only products. It had established an Inter-Ministerial Committee for Combating Substance Abuse to pilot high-level integrated strategies. The Police Service had held its second national conference on chemical monitoring and precursor control, which aimed to develop strategies for countering the diversion of precursor chemicals for the illicit manufacture of drugs and to acquire international expertise on trends and best practices in dismantling clandestine laboratories. The Government had also held a national Substance Abuse Summit and was developing a National Drug Master Plan 2012-2015 and an Integrated Programme of Action. 70. Much work was being done at the regional and subregional levels, with UNODC playing an important role by establishing the Regional Programme for Southern Africa, which, it was hoped, would respond to the needs of the region, and launching the Southern Africa Newsletter in partnership with the Southern African Development Community. South Africa had also participated in a meeting of African Union Ministers on drug control and crime prevention which aimed to strengthen efforts and turn the tide of drugs and crimes in Africa. The country supported all resolutions that would be considered on the agenda items in question. 71. Mr. Archando (Plurinational State of Bolivia) said that UNODC had recognized Bolivia's efforts in the fight against drugs through reducing coca leaf crops, achieved through voluntary and concerted coordination with coca producers' associations in full respect for human rights. The Government had reduced the total surface area of illicit coca plantations in national parks, eradicating 7,389 hectares. Despite the tangible results, it was surprising that, for strictly political reasons that had nothing to do with the problem at hand, the report of the Government of the United States of America had once again qualified Bolivia as a major cocaine producer. The report wilfully ignored the progress made and even presented contradictory data to illustrate false realities. In spite of those political adversities, the Government remained firm in its commitment to fight the global problem of drugs, organized crime and corruption. As a sign of its commitment, Bolivia had strengthened its cooperation, mainly with neighbouring countries, in joint prohibition operations, continuing its bilateral and multilateral efforts in Latin America and the Caribbean. The drug problem was a shared and common responsibility, for Bolivia as well. 72. The chewing of coca leaves, an ancient and ancestral custom inherited from the indigenous Andean and Amazonian tribes of South America, was part of the cultural identity of Bolivia and protected under the Constitution. Bolivia was, in fact, fighting the drug trade, but was also seeking to safeguard a centuries-old cultural practice that was scientifically proven to be harmless. In June 2011, Bolivia had denounced the 1961 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs but had immediately re-adhered, with a reservation, applicable only to Bolivia, legalizing the chewing of coca leaf in its natural state in Bolivia. The National Assembly was considering legislation that ensured that throughout the denunciation and reservation process, Bolivia continued to fulfil all its commitments under the Convention. He wished to make it clear that Bolivia was in no way trying to elude its obligations. That action had been described as an innovative way of avoiding altering the Convention; it should be ratified by the end of 2012. The Government would continue to fulfil its pledge to give dignity to all Bolivians, whatever their race or culture. It could not meet those challenges without cooperation from friendly countries or agencies that respected its sovereignty and human rights. 73. Mr. Abdelmounaïm (Morocco) said that the global drug problem was a direct threat not just to public health and socio-economic stability, but also to international peace and security. Morocco had implemented an institutional framework for a national anti-drug strategy, notably a national commission on narcotic drugs and various other national institutions and bodies. International cooperation entailed shared responsibility among producer, transit and consumer countries. Morocco had made significant progress in recent years as a result of a multifaceted anti-drug strategy based on an appropriate legal arsenal, systematic eradication of drug plantations and integrated and alternative economic development. The 2010 INCB report had underlined the Moroccan authorities' active efforts to intercept narcotics, urging them to continue in that vein and encouraging consumer countries to take the necessary measures to stem drug use. 74. Following the ratification of the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime, Morocco had embarked on a process to bring domestic laws and regulations in line with its provisions. That effort had come to fruition with the amendment of the new Criminal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure and the implementation of a coordinated national multisectoral strategy to prevent organized crime. The legal framework was complemented by laws on money-laundering and corruption. 75. Morocco wished to reiterate its concerns on the increasing link between organized crime and trafficking in weapons, drugs and human beings in the Sahelo-Saharan region, which constituted a threat to regional peace and security. It was actively promoting initiatives at the regional level to fight organized crime. In application of the Action Plan adopted by Foreign Affairs Ministers of countries on the Atlantic coast of Africa, it would host the third conference of National Security Ministers to consider how to operationalize cooperation between those countries, particularly through exchange of experience and best practices. The fourth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention against Corruption would certainly mobilize political will to adhere fully to the Convention. 76. No country could face on its own the dual threat of international crime and trafficking in drugs, arms and human beings, and regional and subregional cooperation was essential. Morocco had constantly endeavoured to diversify its bilateral, regional and international cooperation in the fight against drugs, participating in such initiatives as the centre to coordinate the fight against drug trafficking in the Mediterranean and the Maritime Analysis and Operation Centre-Narcotics (MAOC-N). It had shown the same determination in mobilizing all resources to fight against illegal migrant flows and had initiated a global strategy to that end in 2003, focusing on operational, legal and institutional aspects, as well as socio-economic development and awareness-raising. 77. The limited financial resources of UNODC compromised its capacity to deal with increasing requests for assistance. Morocco therefore called on the international community to step up its financial commitment to UNODC to ensure effective and sustainable delivery in its area of expertise. The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m. 