%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|HONDURAS|RECOMMENDATIONS|

United Nations A/HRC/16/10 General Assembly Distr.: General 4 January 2011 Original: English Human Rights Council Sixteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Honduras Paragraphs Page Introduction 1 - 4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process 5 - 80 3 A. Presentation by the State under review 5 - 21 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 22 - 80 5 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 81 - 84 13 III. Voluntary pledges and commitments 85 22 Annex Composition of the delegation 23 Introduction The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its ninth session from 1 to 12 November 2010. The review of Honduras was held at the 8th meeting, on 4 November 2010. The delegation of Honduras was headed by the Vice-President of the Republic of Honduras, María Antonieta Guillén de Bográn. At its 12th meeting, held on 8 November 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Honduras. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Honduras: Thailand, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Russian Federation. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Honduras: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/HND/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/HND/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/HND/3). A list of questions prepared in advance by the United Kingdom, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden and Switzerland was transmitted to Honduras through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation recalled the commitment of Honduras and noted that the country had ratified several core international and regional human rights instruments. 6. During the general elections held in November 2009, the people of Honduras had exercised their right to auto-determination and their civic duty to resolve conflicts through democratic mechanisms. In that regard, the people of Honduras had demonstrated to the international community that they embraced democracy as the best system for guaranteeing governance by the people. A Government of unity and reconciliation had been established. 7. The delegation referred to the participation of a high-level inter-institutional delegation in the interactive dialogue of the universal periodic review of Honduras, as well as the opportunity that this provided to assess progress and evaluate challenges and opportunities in the promotion and protection of human rights and also contribute to the process of dialogue and national consultation on various thematic areas of concern to all human beings. 8. Honduras reaffirmed its commitment to respecting and protecting the dignity of the human being. A strategy for the promotion of, respect for and observance of human rights as a national objective had been set out in the new "Vision for the Country - Plan for the Nation", which was the result of a broad consultation among civil society, academia, political parties and other key national actors. For the first time, a human-rights-based public policy and a national human rights plan of action would be implemented in the country, through the recently established State Secretariat of Justice and Human Rights. 9. In line with that policy, an open and standing invitation had been issued to all mechanisms and special procedures of the United Nations and the Organization of American States, including an invitation to the Office of the High Commissioner to open an office in the country. The goal of Honduras was to promote good practices and better monitoring for the promotion and protection of human rights. 10. Honduras indicated that the main and most pressing challenge was the need to ensure the protection of the right to life. The delegation referred to the violence affecting the country as a result of organized crime. The delegation described actions being taken to address that situation, but recognized that there was still work to be done and noted the need to define a strategy for guaranteeing the security of citizens as a human right. 11. The delegation indicated that Honduras had complied with all commitments undertaken within the framework of the Guaymuras Dialogue and the Tegucigalpa-San José Accord, among which was the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission. 12. With regard to the main human rights issues, as raised by the High Commissioner for Human Rights and specific Rapporteurs, the delegation noted that Honduras had taken a series of actions to address them. The delegation provided information about, inter alia, measures to address impunity, to strengthen the independence and capacity of the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, and to ensure that the national police respected human rights. 13. Honduras also referred to actions taken to comply with obligations arising from the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols, among which had been the establishment of legal, institutional and policy frameworks to address the problem of the sexual and commercial exploitation of children and child labour. 14. The delegation also noted challenges and the need to address poverty and strengthen the capacities of State institutions, and highlighted the need for support and technical assistance from the international community. 15. Regarding the situation of women in Honduras, the delegation described the legal and institutional framework and referred to gender-related policies and programmes to address the challenges faced by women, including the problem of violence, access to justice and political participation, as well as femicide. 16. The delegation referred to other priority areas to be addressed as part of the national human rights plan of action, such as the comprehensive attention that should be accorded to persons with disabilities, and the promotion and protection of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender groups, migrants and ethnic groups. Information on efforts to protect the right to health and to promote the right to education and food security was also provided by the delegation. 17. Honduras recognized the reality of the problem of racism and racial discrimination and its direct impact on the effective enjoyment of their human rights by indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples. 18. In September 2009, Honduras had received a visit by the Subcommittee on the Prevention of Torture, which had recommended that the infrastructure of the penitentiary centres in Honduras be improved. The delegation reported that the Council of Ministers had already issued an Executive Decree allocating approximately $35 million for improving infrastructure and equipment at nine centres. The legislation providing for the national preventive mechanism referred to in the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture had been adopted, and the President and other high-level public officials had condemned the practice of torture and other cruel and inhuman treatment. 19. The delegation also recognized the need to make further efforts to harmonize domestic legislation with international human rights standards regarding the issue of enforced disappearance. Concerning allegations of arbitrary detention, Honduras also recognized that the Public Prosecutor's Office could improve its performance in terms of the monitoring of the security forces. 20. The delegation expressed concern about the allegations concerning threats and aggression against journalists, social communicators and human rights defenders, and called on them to report such practices to the relevant national bodies with a view to prevention, investigation and the punishment of those found responsible. 21. Regarding the murder of nine journalists, the delegation reported that the evidence resulting from the investigations relating to two cases had been presented in court and that the investigations relating to two other cases were being completed. Honduras had requested assistance from other countries to support the investigations. However, Honduras noted that, in the two cases presented in court, there was no evidence indicating that the crimes had been politically motivated or that State agents had been involved. The State, however, assumed its responsibility for investigating and bringing to justice those responsible. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 22. During the interactive dialogue, 44 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are found in section II of the present report. 23. France referred to the appeal by a group of Special Rapporteurs for measures guaranteeing the security of journalists. It noted the concerns of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women regarding the persistence of violence against women. France also raised the issue of Honduras as a country of origin, destination and transit in relation to victims of human trafficking, mainly for the purpose of sexual exploitation. France made recommendations. 24. India welcomed institutional reforms and efforts to harmonize domestic legislation with international standards. It commended Honduras for having acceded to most core international human rights instruments. It referred to the reform of the health sector, the measures taken in the field of education, the implementation of social housing programmes, and the focus placed on the right to a healthy environment. India encouraged Honduras to implement its migration policy. 25. Indonesia appreciated the efforts made by Honduras to stabilize the country and undertake the necessary democratic reforms following the coup d'état of June 2009. Indonesia welcomed the setting up of the Truth Commission, as well as the role played by the Office of the National Commissioner for Human Rights, the establishment of the Institute for Children and the Family, and the attention given to vulnerable groups. Indonesia made recommendations. 26. Poland welcomed the progress made by Honduras in bringing its legislation into line with international standards. It noted the increasing crime rates and the lack of adequate judicial protection and redress for victims. Poland inquired about the steps Honduras intended to take to reduce impunity and improve judicial mechanisms so that they ensured the independent, timely and effective protection of citizens. Poland made recommendations. 27. Azerbaijan commended the establishment of the Truth Commission, the invitation to special procedures, and the measures taken to promote women's rights. It inquired about the possibility of ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. Azerbaijan welcomed the action plans to combat the commercial sexual exploitation of children and child labour. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 28. Mexico noted that the reports on Honduras clearly reflected the major institutional challenges in improving the human rights situation, which had been affected by the breakdown of the democratic constitutional order in June 2009. It commended the investigation of human rights violations, including the 250 complaints collected by the Office of the Special Prosecutor. Mexico made recommendations. 29. Canada welcomed Honduras' efforts to strengthen human rights and move toward national reconciliation, the establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the appointment of a Special Prosecutor for Human Rights and the creation of a new Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. It commended Honduras for extending an open invitation to international human rights organizations, including OHCHR and the Organization of American States. Canada noted allegations of intimidation, harassment and death threats against members of civil society. Canada expressed concerns towards the sharp increase in murders of women and journalists, and its negative impact on freedom of expression in Honduras. Canada noted that many of the perpetrators have not been brought to justice. Canada made recommendations. 30. Ireland welcomed the voluntary commitments made by Honduras as well as the standing invitation to special procedures. It was concerned about the restrictions on freedom of expression, the situation of human rights defenders, and the violent deaths of women. Ireland asked about measures to tackle violence against women and to deal with increasing violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender advocacy groups. Ireland made recommendations. 31. While recognizing encouraging developments in the field of human rights, such as the creation of a Ministry of Human Rights and the announced creation of a Commission against Impunity, Germany asked what administrative and legal measures had been adopted to end torture and ill treatment by law enforcement officials. Germany also asked for information about support programmes for the victims of gender-based or sexual violence, trafficking and sexual exploitation. Germany made recommendations. 32. The Netherlands expressed concern over the human rights violations committed during and after the political crisis of June 2009, which had gone unpunished. It also expressed concern about the prevalence of violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons and the inadequate response by law enforcement officials. The Netherlands made recommendations. 33. The Holy See welcomed the efforts made to preserve democracy and re-establish the rule of law. It commended Honduras for its national human rights institution and welcomed efforts to protect the right to life. The Holy See encouraged Honduras to move forward on the path of reconciliation. The Holy See made recommendations. 34. Hungary considered the abolishment of the death penalty as a sign of respect for human rights. It noted with appreciation the reforms aimed at preventing and eradicating torture, but underscored the persistent occurrence of the torture and ill treatment of detainees. While noting that effective interaction between society and the State was an essential factor, Hungary indicated that that goal was hindered by the lack of independence of the judiciary. Hungary made recommendations. 35. Brazil underlined the fact that its participation in this interactive dialogue did not alter the present political relations between Honduras and Brazil. It noted with satisfaction that Honduras was party to most international human rights instruments and had extended a standing invitation to special procedures. It recognized Honduras' interest in hosting an office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. It noted with concern the increasing violence against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons, children and young people in situations of social vulnerability and the related impunity for such crimes. Brazil expressed concern at the increasing threats against human rights defenders, journalists, magistrates and political opponents. Brazil made recommendations. 36. Slovakia praised the abolition of the death penalty in 1957. It expressed concern about restrictions on freedom of expression, the vulnerability of journalists, and the killing of eight journalists in 2010. Slovakia considered the dismissal of three judges and a magistrate as an unacceptable attack on the independence of the judiciary. Slovakia made recommendations. 37. Sweden expressed concern at reports of torture and ill treatment in prisons and detention centres in the aftermath of the violation of the constitutional order. Sweden was also concerned about reported allegations of the disproportionate and excessive use of force by the police and military in response to the widespread demonstrations that had occurred since June 2009. It asked for information about actions taken to investigate those allegations and to hold accountable those responsible. Sweden also expressed concern at the increasing homicide rate, especially regarding journalists, and asked about measures taken in that regard. Sweden made recommendations. 38. In responding to questions raised, the delegation indicated that the Truth and Reconciliation Commission had been established as part of the Guaymuras Dialogue - Tegucigalpa-San José Accord of 30 October 2009. The Commission had independence in carrying out its legal mandate. Its main goal was to present to the people of Honduras a report that, it hoped, could be finished during the first trimester of next year. The reports on events that had occurred before and after 28 June 2009 would help to prevent similar crises and put forward constructive recommendations that would strengthen the country's institutions and democratic development and the defence and guarantee of human rights. Honduras was also striving to establish the facts surrounding the incidents and find a channel for national reconciliation. In its mandate, it was recognized that it was important and necessary to have the political will to implement recommendations, particularly those that could strengthen the institutional framework of the State and the protection of human rights. The State Secretariat of Justice and Human Rights had recently established the relevant working sectors and would follow up on the recommendations of the Commission. 39. With regard to the allegations of impunity, the delegation pointed out that 22 cases had been prosecuted. A budget had been allocated, and more resources should be assigned, to support a programme for strengthening the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, including the recruitment and training of staff of the Office, which would carry out independent investigations. The delegation noted that there was the political will to investigate and punish those responsible. 40. The delegation also noted that the State recognized the importance of freedom of expression and the press, and its fundamental role in the consolidation and development of democracy. It was also aware that the necessary measures should be adopted to ensure that journalists could carry out their work. In that regard, the delegation noted that the Constitution and other legislation guaranteed freedom of expression, including collecting, receiving and disseminating information and ideas, without any censorship. Honduras regretted the murders of journalists and social communicators, and investigations were being conducted by the State Secretariat of Security and the Public Prosecutor's Office, as noted in the national report. 41. With regard to protecting the right to life and security of journalists and human rights defenders, the Inter-American Human Rights Commission had issued 341 precautionary measures, of which 253 had been agreed with the beneficiaries. Other security measures had also been implemented by the State Secretariat of Security. 42. Concerning impunity, the delegation stated that Honduras had recently asked the Secretary-General of the United Nations to support the establishment in the country of an international commission against impunity, which would act as an element of technical back-stopping in investigations related to certain cases that they knew had given rise to many concerns at the national and international levels. 43. Haiti welcomed the participation of civil society in the preparation of the national report. It inquired about the measures Honduras intended to take to turn the National Human Rights Commission into a genuine mechanism for protecting human rights. Haiti made recommendations. 44. The United Kingdom welcomed the work done to create a multi-party Government of reconciliation after the unsettling events of 2009, as well as the establishment of the Truth Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and the issuance of a standing invitation to the special procedures mechanisms. It encouraged Honduras to tackle incidents of political repression and to increase consultation with civil society. The United Kingdom expressed concern at the reports of extrajudicial killings, particularly of children, and called upon Honduras to ensure prosecutions. Furthermore, it inquired about measures to protect journalists and human rights defenders. The United Kingdom made recommendations. 45. Australia welcomed the 2010 increase in the national police budget and the appointment of a high-level human rights adviser to assist the President. It noted, however, that much had to be done to improve the human rights situation, especially to reduce the high homicide and femicide rates. Australia expressed its support for the recommendation of the Organization of American States that there be a continued investigation into the high murder rate, especially with regard to journalists and human rights activists. It asked Honduras to take steps to end threats and attacks on the population and to fully support human rights institutions. Australia made recommendations. 46. Italy welcomed the issuance of a standing invitation to international human rights mechanisms and the willingness to host an office of OHCHR. Italy asked about the role of the "unlawful associations" (maras or pandillas) regarding the sexual exploitation of women and trafficking. Italy expressed concern at the carrying out of torture and ill treatment against detainees by police forces, as well as the excessive use of force during the political crisis last year. Italy made recommendations. 47. Uruguay clarified that its participation in the dialogue could not be seen as an explicit or implicit recognition of the Government of Mr. Porfirio Lobo Sosa. Uruguay expressed its deep concern about reported restrictions on freedom of expression and the rule of law; the intimidation, mistreatment and killing of journalists and human rights activists that had occurred after the coup d'état; and the impunity surrounding the killings of juveniles. Uruguay made recommendations. 48. Thailand expressed its support for Honduras in undertaking poverty eradication policies as a way to prevent the abuse and exploitation of women and children. Thailand welcomed the country's various laws and policies aimed at preventing human trafficking, and applauded Honduras for its attempt to promote human rights education and training. Thailand expressed its readiness to explore ways to promote South-South cooperation with Honduras, and noted the possibility of sharing practices as part of a victim-centred approach to combating human trafficking. Thailand made recommendations. 49. China recognized Honduras' implementation of its international obligations, the establishment of the Truth Commission and the Ministry for Justice and Human Rights, and the issuance of a standing invitation to international human rights mechanisms. Owing to financial and technical restraints, Honduras continued to face difficulties in its judicial development and provision of social security. China called on the international community to increase financial and technical assistance to Honduras in order to support the country's capacity to better protect and promote human rights. 50. The United States of America welcomed the investigations into the killings of journalists since March 2010 and congratulated Honduras on having created the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and the Secretariat for the Development of Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples. It was concerned about the killings, intimidations and abuses of persons belonging to the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community. The United States made recommendations. 51. The Republic of Korea asked for information about the activities of the Truth Commission. It acknowledged Honduras' significant progress in promoting and protecting women's and children's rights. It asked about the challenges Honduras was facing in the fight against crime and the measures it was planning to take to overcome them. The Republic of Korea made a recommendation. 52. Spain recognized Honduras' efforts to overcome the negative impact on human rights caused by the political crisis of June 2009. It welcomed the issuance of a standing invitation to special procedures, the request to host an OHCHR office and the establishment of a Truth Commission. Spain noted the persistent situation of impunity in Honduras. Spain made recommendations. 53. Austria expressed concern about discrimination against indigenous minorities, Afro-descendant and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons. It inquired about measures taken to protect the lands of indigenous communities and to address discrimination against minorities in the labour market. It was also concerned about increasing attacks against human rights defenders and about the climate of impunity and corruption. Austria made recommendations. 54. The Czech Republic expressed concern about the increasing homicide rate in Honduras, especially with regard to the situation of journalists. It underlined the need to combat impunity and to better protect the rights of most vulnerable groups. The Czech Republic made recommendations. 55. Panama recognized the efforts made by Honduras to overcome the challenges it faced in the promotion and protection of human rights. It welcomed the establishment of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights as well as the National Human Rights Plan of Action. Panama praised Honduras for the issuance of a standing invitation to the special procedures mechanisms. Panama made recommendations. 56. Guatemala highlighted the establishment of the Truth Commission, the standing invitation extended to special procedures and the request for the establishment of an OHCHR presence. It noted with interest initiatives on migration and gender-based violence, welcomed measures to eradicate child labour, and asked Honduras to share its practices. It requested information about measures to compensate families for the lack of revenues derived from child labour, and on measures to harmonize domestic legislation with international instruments. 57. Costa Rica noted with satisfaction the efforts devoted to the process of national reconciliation and unity. It also identified some positive aspects in the field of human rights, including measures to combat discrimination and violence against women, as well as actions to protect children and adolescents. Costa Rica encouraged Honduras to continue efforts to strengthen its judicial system. Costa Rica made recommendations. 58. The delegation expressed appreciation for the recognition voiced by some delegations with regard to the efforts of Honduras to become a party to the core international human rights instruments. Honduras had also been harmonizing its domestic legal framework with international human rights norms and standards. It recognized, however, that there was still much to be done, and the State Secretariat of Justice and Human Rights would have this responsibility. The delegation reported that the National Congress was considering the possibility of abolishing the legislation on states of emergency, as it was incompatible with the Constitution. Article 209 of the Criminal Code, which regulated the crime of torture, was also being reviewed with a view to its harmonization with international human rights standards. Other draft projects currently being studied by the National Congress included the draft law on the judiciary, the Council of the Judiciary and the Judicial Service Act. Honduras was also promoting the incorporation of new legal institutions into the domestic legal framework, including the incorporation into the new Criminal Code of crimes recognized under international humanitarian law. 59. The delegation further reported on specific measures taken for the implementation of precautionary measures, as noted earlier. Among these measures was an emergency telephone line to contact the police, as well as additional patrolling by police and police escorts. Honduras again referred to the security situation that was affecting the entire region, owing mainly to its geographic location. 60. Since 28 June 2009, the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights had dealt with six cases of proven abuse against the media by police and military authorities. Other cases were being investigated. The State was planning a strategy to protect journalists, social communicators and human rights defenders with a view to protecting their lives and physical integrity, as well as ensuring the effective investigation of such offences. Honduras had asked for assistance from other countries to support the investigative functions. 61. The delegation noted that the State condemned any act of violence against women. The Office of the Special Prosecutor for Women was carrying out actions to address the problem of domestic violence. Through the State Secretariat of Public Health, assistance was being provided to victims of sexual violence and also to aggressors, through special programmes involving 18 family counsellors at the national level. The Women's Institute, through municipal offices, monitored the implementation of the sanctions imposed on perpetrators of domestic violence. The Inter-institutional Commission for the Follow-up and Implementation of the Domestic Violence Law was also trying to solve the problem of violence against women. Honduras had established five shelters at the national level, with the support of international cooperation. However, the protection system needed to be further strengthened. 62. Regarding the promotion and protection of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons, Honduras reported that it had provided legal recognition to groups defending the rights of such persons. The Public Prosecutor's Office had also initiated judicial actions against State agents who had committed abuse of power, discrimination and murder attempts against members of those communities. 63. With regard to indigenous groups and Afro-Honduran peoples, legislative measures had been taken to recognize their ancestral rights, and institutions had been created to regulate land tenure. The Office of the Special Prosecutor for Ethnic Groups and Cultural Heritage was currently investigating a series of allegations involving the crime of usurpation and other offences committed against indigenous communities. It was expected that the new State Secretariat to address issues regarding ethnic groups would effectively ensure the monitoring of the relevant provisions contained in the Constitution and the law. 64. Chile recognized Honduras' efforts to respond to the challenges that had arisen from the political and institutional crisis. It praised the issuance of a standing invitation to international human rights mechanisms, the establishment of a National Plan of Action for Human Rights and the readiness to open an OHCHR office. It welcomed the creation of a Truth Commission. Chile made recommendations. 65. Colombia welcomed Honduras' request for the opening of an OHCHR office, which reflected the country's commitment to the United Nations human rights system. Colombia expressed its support for the implementation of the compromise emanating from the Guaymuras Dialogue-Tegucigalpa-San José Accord, stressing the importance of the creation of the Truth Commission. It highlighted Honduras' commitment to clearing up the cases involving the murder of journalists, and encouraged the country to continue efforts to protect them. Colombia made recommendations. 66. Argentina stated that it did not recognize the Government of Honduras. It noted that, given the situation of grave human rights violations, which had increased since the coup d'état, it had decided to make a presentation during the interactive dialogue. Argentina made recommendations. 67. Switzerland welcomed the establishment of the Truth Commission, the creation of new entities entrusted with promoting human rights, the issuance of a standing invitation to international human rights mechanisms, and the proposal for the opening of an OHCHR office. Switzerland noted with concern the persistent violations of human rights, particularly in relation to insecurity, the fight against impunity, freedom of expression and freedom of the press. Switzerland made recommendations. 68. Paraguay indicated that its intervention in the dialogue did not imply a change in its position regarding the Government of Honduras. Paraguay welcomed the establishment of the Truth Commission and the extension of a standing invitation to the special procedures. It encouraged Honduras to ensure the protection of human rights defenders and freedom of expression. 69. Ghana commended Honduras' efforts to address the challenges of the national health system and to promote women's rights. Ghana noted with concern the high poverty and illiteracy rates among the indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples and asked about the implementation of programmes to improve the situation of indigenous peoples. Ghana urged Honduras to consider the assessment made in 2005 by the Special Rapporteur on racism and to take steps to address racial discrimination. Ghana made recommendations. 70. Slovenia welcomed Honduras' efforts to bring its national legislation into line with international standards, the establishment of a Truth Commission and the issuance of an open invitation to international human rights bodies. It noted with concern the continued impunity for human rights violations that had occurred in the aftermath of the coup d'état. Slovenia made a recommendation. 71. Japan encouraged Honduras to continue its efforts to re-establish democracy and praised efforts made to harmonize domestic legislation with international standards and progress made on gender equality. It also welcomed the establishment of the Truth Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. Japan expressed concern about increasing incidents of violence against women, including femicide. Japan made recommendations. 72. Peru noted the challenges faced by Honduras in strengthening its democratic institutions, the rule of law and the promotion and protection of human rights to prevent a repetition of the serious situation that had undermined the constitutional order of the country. Peru made recommendations. 73. Ecuador stated that it was participating in this review although it did not recognize the Government of Honduras. Ecuador was participating in order to make a contribution to the effective monitoring of, respect for and the promotion of the human rights of the Honduran people, with whom, regardless of the country's authorities, it felt fraternity and solidarity. It recognized the efforts made to promote the rights of women and children. Ecuador made recommendations. 74. Singapore commended Honduras for having established the Truth Commission and for placing emphasis on strengthening the rule of law. It thanked Honduras for sharing its practices on how to tackle human rights challenges, such as prison conditions. Singapore also commended Honduras for the priority accorded to health, a healthy environment, education, decent housing, work, the situation of women, children, young and old people and persons with disabilities. 75. El Salvador recognized Honduras efforts in re-establishing social harmony. It asked Honduras to take into consideration concerns expressed by international human rights bodies and to strengthen its collaboration with them. The universal periodic review process provided the country with an opportunity to strengthen its efforts in seeking reconciliation among all Hondurans and overcoming the situation that had affected human rights in Honduras. 76. Nigeria welcomed the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights and Justice and the Truth Commission. It appreciated Honduras' efforts to provide health-care facilities, particularly for vulnerable groups. Nigeria noted the pressing challenges faced by Honduras in promoting and protecting human rights, particularly regarding democratic governance, past abuses, corruption, trafficking in persons and violence against women. It stated that Honduras would continue to need the support of the international community. Nigeria made recommendations. 77. Angola noted Honduras' efforts to improve the human rights situation despite the challenges it faced. It inquired about the effects of the food security policy, particularly addressing indigenous peoples and the most vulnerable groups. It also asked for further information about the results of and lessons learned from the launching of the national programme on education for indigenous peoples and peoples of African descent. Angola made a recommendation. 78. Honduras was committed to formulating social policies that could have an impact on the lives of those most affected, including women and children. Reference was made to programmes, such as the system of conditional cash transfers and related programmes, being promoted by the State Secretariat of Social Development. 79. In concluding, the delegation thanked all delegations that had addressed questions and recommendations to it. The delegation reaffirmed that in Honduras there was no State policy of curtailing human rights. It also noted that the universal periodic review process had allowed all to recognize, beyond the political differences, the universal interest in protecting and placing in proper perspective the needs of the people, including those suffering human rights violations. 80. Honduras recognized the fundamental role played by human rights defenders at the most critical recent political juncture in the country. Honduras thanked the international organizations, in particular OHCHR, for having already sent an Adviser to the country, and expressed the hope that an office would soon be opened. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 81. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Honduras and enjoy its support: 81.1. Review its national law in order to ensure full and unhampered enjoyment of human rights by all members of society, including those belonging to the most vulnerable groups, such as women, lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons and indigenous peoples (Czech Republic); 81.2. Implement the provision of the resolution on human rights defenders adopted by the Human Rights Council at its thirteenth session, on the establishment of a focal point for the protection of human rights defenders within the national administration (Ireland); 81.3. Take all necessary measures, including by undertaking a reform of legislation governing the telecommunications sector and guaranteeing access to public information, to guarantee freedom of the press, freedom of expression and the right to peaceful assembly (Canada); 81.4. Fully involve civil society in the follow-up to this review (United Kingdom); 81.5. Continue consultations with civil society in the follow-up to this review (Austria). 82. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Honduras, which considers that they have already been implemented or are in the process of implementation: 82.1. Ratify the main human rights treaties to which Honduras is not yet a party (Argentina); 82.2. Ratify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, particularly Women and Children (Ecuador); 82.3. Continue the process of bringing national legislation into line with international standards (Azerbaijan); 82.4. Make efforts to incorporate into national legislation the prohibition of all forms of the corporal punishment of children (Costa Rica); 82.5. Strengthen the Office of the National Commissioner for Human Rights (Peru); 82.6. Continue to ensure the independence of and support for the Office of the National Commissioner for Human Rights and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, in order to fulfil their mandates (Indonesia); 82.7. Ensure the independence and the proper funding of the Office of the National Commissioner for Human Rights and the Institution for Children and the Family, at a time when restrictions on freedom of expression, discrimination, and gender-based and domestic violence are all on the rise (Hungary); 82.8. Strengthen the National Institute for Women with adequate human and logistical resources to enable it to effectively discharge its role (Ghana); 82.9. Establish national mechanisms guaranteeing full protection for women, reinforcing the necessary competencies and budget and the National Institute for Women and recognizing the legal character of the Municipal Women's Offices (Spain); 82.10. Step up efforts to increase the visibility of all initiatives and actions aimed at the promotion of and respect for human rights, through democratic mechanisms and conciliatory processes (Panama); 82.11. Continue pursuing the promotion of human rights, particularly through the consolidation of democratic institutions, freedom of expression, the protection of women, and assistance to indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples (The Holy See); 82.12. Develop a national action plan on human rights (Peru); 82.13. Take concrete measures to raise public awareness of existing legislation and policies, which is indispensable for their effective application (Republic of Korea); 82.14. Incorporate strategies for human rights education and training, focused in particular on the armed forces (Costa Rica); 82.15. Promote human rights education and training, particularly among such administrators of justice as police officers, judges and prosecutors (Thailand); 82.16. Devise programmes of human rights education on behalf of the police and the security forces, and constantly monitor the effectiveness of such programmes (Italy); 82.17. Improve the policies for the protection of the rights of children, and guarantee due access to justice for child victims of violence (Brazil); 82.18. Continue working towards the adoption of plans and public policies for the promotion and protection of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons and other vulnerable populations likely to be discriminated against (Colombia); 82.19. Extend a specific invitation to the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders (United Kingdom); 82.20. Consider including, in the request to establish a country office of OHCHR, a request for technical assistance and cooperation with a view to the development of a comprehensive strategy, with the participation of civil society, to ensure respect for and the defence of human rights (Panama); 82.21. Adopt all necessary measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination, including indirect discrimination against women; guarantee comprehensive attention to victims of gender-based violence, sexual violence, trafficking in persons and sexual exploitation (Ecuador); 82.22. Take the necessary measures to guarantee the fundamental rights of Honduran citizens, particularly regarding the right to life, stepping up efforts to ensure food security and improving the general security for people (Switzerland); 82.23. Promptly, thoroughly and impartially investigate all cases of death in custody and provide adequate compensation to the families of victims, as recommended by the Committee against Torture (Austria); 82.24. Take concrete actions to implement recommendations made by the Committee against Torture in 2009, by the Committee on the Rights of the Child in 2007 and by the Human Rights Committee in 2006 concerning the violent killing of juveniles, emphasizing in particular effective investigations, so as to arrest and punish all material and intellectual perpetrators of such killings, as well as raise awareness about the mistreatment of children (Uruguay); 82.25. Adopt measures as a matter of urgency to put an end to arbitrary detention, torture and illegal centres of detention; ensure due oversight regarding the legality of detentions; and ensure the effectiveness of judicial remedies against such practices (Argentina); 82.26. Establish a mechanism for monitoring the legality of arrests and detentions (Haiti); 82.27. Implement sustainable public policies to prevent torture and prosecute and punish perpetrators; train and sensitize the armed forces and the police; define the crime of torture in domestic legislation (Argentina); 82.28. Take the necessary measures to prevent high numbers of disappearances and extrajudicial killings related to police actions, in particular with regard to children (Hungary); 82.29. Take prompt and effective steps to protect human rights defenders from violent attacks (Austria); 82.30. Take the necessary steps to ensure the protection of human rights defenders, including by implementing precautionary measures requested by international human rights bodies (Canada); 82.31. Adopt measures to end threats against and harassment of human rights defenders, journalists and judges, in accordance with the 1998 General Assembly declaration on human rights defenders, such as the establishment of a mechanism to effectively implement the precautionary measures requested by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (Ireland); 82.32. Increase efforts to protect journalists (Germany); 82.33. Take the necessary measures to improve the security of journalists and human rights defenders, and carry out independent and credible investigations into the murders of seven journalists and threats against several others that occurred in 2010, and bring to justice the perpetrators of those condemnable acts (France); 82.34. Ensure that independent, impartial and effective investigations into the unlawful use of force against women are carried out by Honduran law enforcement officials (Ireland); 82.35. Carry out independent, impartial and effective investigations into the unlawful use of force against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender activists by Honduran law enforcement officials (Ireland); 82.36. Take concrete steps to ensure prompt, adequate, and transparent investigation of killings, intimidations and other abuses of persons from the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community (United States); 82.37. Take immediate steps to address the problems with the application of the current legislation and policies, including a lack of public funding, so as to protect the right to life, bodily integrity, liberty and security of all women (Ireland); 82.38. Intensify actions and adopt broad measures to combat violence against women, children, young people and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons (Brazil); 82.39. Adopt effective measures to prevent gender-based violence and provide protection and assistance to victims; harmonize domestic legislation with international instruments on human trafficking (Argentina); 82.40. Step up efforts to eradicate child abuse and domestic violence through the effective implementation of national strategies (Indonesia); 82.41. Continue to put forward effective measures to eliminate violence against women (Azerbaijan); 82.42. Take practical measures to combat sexist, domestic and sexual violence (Haiti); 82.43. Put in place protection measures to prevent, combat and punish perpetrators of violence against women and children, and conduct a campaign to raise awareness on violence against women (Canada); 82.44. Further implement policies to eliminate violence against women and children (Thailand); 82.45. Take new actions to put an end to violence against women and to combat trafficking in human beings (France); 82.46. Continue and enhance existing measures to protect women and children from violence, such as the training of Honduran police and the development of the dedicated Gender Unit within the police system (Japan); 82.47. Fight against women trafficking and enhance, in this regard, regional cooperation (Italy); 82.48. Strengthen support for victims of human trafficking (Japan); 82.49. Take necessary steps to fight human trafficking (Azerbaijan); 82.50. Allocate more resources to fight trafficking in human beings and support victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation (Germany); 82.51. Devote particular attention to fighting the worst forms of child labour and child trafficking, including that for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation (Uruguay); 82.52. Strengthen efforts to eradicate child abuse, child labour and the sexual exploitation of children (Azerbaijan); 82.53. Take effective measures to improve conditions of detention, in particular to reduce overcrowding and violent crime in prisons, as well as to improve prisoners' access to educational and health services (Austria); 82.54. Continue measures to strengthen the independence of the judiciary (Azerbaijan); 82.55. Make all efforts to ensure the independence of the judiciary (Ghana); 82.56. Undertake all necessary measures to ensure the independence of the judiciary, including by putting an end to any intimidation or unjustified disciplinary procedures against judges perceived as critical of the coup (Slovenia); 82.57. Strengthen the administration of justice according to international standards, which may contribute to reducing the growing number of cases of impunity (Hungary); 82.58. Guarantee effective compliance with the precautionary measures of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (Brazil); 82.59. In line with the concerns expressed by the Committee against Torture and the Human Rights Committee, establish an independent body to safeguard the independence of the judiciary and supervise the appointment, promotion and regulation of the profession (United Kingdom); 82.60. Take concrete actions to consolidate democracy; continue institutional, infrastructural and constitutional reforms to enhance the administration of justice and the rule of law (Nigeria); 82.61. Consider establishing an independent body to safeguard the independence of the judiciary (Poland); 82.62. Establish an independent body to safeguard the independence of the judiciary and to supervise the appointment, promotion and regulation of members of the profession (Slovakia); 82.63. Take the necessary measures to ensure that the justice system effectively combats impunity, and analyse the feasibility of establishing an international commission against impunity on the model of the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (Switzerland); 82.64. Strengthen the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, and ensure that the Special Prosecutor receives proper protection against violence and threats thereof (Netherlands); 82.65. Carry out impartial and independent investigations to combat impunity in cases of alleged violations of human rights, and inform the international community about those investigations (Costa Rica); 82.66. Investigate, prosecute and punish those responsible for the harassment of members of the judiciary, and provide adequate redress for victims (Argentina); 82.67. Provide sufficient financial and human resources to the new Ministry for Justice and Human Rights and to the Office of the Special Prosecutor for Human Rights, so that they can perform their function of preventing and effectively investigating cases of human rights violations, particularly those committed against journalists and human rights defenders (Mexico); 82.68. Provide adequate resources as well as professional and human rights training to the judiciary and the police forces (Austria); 82.69. Strengthen the legal and judicial system in order to ensure that perpetrators of human trafficking, among others, are brought to justice (Thailand); 82.70. Approve the law on judicial career and ensure that it establishes an independent body to guarantee the independence of the judiciary and supervise the appointment, promotion and regulation of members of the profession (Spain); 82.71 Take prompt and effective steps to hold to account perpetrators of corruption, extortion, torture and other forms of violence in the ranks of the judiciary and the police and security forces (Austria); 82.72. Carry out investigations into the recent dismissal of three judges and one magistrate so that, if it is appropriate, they are reinstated, and adopt measures to ensure the immovability of members of the judiciary (Mexico); 82.73. Strengthen State and Government mechanisms to better investigate and sanction those responsible for violations of human rights (Canada); 82.74. Consider the possibility of applying sentences alternative to imprisonment, particularly for juveniles and adolescents in conflict with the law (Mexico); 82.75. Bring the juvenile justice system fully into line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Poland); 82.76. Continue bolstering the investigative and prosecutorial resources in order to conduct prompt, transparent, credible and effective investigations of the killing of journalists since March 2010, and effectively prosecute those responsible for these crimes (United States); 82.77. Continue to investigate cases of violence against journalists and to effectively prosecute those responsible for such acts (Italy); 82.78. Continue investigations into the murders of journalists, human rights activists, and opposition and Government figures (Australia); 82.79. Intensify efforts to investigate and prosecute those responsible for the recently reported crimes committed against journalists (Netherlands); 82.80. Improve its investigative capacity to solve the cases of murdered women, journalists and human rights defenders, and bring to justice those responsible (Canada); 82.81. Approve, as soon as possible, the law on comprehensive compensation for victims of human rights violations (Peru); 82.82. Adopt measures to ensure that the Truth Commission enjoys absolute legitimacy and transparency in the election of its members, full independence to efficiently carry out its mandate, and clarity with respect to the scope of its mandate, so that it meets it objective, which is to know the truth regarding the serious human rights violations committed (Argentina); 82.83. Bring to justice people who have being identified by the Truth Commission as having committed human rights violations (Peru); 82.84. Investigate and bring to justice those responsible for reported abuses in the aftermath of violations of constitutional order that occurred on 28 June 2009 (Sweden); 82.85. Take relevant steps in order to conduct immediate, independent, transparent and thorough investigations of human rights violations committed during and after the events of June 2009, and initiate further legal proceedings against those found responsible for such crimes (Czech Republic); 82.86. Fully investigate regarding all reports about violations of human rights in the context of last year's political turmoil (Germany); 82.87. Investigate and punish the violations of human rights committed in the aftermath of the coup d'état of 28 June 2009 (Ecuador); 82.88. Ensure that independent, transparent, appropriate and effective investigations are carried out regarding the allegations and reports of human rights violations since June 2009 and, depending on the results thereof, bring to justice the perpetrators of those acts in processes that could be defined as fair trials according to international standards (Spain); 82.89. In compliance with its international obligations, duly carry out, without delay, in an independent manner and respecting fair trial guarantees, investigations into the human rights violations; prosecute perpetrators; and compensate victims, in order to end impunity for crimes committed as a result of the coup d'état (Argentina); 82.90. Investigate and sanction effectively all reported cases of human rights violations committed during and after the political crisis, and ensure that persons belonging to the armed forces and the police are not excluded from these investigations (Netherlands); 82.91. Continue to protect, through legal and administrative acts, freedom of expression and freedom of the press, as well as access to information (Chile); 82.92. Fully implement the law on transparency and access to public information (Peru); 84.93. Take all necessary measures to protect freedom of expression, including by ensuring that journalists and members of the political opposition are able to express their views without fear of intimidation, and by investigating and bringing to justice those responsible for violence directed at journalists (Sweden); 82.94. Carry out an active prevention policy against violence and acts of intimidation against media and members of the political opposition, and give the established mechanisms the necessary resources and means to accomplish their mandate in the field of human rights protection (Switzerland); 82.95. Adopt effective measures to guarantee the right to life and the physical integrity of Honduran journalists, as well as the exercise of freedom of expression; adopt all possible measures to carry out investigations in order to end impunity for the killing of journalists (Argentina); 82.96. Adopt urgent measures to address the increasing vulnerability of journalists working in the country, including at the legal level (see crimes of press) and by protecting them from suppression and impunity (Uruguay); 82.97. Ensure freedom of expression, in conformity with obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, in particular in relation to journalists, human rights activists and members of the opposition (Australia); 82.98. Fully restore the freedom of the media, protecting them from any harassment or intimidation, in accordance with its international obligations (Slovakia); 82.99. Ensure that journalists, opinion makers, members of the opposition and human rights defenders can express their criticisms and opinions freely and peacefully, and put an end to acts of harassment against opponents of the coup d'état and against judges, in view of the separation of powers (Uruguay); 82.100. Guarantee freedom of expression, notably by combating attacks against journalists and ensuring that journalists, opinion makers and members of the political opposition are free to express their views (Czech Republic); 82.101. Continue to make progress in the implementation of the National Plan to Generate Decent Work, with a view to achieving the employment goals by 2015 (Colombia); 82.102. Address the root causes of poverty, unemployment and lack of education, particularly those affecting children and juveniles, which would help to combat violence and organized crime - which, not infrequently, are the consequences of disappointment and the hopeless future of unemployed young people - as well as to prevent migration and the involvement of persons in drug trafficking and human trafficking (Holy See); 82.103. Speed up efforts to reduce poverty and unemployment in the country (Azerbaijan); 82.104. Complete quickly the National Health Plan 2021, which was prepared in 2005 and is currently undergoing reform, to enable the full enjoyment of the highest possible level of health for the citizens of Honduras (Ghana); 82.105. Increase budget allocations for the education and health sectors (Azerbaijan); 82.106. Take urgent action to develop a specific policy to protect the rights of minorities and indigenous peoples and address the key question of racism (Nigeria); 82.107. Ensure that the eligibility criteria for indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples to receive the benefits of the Presidential Programme on Health, Education and Nutrition in a culturally appropriate manner are made fair, non-discriminatory and all-inclusive (Ghana); 82.108. Make efforts to take into account the need to integrate indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples into the labour market (Angola); 82.109. Develop specialized and differentiated programmes to assist migrant children returned or deported to Honduras, with an approach of restoring their rights while ensuring their effective reintegration into the family and society (Uruguay); 82.110. Develop specialized programmes to assist with minor and adolescent migrants returned or deported to Honduras, in order to ensure their effective social reintegration (Mexico); 82.111. Follow up to the recommendations formulated by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in March 2010 aimed at establishing a national plan of action for human rights, and by the Committee against Torture in 2009 with a view to establishing an independent body to investigate allegations of ill treatment and torture (France); 82.112. Continue the implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the High Commissioner (Brazil). 83. The following recommendations will be examined by Honduras, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the 16th session of the Human Rights Council, in March 2011. The response of Honduras to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Council at its 16th session: 83.1. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Intercountry Adoption (Ecuador); 83.2. Ratify (Ecuador and Spain)/sign and ratify (France)/consider ratifying (Brazil) the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; 83.3. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 83.4. Enact comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation to effectively protect the human rights of persons belonging to indigenous minorities and Afro-Honduran peoples and of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons, in particular with regard to violence against such persons and their access to the labour market (Austria); 83.5. Repeal all national legal provisions that are incompatible with international norms, such as the legislation that encourages detention on the basis of mere suspicion of having broken the law (Haiti); 83.6. Establish an institution specifically addressing the rights of children; ensure respect for the rights of indigenous children or children living in rural or remote areas; adopt the necessary measures to ensure respect for the rights of girls, boys and adolescents living in the streets or in situations of vulnerability (Ecuador); 83.7. Adopt a comprehensive law on non-discrimination based on international human rights standards, including gender identity and expression, and sexual orientation, which would enhance and specify the protection provided for in article 321 of the Penal Code, and which would create an independent body to promote non-discrimination and equality, and monitor compliance with this law by public and private actors (Ireland); 83.8. Include sexual orientation and gender identity as grounds in anti-discrimination legislation, and provide training to law enforcement and judicial officials to promote respect for the rights of all persons, regardless of their sexual orientation or gender identity (Netherlands); 83.9. Consider new concrete guarantees so that human rights defenders can do their work (Chile); 83.10. Empower the Public Prosecutor's Office with its own investigative capacity to enable it to carry out independent inquiries (Poland); 83.11. Drop any disciplinary proceedings against judges perceived as critical of the legality of the coup d'état (Slovakia); 83.12. Enact legislation to protect the land rights of indigenous persons and to ensure that their interests are safeguarded in the context of the exploitation of natural resources (Austria). 84. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the positions of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. III. Voluntary pledges and commitments 85. Honduras recognized that the review was an opportunity for the strengthening of its national capacities and to guide it in addressing its immediate challenges, in particular with regard to its voluntary commitments, including the following: (a) Starting the process for the preparation and drafting of the national human rights plan of action with the participation of thematic working groups, organizations of civil society, interested groups and institutions with a mandate to promote and protect human rights; (b) Generating a debate in the National Congress and civil society with a view to harmonizing the regulatory framework of the Telecommunications Sector Law and ensuring that it is was line with the international human rights conventions and standards, in particular with regard to the levels of public, private and community broadcasting; (c) Promoting the reform of article 209-A of the Criminal Code, referring to the offence of torture, with a view to harmonizing it with the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture; (d) Promoting discussion of the draft law against trafficking in persons and sexual and commercial exploitation, which prohibited and punished all forms of such offences, in accordance with the relevant Protocol; (e) Increasing the efforts of the State to improve conditions for citizen security, considering as priority elements attention to victims of violence and crime, arms control, the professionalization and modernization of the national police and armed forces, and making accountable all authorities responsible for the implementation of the policy and strategy on citizen security. Composition of the delegation The delegation of Honduras was headed by Her Excellency María Antonieta Guillén de Bográn, Vice-President of the Republic of Honduras, and composed by the following members: Abogada Ana Pineda, Secretaria de Estado en los Despachos de Justicia y Derechos Humanos; Abogado Carlos Áfrico Madrid, Secretario de Estado en los Despachos del Interior y Población; Abogada María Antonieta Botto, Directora del Instituto Nacional de la Mujer; Embajador Roberto Flores Bermúdez, Representante Permanente ante los Organismos de Naciones Unidas en Ginebra; Abogada Karla Cueva, Subsecretaria de Estado en el Despacho de Desarrollo Social; Diputado Orle Aníbal Solís Meraz, Presidente de la Comisión de Derechos Humanos del Congreso Nacional; Diputada Welsy Vásquez, Congreso Nacional; Licenciado Ricardo Rodríguez, Subprocurador General de la República; Abogada Sandra Ponce, Fiscal Especial de Derechos Humanos; Abogada Nora Suyapa Urbina, Fiscal Especial de la Niñez; Abogada Irma Grisele Amaya, Fiscal Especial de la Mujer; Abogada Jany Del Cid, Fiscal Especial de las Etnias y Patrimonio Cultural; Embajador Ramón Valladares Reina, Director de Asuntos Especiales y Coordinador de la Comisión Interinstitucional del Examen Periódico Universal; Embajador Giampaolo Rizzo Alvarado, Representante Permanente Alterno ante los Organismos de Naciones Unidas en Ginebra; Abogada Olmeda Rivera, Asesora del Ministerio Público; Doctora Ligia Pitsikalis, Asesora del Ministerio Público. 