%%%HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY|SURINAME|

United Nations A/HRC/WG.6/11/SUR/1 General Assembly Distr.: General 16 February 2011 Original: English Human Rights Council Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Eleventh session Geneva, 2 - 13 May 2011 National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 Suriname* Paragraphs Page List of acronyms 3 I. Preface 1 - 5 5 II. Introduction and methodology 6 - 12 6 III. Country background 13 - 27 6 A. Geographical locations, political and social structures 13 - 23 6 B. Legal and institutional framework 24 - 27 7 IV. Promotion and protection of human rights 28 - 131 8 A. Women's rights 31 - 64 9 B. Children's rights 65 - 80 14 C. Youth 81 - 84 15 D. Education 85 - 92 16 E. Culture and religion 93 - 95 17 F. Aging/elderly 96 - 97 18 G. Trafficking in persons 98 - 102 18 H. Prisoner's rights 103 - 105 19 I. Health 106 - 125 19 J. Interior 126 21 K. Indigenous people and Maroons rights 127 - 131 21 V. Achievements, best practices, challenges and constraints 132 - 138 22 VI. Final provisions 139 - 140 23 AIDS Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome AOV General Old Age Stipend AVR Antiretroviral drug CARICOM Caribbean Community CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women CERD Convention on All Forms of Racial Discrimination CIDA Canadian International Development Agency CRC Convention on the Rights of the Child CSME Caricom Single Market and Economy EC European Commission ECD Early Childhood Development HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus IGAP Integrated Gender Action Plan ITC-ILO International Training Centre of the International Labour Organization KALBOBIS Kansverbetering Leerlingen Basisonderwijs Binnenland Suriname KAP survey Knowledge Attitude Practice Survey MICS Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey MOP Multi- annual Development Plan MZ Medical Mission NBG National Bureau for Gender Policy NGO Non-Governmental Organization NSP National Strategic Plan NYI National Youth Institute OAS Organization of American States OIC Organization of Islamic Conference PAHO Pan American Health Organization PLHIV People Living with HIV/AIDS PMTCT Prevention of Mother To Child Transmission SRD Surinamese Dollar SSGTV Foundation Stop Violence against Women TELESUR Telecommunication Company Suriname UNGASS United Nations General Assembly Special Session UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS UNDP United Nations Development Program UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFPA United Nations Population Fund UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNIFEM United Nations Development Fund for Women UPR Universal Periodic Review USD United States Dollar VSG Association of Saramaka Authorities VCT Voluntary Counseling and Testing WRC Women's Rights Centre 1. The Universal Periodic Review (UPR) is executed by the Human Rights Council. Its main task is to evaluate the fulfillment by all States of all its human rights obligation. 2. This gives concrete expression to the principle that human rights are universal and indivisible. Equal attention is given to civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, as well as the right to development. Under this system every Member State comes up for review on a periodic basis, that is every four years. 3. Suriname as a Member State of the United Nations will be under review during the eleventh session of the UPR working group from 2 - 13 May 2011. In the order of review Suriname is number 10 on the list while in the tentative timetable its turn is on Friday 6 May from 14:30 - 17:30. The adoption of the report on Suriname is scheduled on Tuesday 10 May from 17:30 - 18:00. 4. The UPR Troikas for Suriname on the eleventh session of the working group are: Lybian Arab Jamahiriya, Qatar and Uruguay. 5. We would like to acknowledge the following entities and persons for their contribution. Entities: Stg. Ilse Henar- Hewitt Juridische Bijstand voor Vrouwen Stg. Stop Geweld tegen Vrouwen Nationale Vrouwen Beweging Vereniging van Saramakaanse Gezagsdragers Vereniging van Inheemse Dorpshoofden Suriname Foundation Human Development/BKO Medische Zending, Primary Health Care Suriname Ministry of Justice and Police: Bureau Vrouwen - en Kinderbeleid Nationaal Bureau Genderbeleid Bureau Familierechtelijke Zaken Jeugd Doorgangscentrum "Opa Doeli" Centrale Penitentiaire Inrichting Santo Boma Onder Directoraat Delinquenten zorg Onder Directoraat Kategoriaal en Maatschappelijk Werk, Ministry of Social Affairs and Public Housing Inter- Ministeriële Commissie Mensenrechten Persons: Mr. E. Limon LL.M. Ms. S. Chandrikasingh LL.M. & MBA Ms. J. Vinkwolk LL.M. Ms. M. Malone LL.B. Paramaribo, 1 February 2011 Ms. Margo Waterval LL.M. & LL.M. Consultant II. Introduction and methodology 6. The Government of Suriname is determined to promote and guarantee all fundamental rights and freedoms. 7. The Constitution of the Republic of Suriname elaborates in chapter V on the protection of basic rights, individual rights and freedom within the territory of Suriname. 8. In the Multi-annual Development Plan (M.O.P.) of the Government for 2006 - 2011 human rights is mentioned, among other things, as a cross-cutting issue. 9. Suriname is committed to the protection and promotion of human rights as evidenced, in addition to the Constitution, by the domestic legislation and its adherence to international treaties. 10. The Universal Periodic Review Report of Suriname has been drafted in conformity with the general guidelines for the preparation of information for the review, contained in decision 6/102, as adopted by the Human Rights Council on 27 November 2007. By drafting this Report, Suriname is meeting prior commitments with regard to regular reporting on the achievements of human rights. 11. The convening of meetings with relevant Organizations as well as the drafting of the said report was the responsibility of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Justice and Police. 12. This report is drafted with the input of relevant Government Institutions and Non - Governmental Organizations (NGO'S). Consultations were conducted during the various stages of drafting of the report and will continue throughout Suriname's preparation for the inter-active dialogue phase of the Universal Periodic Review. III. Country background A. Geographical locations, political and social structures 13. Suriname, with its capital Paramaribo, is located on the north eastern part of South America between 2 and 6 degrees northern latitude 54 and 56 degrees western longitude. Suriname borders on the Atlantic Ocean in the North, Guyana and French Guyana respectively the West and in the East and Brazil in the South. The country, which is largely covered by tropical rainforest has a surface area of approximately 163,820 square kilometers and is divided into ten administrative districts. 14. Suriname became a colony of the Netherlands in 1667. A people's representative was introduced in 1866, while general suffrage for men and women was introduced in 1948. The first political parties were formed shortly after the First World War, and the first general elections were held in 1949. 15. Suriname acquired autonomous status within the Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1954 and became independent on 25 November 1975. Both before and after independence, politics in Suriname were run by a large number of coalition parties, which were often founded on ethnic lines. After the military coup d'état of 25 February 1980, the military remained in power until 1987. The general elections of 1987 brought a civilian government to power again until 24 December 1990, when another coup d'état took place. General, free and fair elections thereafter took place in 1991, 1996, 2000, 2005 and 2010. 16. The present Constitution of Suriname dates from 1987 and was last amended in 1992. The Republic of Suriname is a democratic state, based on the sovereignty of the people and on respect for rights and freedoms as stated in article 1 paragraph 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Suriname. The political power rests with the people and is implemented in accordance with the Constitution. 17. The political democracy is characterized by participation and representation of the people of Suriname in establishing a democratic political system as well as participation in legislation and administration, directed towards maintaining and expanding this system as stated in Article 52 paragraph 2. The Republic of Suriname is a decentralized non-federal state; the democratic structure consists of a regional level of government services, whose function, organization, competencies and procedures are laid down by law and are in accordance with the principles of participatory democracy and decentralization of government and legislation (Article 159). 18. The President is Head of State of the Republic of Suriname, chairman of the National Security Council, Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, Chairman of the Council of State. He is also in charge of the Foreign policy of the Republic of Suriname and of all efforts geared towards the development of the international legal order. The President is chosen for a period of five years by the National Assembly. 19. The Vice - President is in charge of the day to day operations of the Council of Ministers, consisting of 17 ministers, which is the highest executive and administrative organ of Government. 20. The National Assembly supervises the work of the Government in accordance with the Constitution. The assembly consists of 51 members, who are chosen per district by means of a democratic and free election for a 5 year term. 21. Suriname holds membership in a number of international organizations among which the United Nations, OIC, OAS and CARICOM. Suriname is a parliamentary democracy and a Republic. 22. Suriname is a multi-ethnic and multi-religious society. According to the Statistic Bureau of Suriname, the population by ethnic group is as follows: Amerindians (18,037), Maroons (72,553), Creole (87,202), Hindustani (135,117), Javanese (71.879), Chinese (8,775), Caucasian (2,899), Mixed (61.524), Others (2.264), Don't know (1,261), No answer 31,318. Hindus, Christians and Muslims constitute more than half of the population, while sizeable amount of persons have other religious convictions (among them Amerindians, Maroons and Jews). 23. Each ethnic group is speaking its own language. Dutch is the official language of Suriname and Sranan Tongo its lingua franca. B. Legal and institutional framework 24. The Constitution of the Republic of Suriname is the supreme law of the country. It sets out and defines the authority of main bodies of the State. All other legal regulations and laws must be in line with the Constitution otherwise they will be null and void. 25. The preamble of the Constitution embodies the guarantee that the principles of freedom, equality and democracy as well as the fundamental rights and freedoms of mankind will be respected. Chapters V and VI of the Constitution set out the different basic rights and freedoms as well as the manner in which they can be protected. Article 10 of the Constitution states that "Everyone has in case of infringement of his rights and freedoms a claim to an honest and public treatment of his complain within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial judge". 26. Suriname's law acknowledges two authorities that can administer justice. The Cantonal Court is the first court in the State, where as the Constitution designates in article 39 the High Court of Justice as the highest authority entrusted with the administration of justice in Suriname. Suriname also recognizes the original jurisdiction of the Caribbean Court of Justice for the interpretation of the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas and the contentious jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court on Human rights 27. The human right infrastructure of the Republic of Suriname has both legal and institutional components. The legal component includes the constitutional regulations, the national law of Suriname as well as its international obligations. The institutional infrastructure is composed of Governmental Institutions and Non-Governmental Organizations for the different areas of human rights. IV. Promotion and protection of human rights 28. In 2008 the Ministry of Justice and Police has established the Human Rights Bureau. In the same year a project plan named `Support for Implementing the Policy Plan for Protection of Legal Rights and Safety - Legal Protection and Human Rights, and Anti-Corruption' has been drafted and signed with UNDP. 29. The execution of this project started in 2009. A project council was established consisting of the country director of UNDP, the Ministry of Justice and Police, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Public Housing , the Ministry of Regional Development, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Labour Technological Development & Environment and the Ministry of Education and Community Development. The following actions have already been taken: A study `Human Rights Needs Assessment'. A curriculum for human rights training. Capacity building study for the Human Rights Bureau. Awareness trainings for media, NGOs, religious organizations and organizations of Indigenous Peoples and Maroons. The development of a media communication strategy for human rights. The development of a media communication strategy for the bureau legal aid. Capacity building trainings for management and staff of Bureau Legal Aid. The installation of an inter-ministerial commission to prepare the country report for UPR. 30. For 2011 a consultant will conduct the following activities in the area of human rights and legal aid: Implementing media communication strategy for human rights. Implementing media communication strategy for legal aid. Continuing with awareness trainings. Continuing with capacity building trainings. Post graduate study in human rights for the period of one year, for 20 high level government officials in human rights. A. Women's rights 31. The Rights of Women are protected by law. The domestic law deals with the different aspects in assuring the safety and well - being of women. 1. General 32. Suriname ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) in 1993 (Instrument of Ratification submitted to the Secretary General of the United Nations, S.G. no. LA41TR/221/1 (4-8) of 21 April 1993). In virtue of Article 27 of the Constitution, this Convention came into force for Suriname on 31 March 1993 (V.B. 2007, no. 27). With the ratification of this Convention, Suriname committed itself to ensure that all forms of discrimination against women are eliminated and that the principle of gender equality is included in its national legislation. Suriname is now preparing the 4th and 5th national report. 33. Suriname has further signed the Convention on the Beijing Declaration and Beijing Platform for Action, and the Convention of Belem do Para concerning the Elimination of Violence against Women. In doing so, the country recognizes the importance of human rights. The Government of Suriname has committed itself not only to eliminate all forms of discrimination of women, but also to achieve complete equality and equity of men and women in the society. 34. In the Multi-annual Development Plan (M.O.P.) of the Government for 2006 - 2011 gender is also noted as a cross-cutting issue. 35. The National Bureau for Gender Policy was established as a department of the Ministry of Home Affairs in 1997, and was opened in 1998. This institute was given the task to promote and monitor gender equality in Suriname. 36. The National Bureau for Gender Policy has been formulated in the Integrated Gender Action Plan (IGAP II 2006-2010). This took place in collaboration with stakeholders (governmental/non-governmental), with the principal aim to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and the Beijing Platform for Action. 37. The National Bureau for Gender Policy (NBG) - the National Mechanism- is the coordinating body for the national gender policy of the Government. A Gender Management System has been set up with Gender Focal Points in all government ministries. This bureau has a structural collaboration with Civil Society Organizations, while it has a sound collaboration with several regional and international organizations such as UNFPA, UNIFEM, UNDP and the CARICOM Secretariat. 38. The Surinamese Government acknowledges the strength of equal participation and wants to further design the process to realize gender equality together with various stakeholders (state and none-state). Gender discrimination is prohibited in the national legislation, Article 8 Paragraph 2 of the Constitution: "No one shall be discriminated on grounds of birth, sex, race, language, religion, origin, education, political opinion, economic position or social circumstances, or any other status". Discrimination is also defined in Article 126 of the Penal Code. The principle of equality of men and women is also explicitly incorporated in Article 35 Paragraph 2 of the Constitution: "men and women are equal by law". 39. The Government installed the National Committee on Gender Legislation. This Committee consisted of various departmental representatives and non-state actors, including representatives of the University of Suriname and women's organizations. This Committee has prepared the Draft law on Stalking, the Draft Law on Sexual Harassment, and the Draft Law on Prevention of Sexual Harassment at the Workplace. The law on Stalking is now presented to the Parliament for approval. 2. Labour 40. The Ministry of Labour, Technological Development and Environment has developed strategic entrepreneurship to reduce poverty and to offer training to business women in stimulation of micro and small size business in the agricultural sector. There are also opportunities offered by the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Public Housing and the Ministry of Justice and Police. 41. The activities have resulted in: (a) an additional amount of female micro - entrepreneurs; (b) a low income shelter programme (focusing on one parent household); (c) an agricultural credit fund to eliminate gender gaps; (d) cooperative efforts between the Ministry of Labour, Technological Development and Environment and the National Women Movement generating employment projects for women to reach their skills. 3. Collaboration with International Organizations 42. In collaboration with the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) a Trade and competitiveness project is launched to study the various roles of men and women in the development of Caricom Single Market and Economy (CSME) and to analyze the effects of CSME free trade regime on women. Currently the Ministry of Home Affairs, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), is executing the research project "Gender Equality Gender Relations and the Position of Women in Suriname, A Situation Analysis". This project is part of the European Commission (EC), the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), and the International Training Centre of the International Labor Organization (ITC-ILO) programme: EC/UN Partnership on Gender Equality for Development and Peace in Suriname. The objectives of this project are: To have an overview of the existing Situation of Women in Suriname (urban, rural coastal and interior). To identify gaps in which further work is required. To monitor gender equality in Suriname. To serve as source of reliable data for Suriname's policymaking and regular reporting. To document the progresses made in the advancement of women in Suriname. 43. Within the Ministry of Justice and Police, a Bureau for Women and Children has been established. This bureau coordinates the Women and Child policy of all divisions within this Ministry and is also executing projects to implement the Conventions: CEDAW, Belem do Para and the Convention on the Rights of Children. 4. Awareness 44. In an effort to eliminate all forms of violence against women, the Government as well as NGO's have taken several measures among which various groups-among which the police and priests of various religious groups- were trained in different aspects of domestic violence by the Foundation Stop Violence against Women (SSGTV) and the Women's Rights Centre (WRC). Information and education sessions are held by the SSGTV for students, social workers and teachers with the aim of increasing awareness of domestic violence and to promote healthy partner relations. Coaching, counseling services and self-help groups are available for victims of domestic violence. 45. In this regard it should be noted that the Government involved experts to train government officials. Priests who are registered at the Ministry of Home Affairs have been trained in identifying domestic violence. The training was organized by the Ministry of Home Affairs in collaboration with the Women's Rights Centre (NGO). In the period February - April 2009 a total of 80 priests were trained. Preparations are underway to train the remaining priests and to set up a network. 5. Legal infrastructure for the protection of men and women 46. The Moral Law, which is incorporated in the Penal Code, was revised in July 2009. One of the revisions is that rape within a marriage is now penalized. The provisions that penalized the person who exhibited contraceptives for the prevention of pregnancies, offered contraceptives and contraceptive services, and the publications for the prevention of pregnancies have been banned. 47. The Moral Law is now formulated gender neutral, in order to protect men and women. The Moral Law has been revised in line with the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime including protocols regarding prevention. Elimination and Punishment of Trafficking in Persons in particular in women and children and in accordance with the Convention on Cybercrime. 48. The Law on Combating Domestic Violence was adopted in June 2009 and came into force in July 2009. This law punishes financial violence, physical violence, psychological violence and sexual violence. The provisions in this law can also be applied on provisions regarding sexual acts that are penalized in the Penal Code. Currently the Law on Combating Domestic Violence is under revision. 49. Other legislation under revision are the Penal Code (in general), and the Civil Code. 6. Physical infrastructure 50. The physical infrastructure to assist female victims of violence consists of: a shelter for women victims of domestic violence; a policy forum for Governmental and non - Governmental organizations to discuss and submit proposals on policy to combat violence against women in particular domestic violence. 51. There are special facilities for victims in all renovated and new police stations and victims are offered the opportunity to tell their story in private. Depending on the seriousness of the case, victims are referred to several organizations. 52. A Bureau of Victim Aid was opened in the district Nickerie on November 26th of 2007. Also a "Bureau Slachtofferzorg" (Bureau of Victim Aid) has been opened in Paramaribo on the 10th of December 2008. The "Bureau Slachtofferzorg" is opened to everyone irrespective of age or origin who is a victim or witness of a crime. The bureau provides practical, juridical and psychological aid. 53. The "Stichting Stop Geweld tegen Vrouwen" (Foundation Stop Violence against Women) will establish more self-help groups for male and female victims of domestic violence on the basis of experience with the present self-help groups. The members of these self-help groups will assist the foundation in her information and training sessions. This foundation offers 4- or 5-day training sessions in various aspects of domestic violence to occupational groups/ social workers who have contact with victims of this type of violence. The foundation does this so that these groups can recognize and discuss signals of domestic violence and refer victims to specific professionals who can offer them assistance. These training sessions result in networks for prevention and combating of domestic violence. The trainees become contact persons in their district. These trainees are also trained and guided further. The government will also train various groups (police, religious leaders). 7. Awareness 54. Judges, public prosecutors, lawyers and social workers have been trained in order to increase awareness and focus on crimes against women. Forty five at random selection from society women participated in the training which was conducted from November 2009 until January 2010. 55. Several activities regarding awareness have been carried out such as: An awareness program on domestic violence for emergency aid medical personnel by the Women's Rights Center. The police trained their personnel in counseling of victims and perpetrators of domestic violence. The Foundation `Stop Violence against Women' has several training programs for the prevention and eradication of violence. The law on domestic violence. Installment by the Suriname Police Force of victims' rooms, a special protocol, reporting and data surveillance system for domestic violence in collaboration with two NGO's. 56. On May 05th of 2008 six ministries (Justice and Police, Home Affairs, Education and Community Development, Social Affairs and Public Housing, Regional Development and Health) have signed a cooperation agreement. The aim of this cooperation is to gear one's policy better and to approach domestic violence in a structured manner. In this regard a Steering Committee has also been installed on May 05th of 2008. Some of the activities of this Steering Committee are to execute the cooperation between the six ministries and to set up a network of all the stakeholders in this field in order to approach domestic violence integrally. The cooperation is coordinated by the Ministry of Justice and Police. 8. Collaboration with International Organizations 57. In collaboration with the U.N. Trust Fund the Foundation Ilse Henar Hewitt (NGO) is currently executing a project to eliminate sexual harassment at the workplace. In addition to the Government ten organizations (private and public) have committed to enact policy on the issue. 9. Decision making 58. Women are still a minority in top management in both public and private organizations although more women are graduating from the university and are higher educated than men. There are no reliable statistics available on the private sector. Regarding the public sector women are taking over the higher positions in government more rapidly now, although there is still an imbalance in the top positions. For the absolute top positions, such as permanent secretaries and deputy permanent secretaries, there is still a long way to go. 59. Suriname has joined the 50/50 campaign to ensure an equal representation of women in policy and decision making positions, and towards enhancing gender awareness among men and women. 60. To promote the full participation of women in public office and in political representative bodies, the Ministry of Home Affairs has organized an open discussion for the introduction of a quota policy in Suriname, on February 23rd of 2010, entitled: Quotum Policy and Promoting the Participation of Women in Politics. 61. A follow-up of this workshop was organized by the Democracy Unit and the Foundation Ilse Henar Hewitt in collaboration with the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Women's Parliament Forum, the Foundation Stop Violence against Women and the National Women Movement. 10. State of Affairs 62. Until now the measures taken and the consultations conducted have resulted in strengthening the infrastructure for the promotion of women rights and combating their violation. The following is among the decisions taken: The participation of women in development has increased (in companies, at the ministries and other domestic institutions); Women are in charge of the National Assembly, both the Speaker of the Assembly as well as the Deputy Speaker are females; The judiciary has been strengthened with female judges. The judiciary now consists of nine male and ten female judges; The participation of females as entrepreneurs in the different areas of development is increasing; The legal infrastructure has, with the addition of new regulations and laws been updated; likewise the institutional infrastructure got a couple of additional institutions to assist victims of violence. 11. Challenges 63. Better collaboration between NGO's and the Government, platform domestic violations and NGO's availability of data from women who made use of Stop Violence Against Women. A continuation of the pilot project for shelter for victims of domestic violence. 64. Women are still a minority in top management in both public and private organizations. To empower women, changes in political culture, legislation and gender ideology in general are needed. Cultural factors in general form the basis for unequal participation of men and women in public and political life. The main challenges women face are: impediments regarding childcare; irregular working hours; among certain groups of unemployed women there is a lack of motivation and lack of perseverance among some women in the lengthy process to acquire a suitable place of employment. C. Children's rights 65. In 1993 Suriname ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and thereafter reported to the Committee on the Rights of the Child. 66. In 2007 the Ministry of Justice and Police established the Bureau Women and Child Policy with the main task to coordinate the policy on women and child issues. 67. Physical and sexual abuse of children continued to be challenges. 68. In 2010 police received reports of 223 cases of sexual abuse of children compared to 265 in 2009 and 338 in 2008. 69. The Police Youth Affairs Office conducts 3 visits per week to different schools in Paramaribo and the surrounding areas on a rotating schedule to provide outreach and raise awareness about child abuse and to solicit and investigate complaints. The Youth Police also raises awareness about sexual abuse, drugs and alcohol through a weekly television program. 70. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Public Housing has formulated a plan of action (2009 - 2013) which momentarily is being implemented; it also raises awareness about safe environment and quality standards for childcare and other children's rights through television programs such as children with a handicap, dropouts, perpetrators of child's abuse, revised legislation, juvenile delinquencies, outdoors activities for juveniles delinquents, education in the interior, sexual abuse, health and the long term planning of the Ministry. A KAP study has been done about children's knowledge about children's rights and workshops for parents and caregivers in all districts. 71. Other best practices of this ministry are: There has been a new MICS survey in 2010; In collaboration with UNICEF there has been a situation analysis of children in 2006; On November 17, 2010 there was a meeting with the Speaker of Parliament, focused on prioritizing the discussion about the law on children's shelter. 72. Various laws are used to prosecute perpetrators of sexual abuse and several cases regarding sexual abuse against minors came to trial. Sentence averaged three years in prison. 73. There are several orphanages and one privately funded shelter for sexually abused children. 74. In July 2009 the Criminal Law was revised to include penalties against child's prostitution. The maximum penalty is six years imprisonment and the maximum fine is about USD 35,714. The law also prohibits child pornography which has the same maximum years imprisonment and a fine of about USD 17,857. 75. A law on children's right to be heard (de wet hoorrecht) was approved in 2007. 1. Collaborations with international organizations 76. UNICEF continued operating with the government in providing training to officials from various ministries dealing with children and children's right. 77. The government operates the 1-2-3 telephone hotline for children, provides confidential advice and aid to children in need. In 2008 about 5,998 children used this opportunity and in 2009 there were 9,788 children. 78. In 2009 a national commission on the Elimination of all forms of Child Labor was installed which consists of government officials, persons of the private sector, labor union, NGO and the university. This commission is not only building awareness among the stakeholders but also writing terms of reference to conduct a research to all forms of child labor country - wide. 79. In 2009 there were 109 cases where children were granted a legal guardian. From January 2010 - July 2010 there were 119 cases. In the same period there are 999 cases pending. 2. Challenges 80. Trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation of minors are challenges which the government faces. The other challenges are: -unavailability of data of children living in the districts bordering the neighboring countries. -no legislation on shelter for children (momentarily the law is at Parliament to be enacted). -not enough awareness from people of the interior with regard to children's rights. C. Youth 81. As CARICOM member state Suriname holds the portfolio on Youth policy. Youth movements in Suriname dates back from the early years when it was a colony of The Netherlands. The youth organizations in Holland and internationally had its counterpart in Suriname. The first youth parliament was installed in May 1972, but was not a success and lasted for some months. In 1999 the National Youngster Institute was established (S.B.1999 no. 75) and Suriname established the National Youth Institute (NYI) by the power of the State Resolution, February 19th 2004, concerning the installation of the National Youth Institute. The purpose of the NYI is to express and to have a full experience of the right on participation of the youth on governmental level, so that the youth policy will be effective and efficient. 82. The main tasks of the NYI are to provide the Government information and insights in order to establish a harmonious youth policy that is relevant to the community and to monitor and supervise the execution of the youth policy. Other tasks of the NYI are: (a) To lay down the points of views concerning youth affairs to the Government; (b) To nominate the Youth Ambassadors; (c) To consult the relevant persons and organizations responsible with youth affairs; (d) Responsible for the organization of the annual National Youth Congress; (e) To draw up an agenda for the National Youth Congress; (f) To process the results of the National Youth Congress in a note in favor of the Government. 83. The NYI consists of the National Youth Parliament, the CARICOM Youth Ambassadors and the Millennium Development Goals Ambassadors Program and the undertaken activities regarding the NYI are ongoing. The main goals of the annual Youth Congresses are: (a) The evaluation of the NYI; (b) The evaluation of the execution of the Government Youth Policy; (c) To give recommendations concerning the Government Youth Policy. 84. On 10 December 2010 there was an election of the Youth Parliament for the third time. Every person between the age of twelve and twenty five could then choose youngsters between fifteen years of age and twenty two to represent them in the Youth Parliament. Twenty-nine youngsters nationwide were chosen to represent the youth. D. Education 85. According to the available information on the 2009 situation Primary and Secondary School participation is as follows: Out of all the children who are of primary school entry age (age 6) in Suriname, 92 per cent are attending the first grade of primary school. Although compulsory education is legally established at 7 to 12 years, the enrollment of the age group 4 to 12 is relatively high and in line with the region. There are no significant differences by gender in primary school enrollment at national level. However when the figure is disaggregated by rural or internal districts almost 1 out of 3 children aged 6 are not in school (MICS 2006). 86. Gender disparities are a major problem in education. Especially at the junior secondary level the participation of boys is less than that of the girls. The dropout occurrence among boys in education starts in the last grade of the primary education. For the secondary and higher education streams, male participation in education is significantly lower than the female participation. 87. Despite the relatively high accessibility (in urban areas) of primary education in Suriname the ultimate result is unsatisfactory. Education in the hinterland, where enrollment is lower, faces serious problems. The accessibility of education in the interior is generally hampered by a lack of transport facilities, adequate school buildings, educational schools and material, qualified teachers and teacher's accommodation. 1. Adult literacy 88. The percentage of women aged 15 - 24 years that are literate is 91.9, with considerable geographic disparities. According to the MICS 2006 report, the (female) adult literacy figures for the Urban Coastal, Rural Coastal and Rural Interior were 96.2 per cent, 94.2 per cent and 45.0 per cent respectively. Although the overall national figure for literacy is high, the major challenge is getting the rural and interior districts on track. Literacy programs are mostly being offered in Paramaribo. It is a major challenge for the people living in the interior to enroll in these programs. The Ministry of Education and Community Development has started to take actions to decentralize the literacy programs in order to make them more accessible for everyone. 2. Education in the hinterland 89. During the internal strife (1986 - 1992) many schools in the interior were destroyed or badly damaged. Education was therefore discontinued and disrupted in many villages. This was a major setback in education. The interior is still struggling with a lack of school buildings (especially kindergarten) and qualified teachers, willing and motivated to work in remote areas. Recruiting teachers for the interior was a problem, but two years ago the teacher training colleges implemented a program to motivate teachers to work in the interior. This program is like an internship in which the student teacher in an early stage visits the interior in order to get acquainted with the people, the environment, the culture and the tradition of the local people. 90. Actions taken to support education in the interior: (a) Suriname has implemented a construction program wherein the building of schools in the interior is of high priority. In 2010 we can say that a lot of the school buildings and the houses for the teachers have been renovated. (b) Suriname moreover supports the initiative of the "Leri for Life Program" which is executed by an NGO. The purpose is to introduce early schools in the interior. In this regard the Early Childhood Development (ECD) Commission has taken upon the task to establish District Focal Points to ensure the implementation of the government ECD Policy Plan. (c) Suriname started training sessions for Remedial Teaching and has completed the KALBOBIS Project. It has been evaluated and the recommendations are included in the Education Implementation Plan for the Interior 2008- 2015. (d) Suriname also started the second phase of the Child friendly School project in the interior in 2008. This included the Water and Sanitation Facilities Project. (e) Suriname has conducted an evaluation of the Mother-tongue Approach. The results are available and the Ministry of Education and Community Development will execute follow-up activities. 91. As part of a comprehensive plan of action for education in the interior, the Government had introduced a special training program for teachers for the interior, including computer training and region-specific curricula. Moreover, it had renovated schools and teachers' houses, built additional classrooms and planned to introduce a distance-learning programme in the region, in cooperation with Telecommunication Suriname (Telesur). The Government also planned to re-introduce a rule stipulating that all graduates of teacher training colleges were required to serve in hinterland schools for three years. Some 200 graduates were currently working in such schools. 3. Challenges 92. Employing the right numbers of professionally educated teachers at all levels within education, ensuring adequate infrastructure, learning materials, educational tools and other supplies needed at various schools. Legal determination of the compulsory education for 4 - 14 years old. E. Culture and religion 93. The right to participate in cultural life is guaranteed by the Constitution. Suriname is a multicultural society comprised of almost eight ethnic groups. Each group is free to promote and preserve its culture and traditions. Several NGO's support in particular the Indigenous People and the Maroons to conserve their culture and traditions. There is a shaman's program going on in several villages where the elder medicine man shares his knowledge with youngsters in the villages, called the apprentice program, which is part of the curriculum of the primary school in the interior. 94. In the village of Pikin Slee in the interior a Maroon museum has been opened showing specifically aspects of the Saramacca Maroon culture 95. Suriname possesses several old buildings which are on the list of world heritage of UNESCO. Suriname has the highest wooden building in the Caribbean, the Saint Paul and Peter's Cathedral which was re-installed on Sunday 14 November 2010 after being closed for about 12 years. As part of our culture we have the famous example of tolerance in the world, namely, a mosque right beside a synagogue. F. Aging/elderly 96. In 1980 the AOV (General Old Age Insurance) was established. From that moment on all elderly persons from the age 60 (senior citizens) were eligible for financial support. Regularly the government increased the amount depending on the socio-economic developments. In 2005 the amount was SRD 150 and in 2010 it was SRD 275 which in December 1, 2010 was raised to SRD 350. In October 2010 there were 43,808 elderly people who received this financial support. 97. The government also cares for the elderly through housing. Ashiana is subsidized by the government and has room for about 600 elderly people. G. Trafficking in persons 98. There is a working group Trafficking in Persons within the Ministry of Justice and Police since 2003. One of the tasks of this group is to make an inventory of the several aspects of trafficking and formulate strategies for a sustainable approach. 99. The law prohibits all forms of trafficking in persons. The penal code specifically prohibits trafficking in persons for both sexual and other purposes. The law covers internal and external forms of trafficking. Penalties for trafficking in persons for sexual exploitation and labor exploitation such as forced or bonded labor and involuntary servitude range from 5 to 20 years' imprisonment. 100. The Prosecutor General's Office may press dual charges against a trafficker for both the act of trafficking and for the rape of a victim. The penalty for rape or forced assault ranges between 12 and 15 years in prison. The government provides free legal services to trafficked victims. 101. On June 9, 2009, a judge sentenced a Dutch man and two Guyanese women who were arrested in September 2008 for trafficking an underage Guyanese girl and forced her to work as a prostitute. The Dutch man received two years imprisonment, one women received 9 months' imprisonment and $1,071 fine and the second women received 18 months imprisonment and $3,571 fine. The two women appealed the decision. On December 22, 2009 they were released from prison after having served two third of their sentences. 102. The government Anti-trafficking Working Group, which has primary responsibility for interagency coordination of anti- trafficking efforts, assessed progress and coordinated new actions. Police cooperated with counterparts in Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago and the Dominican Republic, and justice officials sought improved mechanisms for cooperation with Columbia and French Guiana. The Government requested the cooperation of Trinidad and Curacao in investigating the case of 23 individuals' trafficking to Trinidad and Tobago for forced labor. The government of Curacao cooperated in extraditing four individuals arrested in connection with the crime. H. Prisoner's rights 103. There are three prisons which hold female and male prisoners separately. There are also 28 smaller jails or temporary detention centers in police stations throughout the country. Most of these facilities are sometimes overcrowded. The main pretrial detention can hold 600 persons. There is one juvenile detention facility, Opa Doeli, for boys and girls under the age of 18. This facility is located in Paramaribo, the capital, and is considered adequate; it provides educational and recreational facilities and less than the maximum capacity is occupied. Visits of independent human rights observers are permitted. 104. Opa Doeli a Juvenile facility is the first of its kind in the Caribbean. Although the law permits children of the age of 10 to be convicted, in practice the youngest is 12. The youth police is working in conformity with the Convention on Children Rights. The administration of Opa Doeli has a software exchange of data among various actors such as youth police, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Public Housing etc. There are various organizations working with the personnel of Opa Doeli for capacity building in order to support the juvenile delinquencies. Weekend leave of these youngsters has turned into vacation leave. 105. In February 2008 there was a kick off in all the three prisons about the new policy with regard to the protection of persons deprived of their liberty. Alternative measures were introduced for inmates who have been in prison for more than half of their sentence. There is a new policy with regard to re-socialization. In 2009 there was a "criminal data base" (pilot project) with the objective uniformity among the three prisons. The Caribbean data processing center has trained personnel in the administration of convicted persons. In 2011 the Ministry of Justice and Police will decide whether to continue this project or not. I. Health 1. HIV/AIDS 106. In June 2001 the Government of Suriname adopted the UNGASS Declaration of Commitment, thus underlining national commitment to the fight against HIV/AIDS. In 2003 the process of formulating a National Strategic Plan (NSP) on HIV/AIDS was initiated. The NSP was completed and formally adopted by the council of Ministers in 2004. During 2004 - 2005 the NSP served as the framework for expansion and strengthening of the national response against HIV/AIDS. 107. Approval of a Global Fund grant and continued strong partnership with UN and other partners provided the necessary financial resources for rapid expansion of national programs. 108. Major achievements include the introduction and up scaling of ARV treatment from 0 in 2002 to over 500 persons by December 2005. Various national protocols and guidelines were developed to strengthen and standardize care and treatment, including clinical treatment protocol, a VCT protocol and a PMTCT protocol. Coverage of PMTCT screening of pregnant women increased from 30 per cent in 2003 to 70 per cent in 2005. Introduction of free HIV testing and expansion of the number of VCT sites contributed to rapid increase of the number of VCT clients from 500 in 2003 to almost 2000 in 2005. 109. In 2005 a second Global Fund grant enabled rapid up scaling of national-level and targeted prevention efforts. In 2010 there were more stakeholders involved than ever before in financing and implementing this NSP. Responsibility for coordination of these various, national and international actors in the HIV arena lies with the National Aids Program of the Ministry of Health. The wide variety of stakeholders both in term of technical focus as well as geographic coverage, poses a challenge to coherent implementation of the NSP. The past two years have brought about significant increases in knowledge and lessons learned, both locally and globally on how to respond more effectively to HIV. 110. Suriname has a generalized epidemic and HIV is prevalent in all layers and groups of society. It is estimated that approximately 1.1 per cent of the adult population (age 15 - 49) is infected with HIV (UNAIDS 2009 estimation workshop). Since registration of the first case of HIV in 1983, there has been an upward trend until 2006. 610 new HIV cases were reported in 2005 and 740 in 2006. From 2007 there is a decline in the number of new HIV cases seen with respectively 683 and 601 new cases in 2007 en 2008. (see country report on the UNGASS on HIV/Aids, January 2008 - December 2009). The number of report of women with HIV, in comparison with men with HIV, has continued to increase and is even higher than in 2003. The increase in the number of registered HIV infected among young women is remarkable. From 2001 to 2005, in age group of 15 - 24, there were more registered HIV- positive women than men. 111. The annual numbers of HIV related hospitalizations suggest a decreasing trend. Hospitalizations were down from 255 in 2004 to 239 in 2005 and 215 in 2008. There are fewer women hospitalized then men. Most hospitalized women are in the age group 20 - 44 years while the majority of male patients are in the age group 25 - 49 years. 112. From 1997 to 2008, the cumulative number of certified cases of Aids deaths is 1462. There are indications that the annual death rate due to Aids has decreased. In 2004 and 2005, 171 and 181 persons respectively died of Aids, but in 2006 this number dropped to 130 and 2008 the reported number is 213. Aids dropped from fifth to sixth place on the list of most frequent causes of death in 2006. Causes for this decrease are the increase of early diagnostics and wider availability of antiretroviral drugs (ARV). 113. Mid 2007 preparations started for a joint revue and revision of the NSP and 1st of December 2009 the NSP 2009 - 2013 was officially launched. Both NSP were developed as results based strategic frame works and based on a national and broad consultative process. The current five priorities of the NSP are: National coordination, Policy and Capacity building Prevention and further spread of HIV Treatment, Care and Support Reduction of stigma and discrimination of PLHIV Strategic Information for policy development and service provision. 114. The Medical Mission Suriname is the organization in Suriname that provides basic health care services, using primary health care principles, to people living in the interior of Suriname since 2002. This primary health care is free of charge for all the Indigenous Peoples and the Maroons. Since the medical mission is working with international organizations it is possible to offer these people in the interior an extended packet of care including dental care.This organization is dynamic in development and there is an ongoing process of professionalizing and quality improvement. 115. The Global Fund has donated $5 million to spend on health care in the interior. A major part of this amount was spent in the malaria eradication program. 2. Malaria 116. Malaria is one of the important diseases which exist in the labor area of the Medical Mission (MZ) and for that reason the malaria fighting is one of the main issues on which the health care of the MZ is focused. 3. Therapy 117. Regarding the treatments the MZ constantly follows the instructions of the national malaria board and the research to the affectivity of new medicaments and diagnostic possibilities in comparison with the existing schemes is continually made in teamwork with the "Diakonessenhuis" and the Bureau for Public Health. If malaria is treated on time then this disease can be cured for 100 per cent. 118. In collaboration with the Ministry of Health the Malaria, a disease transmitted by a mosquito, has been diminished from 15,000 cases in 2005 to 300 in 2010. 119. There are 51 policlinics in the entire interior and 7 health care centers. These policlinics and health centers are staffed with trained personnel. Since a doctor cannot be in all those places at the same time there is a visiting schedule. In urgent cases the trained personnel can radio contact the doctor in places where there is no reach for cellular phone. 120. Fund Program "Decreasing the Incidence of Malaria in the Populations of the Interior of Suriname" 121. In 2004 the Country Coordinating Mechanism submitted the request for funding for a malaria program and HIV/AIDS program at the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. The Program proposal has been approved for a period of 5 years. The Medical Mission has been assigned to act as the Principal recipient of the malaria program. This Program will seek to reduce the risk of mobile populations - the Garimpeiros - and other vulnerable groups to malaria. The Program will expand its current healthcare services in both the interior of the country and in the coastal region. The Bureau of Public Health will be responsible for the entomological research and for the treatment of patients in the urban coastal areas. 122. The goal of this Program is to reduce the transmission of malaria in high-risk communities in the interior of Suriname through the expansion of healthcare services to mobile populations in the interior using malaria as the entry point. 123. In the Americas Suriname is leading in the fight against Malaria. For the efforts to eliminate this disease, Suriname received the `Malaria Champion of the Americas' award at the Headquarters of the PAHO in Washington D.C. , on Thursday 4 November 2010 This award is not only about the fighting of Malaria but also about the policy. Suriname also tends to support the neighboring countries technically. 124. Seventy percent of the victims of Malaria now is imported. People from French Guyana and Brazil are entering this territory with the disease. 125. Suriname has a 99 per cent free c.q. low risk from malaria environment. J. Interior 126. The interior of Suriname is populated for the majority by the Indigenous Peoples and the Maroons. Telecommunication and solar panels cover almost whole of the interior. People can communicate very easy with each other. Ninety percent of Suriname's territory consists of the interior. K. Indigenous people and Maroons rights 127. Suriname has ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD) and has twice reported to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 128. The law affords no special protection for or recognition of Indigenous Peoples and Maroons. These peoples face problems from illegal and uncontrolled logging and mining activities. Although the Constitution recognized the individual rights to land for all Surinamers, it does not yet recognize the collective rights to land. Since the lands of the Indigenous and Maroons are not effectively demarcated, the government launched a project named `Support for Sustainable Development of the Interior Program' which had to demarcate the land of the people living in the interior. There was opposition of this project but in October 2010 the Ministry of Regional Affairs handed a map to the oldest Gaaman of the Maroons. This map was not only accepted but also agreed on and demarcated the lands of the N'djuka tribe. Several other maps were handed over to captains of other villages from Sangamasusa up to Granboli, including a collective map covering the areas of the six Maroon tribes and one Indigenous tribe. These maps were handed over during a meeting (krutu) as tradition prescribes. 129. In December 2010 the current Minister of Regional Affairs has together with the VSG, the petitioner in the Samaaka Los judgment approved another map. 130. The Indigenous Peoples make up about 3 per cdent and the Maroons about 10% of the Surinamese population. The Maroons and the Indigenous Peoples have initiated several claims against the government of Suriname for failing to protect their collective rights. In 2007 Suriname was judged by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to recognize among other things the collective rights to land of the Saramaccaners, a Maroon tribe. Currently about the same petition is pending at the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Lokono and Kalinas, an indigenous tribe. 131. The government is seriously trying to recognize the collective rights of these peoples, but is aware that this is a process. All Surinamers have to be aware that the Indigenous and Maroons have special rights and because of their vulnerability need special protection. V. Achievements, best practices, challenges and constraints 132. In the past three years several laws have been enacted in order to grant all Surinamese better protection of their human rights. 133. The core principals of the CRC regard survival, protection, development and participation. The government has formulated its policies based on these principals. The development of a policy plan was a major achievement. This policy plan include health, education, legal protection and security, gender mainstreaming, people with disabilities and HIV/AIDS. Its commitments towards the Early Childhood Development (ECD) was made visible due to the formulation of an ECD policy plan and communication strategy. 134. In August 2010 there was the launch of the shelter for victims of domestic violence. Another achievement was the formalization of a platform of representatives of NGOs to combat domestic violence. There are two bureaus where victims of offences against morality suicidal tendencies and domestic violence get social and psychological help, they also get police, juridical and medical help. 135. In November 2010 Suriname received the `Malaria Champion of the Americas award' at the Headquarter of the PAHO in Washington DC. Suriname has a 99 per cent free from Malaria environment. Some challenges are: (a) There are not enough qualified teachers in the interior. People in the interior also lack secondary schools, universities and schools for adults. Not every village has a school, so children have to travel by boat to other villages were there are schools; (b) Despite the relatively high accessibility in urban areas of primary education in Suriname, the ultimate result is unsatisfactory. Education in the interior, where enrollment is lower, faces serious problems: the accessibility of education is generally hampered by a lack of transport facilities, adequate school buildings, educational tools and material, qualified teachers and teachers, accommodation. 136. Several actions have been taken by the Ministry of Education and Community Development in the past months such as construction of school buildings, provisions of qualified teachers. 137. Teenage pregnancy is a real challenge. Programs have been developed for these teenage mothers in order to re-enroll school or become junior entrepreneurs. 138. A challenge in the labour area in Suriname: There are serious problems identified on the labor market such as: lack of a minimum wage system, the informal sector, changing labor relations (contract labor - migration labor), a total mismatch in demand and supply of jobs. The government is working on these matters with special emphasis on the vulnerable groups. VI. Final provisions 139. Suriname considers it very important to submit its national reports on time to the various treaty bodies. Although it is time consuming with great pressure, Suriname tends to fulfill its international obligations. 140. Suriname considers the implementation of the recommendations of the various treaty bodies and the judgment of the Inter-American Court on Human rights as one of the great challenges, but is trying to implement them. 