%%%CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|COSTS|

CCW/AP.II/CONF.13/5 Thirteenth Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects 9 November 2011 Original: English Geneva, 11 November 2011 Item 6 of the provisional agenda Adoption of arrangements for meeting the costs of the Conference Estimated Costs Fourteenth Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to be Excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate Effects Note by the Secretariat 1. The Thirteen Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed To Be Excessively Injurious or To Have Indiscriminate Effects, held in Geneva on 11 November 2011, decided to convene a one-day meeting of the Fourteenth Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties on 14 November 2012. 2. This document is submitted pursuant to the above-mentioned decision of the High Contracting Parties and provides estimated costs in the amount of US$306,900 for convening that meeting. A breakdown of these costs is provided in the attached table. 3. It should be noted that the costs are estimated on the basis of past experience and anticipated workload. The actual costs will be determined after the closure of the meeting and completion of related work, with all relevant expenditures recorded in the accounts. At that time, any adjustments in the contributions made by the participants sharing the costs will be determined accordingly. 4. With regard to the financial arrangements, it will be recalled that, in accordance with the practice followed on the occasion of previous multilateral disarmament conferences and related meetings, and as reflected in their Rules of Procedure, the costs are shared among the States Parties participating in the conferences or meetings, based upon the United Nations scale of assessment pro-rated to take into account the number of States Parties participating in the meetings. States that are not States Parties but that have accepted the invitation to take part in the meetings share in the costs to the extent of their respective rates of assessment under the United Nations scale of assessment. 5. Subject to the States Parties' approval of the estimated costs and cost-sharing formula, assessment notices will be prepared based on the overall estimated costs and applicable cost-sharing formula. Since the above-mentioned activities shall have no financial implication for the regular budget of the Organization, States Parties should proceed with the payment of their share of the estimated costs as soon as assessment notices have been received. 