%%%CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS|DOCUMENTS|

CCW/GGE/2011-II/4 Group of Governmental Experts of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects 18 May 2011 Original: English 2011, Second Session Geneva, 28 March - 1 April 2011 Agenda item 10 Adoption of the procedural report Procedural Report 1. The Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (CCW) held at Geneva on 25 and 26 November 2010 decided, as contained in paragraph 35 of its Final Report (CCW/MSP/2010/5), that: "The Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) will meet from 21 to 25 February, from 28 March to 1 April and from 22 to 26 August 2011. The GGE will conduct preparatory work for the Fourth Review Conference under the overall responsibility of the President Designate. The GGE will continue its negotiations informed by the Chair's Text on a draft protocol on cluster munitions, and taking into account other past, present and future proposals by delegations, with a view to making a recommendation for consideration by the Fourth Review Conference, to address urgently the humanitarian impact of cluster munitions, while striking a balance between military and humanitarian considerations. The work of the GGE will be supported by experts on relevant issues. The GGE will report to the Fourth Review Conference." 2. The Meeting of the High Contracting Parties decided, as contained in paragraph 36 of its Final Report (CCW/MSP/2010/5), to convene the Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention from 14 to 25 November 2011. 3. The Meeting of the High Contracting Parties decided, as contained in paragraph 39 of its Final Report (CCW/MSP/2010/5), to designate Ambassador Gancho Ganev of Bulgaria as President of the Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention to be held in 2011, and appointed Minister Jesus S. Domingo of the Philippines as Chairperson of the Group of Governmental Experts. 4. The Second 2011 Session of the Group of Governmental Experts was held at Geneva from 28 March to 1 April 2011. 5. The following States Parties to the Convention participated in the work of the Group: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Holy See, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lithuania, Mexico, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). 6. The following Signatory States to the Convention also participated in the work of the Group: Egypt and Nigeria. 7. The following States not parties to the Convention participated as observers: Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Gambia, Ghana, Haiti, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon, Myanmar, Namibia, Thailand and Zambia. 8. The representatives of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) and United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA) took part in the work of the Group. 9. The representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) took part in the work of the Group. The representatives of the European Union and Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian Demining (GICHD) also participated in the work of the Group. 10. The representatives of the following non-governmental organizations took part in the work of the Group: Cluster Munition Coalition (CMC) (Handicap International, Human Rights Watch, IKV Pax Christi, Landmine Action and Norwegian People's Aid). 11. The Second 2011 Session of the Group of Governmental Experts was opened on 28 March 2011 by the Chairperson, Minister Jesus S. Domingo of the Philippines. He was assisted by the Friends of the Chair: Mr. Philip Kimpton of Australia, Ms. Anesa Kundurović of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Lt. Col. Jim Burke of Ireland. Mr. Bantan Nugroho, Head of the CCW Implementation Support Unit, United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, Geneva Branch, served as Secretary of the Group. 12. At its first plenary meeting, on 28 March 2011, the Group confirmed its Agenda as adopted at the first session of the Group (CCW/GGE/2011-I/4, Annex I). The Group also confirmed the Rules of Procedure as adopted and used by the Third Review Conference (CCW/CONF.III/11, Part III) and adopted its Programme of Work as contained in annex I. 13. At the same plenary meeting, the following States participated in a general exchange of views: Austria, Croatia, France, Germany, Guatemala, Israel, Lithuania, Mexico, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Switzerland, and United States of America. UNDP, CMC and Human Rights Watch also participated in the general exchange of views. 14. The Group held plenary meetings and informal meetings and considered documents CCW/GGE/2011-II/2 and CCW/GGE/2011-II/CRP.1, as listed in annex II. These documents are available through the Official Document System of the United Nations at http://documents.un.org, and the CCW website at http://www.unog.ch/disarmament/CCW. 15. The Group of Governmental Experts heard presentations by Germany on "CCM Criteria in Practice"; Ukraine on "Potential Impact of CCW Draft Protocol VI on Ukraine's Defence Capacity"; and Norwegian People's Aid on "Submunition failure rates and self-destruct mechanisms as a basis for legal control? Lessons from the M85 report". 16. In accordance with the decisions taken by the Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention in 2010, the Group of Governmental Experts devoted time for the consideration of the preparation for the 2011 Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention at the plenary meetings on 30 and 31 March 2011. The meetings were chaired by the President-designate of the Fourth Review Conference, Ambassador Gancho Ganev of Bulgaria, and considered a paper presented by the President-designate titled "Draft Final Document of the Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects" as contained in CCW/GGE/2011-II/3. 17. At its final plenary meeting, on 1 April 2011, the Group of Governmental Experts considered the report of the Chairperson. 18. As decided by the Meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention in 2010, the Group of Governmental Experts will hold its Third 2011 Session from 22 to 26 August 2011. 19. At the same plenary meeting, the Group of Governmental Experts adopted the procedural report of its Second 2011 Session, as contained in document CCW/GGE/2011-II/CRP.1, as orally amended, which is being issued as document CCW/GGE/2011-II/4. Programme of work Date Time Programme Monday, 28 March 2011 Opening of the session; General exchange of views; Cluster munitions Tuesday, 29 March 2011 Wednesday, 30 March 2011 Preparation for the Fourth Review Conference Thursday, 31 March 2011 Friday, 1 April 2011 Wrap-up; Adoption of the procedural report; Closure of the session List of documents Symbol Title CCW/GGE/2011-II/1 Provisional Programme of Work - Submitted by the Chairperson CCW/GGE/2011-II/2 Draft Protocol on cluster munitions - Submitted by the Chairperson CCW/GGE/2011-II/3 Draft Final Document of the Fourth Review Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects - Submitted by the Chairperson CCW/GGE/2011-II/CRP.1 [English only] Draft Procedural Report CCW/GGE/2011-II/INF.1 and Add.1 [English/French/Spanish only] List of participants CCW/GGE/2011-II/MISC.1 Provisional List of participants 