%%%WOMEN'S RIGHTS|WOMEN'S STATUS|LAWS AND REGULATIONS|PERIODIC REPORTS|CHAD|GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE|TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS|WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT|WOMEN'S HEALTH|RURAL WOMEN|WOMEN REFUGEES|AGEING PERSONS|MARRIAGE|FAMILY|

United Nations CEDAW/C/TCD/Q/4/Add.3 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women Distr.: General 19 April 2011 English Original: French Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Pre-session working group Fiftieth session 3 - 21 October 2011 Responses to the additional list of issues and questions with regard to the consideration of the combined initial and second to fourth periodic reports Chad* [11 April 2011] General Response to paragraph 1 of the list of issues and questions 1. The Ministry of Social Action, National Solidarity and the Family, in its role as a coordinating body, has, under Administrative Order No. 0013/MASF/DG/02, established a technical committee to prepare reports on the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and has, with financing from the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), recruited two consultants for that purpose. 2. The first validation workshop, held at the Centre for Development Studies and Training (CEFOD) in N'Djamena, was attended by the gender focal points of all the Government ministries, semi-public and private institutions, national organizations, United Nations specialized agencies and civil society organizations. 3. The second workshop, held in Darda, a town located 58 kilometres from N'Djamena, was attended by the same stakeholders. The third and final workshop was held at CEFOD in N'Djamena with the participation of representatives of high-level State institutions (the Office of the President and the National Assembly). 4. The preparation of the report was a participatory process involving consultations with the ministries of health, human rights, justice, microfinance and education and with civil society, particularly women's organizations such as the Women's Associations Liaison Unit (CELIAF), the Association of Women Jurists (AFJT), the Network of Women Ministers and Parliamentarians (REFEMP) and the Union of Arabic-Speaking Women's Associations in Chad (UAFAT), and groups from all faiths. 5. United Nations specialized agencies, including the United Nations Population Fund and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, provided financial support for activities carried out in this connection and for the preparation of the final version of the report. Response to paragraph 2 of the list of issues and questions 6. In this connection, the following initiatives should be mentioned: The Eastern Chad Recovery and Sustainable Development Programme The Commission for Conflict Resolution, which includes women The Network of Women Ministers and Parliamentarians, which engages in advocacy The much more project-focused role being played by the country's ministries 7. The Eastern Chad Recovery Programme is one of a number of efforts being undertaken with donors' coordination and support to promote recovery in eastern Chad. It has three components: (a) Restoration of the rule of law, local governance and social cohesion; (b) Economic recovery and the improvement of living conditions through the enhancement of access to basic social services and the quality of those services; (c) Strengthening of coordination structures for early recovery initiatives at the national and United Nations system levels. 8. The programme will be implemented in accordance with Security Council resolution 1325 on the inclusion of a gender perspective. 9. In order to ensure that gender-related issues are taken into account, women's organizations and the Network of Women Ministers and Parliamentarians will be closely associated with the programme's implementation. Discussions have been held with the Association of Women Jurists regarding support for the rule-of-law component. Women can play a particularly important role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding. By working for peace, the project will contribute to the prevention of violence against women. In all, 15 per cent of the project's resources are earmarked for gender-related activities. 10. The ministries involved in this effort include those responsible for justice, social action, human rights, decentralization, health, education, environment, agriculture, microfinance, water supply, sanitation, economic affairs and planning, and the interior and public safety. 11. The thematic groups are governance, justice, human rights and social cohesion, education, water supply and sanitation, health and nutrition, food security, income-generating activities and socio-economic inclusion, habitat and the environment. Validation of the Convention Response to paragraph 3 of the list of issues and questions 12. One of the groups which is partnering with the Government on various projects is the Association of Traditional Leaders of Chad (ACTT), who have participated in training and awareness-raising activities. They, in turn, have proposed awareness-raising activities for the general public. The members of ACTT are stakeholders in various projects and campaigns designed to increase awareness of women's rights (target groups for partners' advocacy efforts). 13. ACTT is a member of the national commission that has been set up to draft a personal and family code. Constitutional and legislative framework; definition of discrimination Response to paragraph 4 of the list of issues and questions 14. The bill initiated by the Association de la Jeunesse Anti-divage (Youth Association against Divisiveness) (AJAC) is in line with the Constitution. Response to paragraph 5 of the list of issues and questions 15. Ordinance No. 006/PR/84, which governs the activities of tradespeople, allows the husband of a shopkeeper to object to his wife's commercial activities. This provision was taken from article 223 of the Civil Code of 1958, which authorizes husbands to put a stop to their wives' activities if they deem it necessary. However, with the advent of the Constitution of 1996, this provision became obsolete and is no longer in force. 16. Petroleum Revenues Act No. 001/PR/99 does not mention the specific interests of women or children. 17. After a review process, Chad has ratified the agreement between the European Union and the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries, as revised in 2006, which guarantees women's rights to participate in commerce and the economy. 18. Decree No. 1140/PR/PM/MCPT/07 of 8 September 2007 established a national day in recognition of women merchants and businesses managers. 19. The Government of Chad and its international and local financial partners, along with civil society, have instituted programmes, action plans and specific measures to increase women's access to means of production, including capital, while enhancing their organizational and management skills. (cf. Implementation of the Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa P.11.) Programmes and action plans Response to paragraph 6 of the list of issues and questions 20. The following projects are designed to incorporate a gender approach into the development process: Project CHD 5 G 102 on equality and equity has been in operation since 2006, is financed by the United Nations Population Fund and is managed by the Directorate for the Advancement of Women and Gender Integration. As part of this project, the Ministry has been building capacity through awareness-raising, advocacy, education, advisory services and training to prepare State officials and civil society partners to perform tasks relating to the promotion of equality and gender mainstreaming in their sectors. Project CHD 5 G 104 on the empowerment of rural women has been operational since 2006. The National Food Security Project (PNSA). The Lake Chad and Kanem Development Project (PRODELKA). A project to promote human rights and access to justice. A five-year plan on priority issues for Chadian women. Regional development plans financed by the European Union. The national human rights programme. The conversion of the Directorate for the Advancement of Women into the Directorate for the Advancement of Women and Gender Integration in 2006. This directorate, which is under the Ministry of Social Action, National Solidarity and the Family, is responsible for implementing Government policy on the socio-economic and legal advancement of women, on equality, on gender equity and on women's empowerment, on gender mainstreaming in development policies and strategies and on ensuring governmental follow-up and coordination. 21. The Directorate for the Advancement of Girls' Education was established within the Ministry of Education under Decree No. 414/PR/PM/MEN/2007 of 17 May 2007. Its responsibilities include: Supporting and carrying out studies and/or other initiatives relating to girls' education Organizing and running information, awareness-raising and advocacy activities to promote the education of girls 22. The following measures relating to health care should be mentioned: Establishment of the Directorate for Reproductive Health Adoption of a national strategy to address the problem of vaginal fistulas Provision of free emergency obstetrical care and antiretroviral medicines Development of a road map for the Campaign on Accelerated Reduction of Maternal Mortality in Africa (CARMMA) Establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights Response to paragraph 7 of the list of issues and questions 23. Research on gender issues has been undertaken in order to identify gender disparities and inequalities in all sectors and to analyse their effect in terms of development. These findings have served as a basis for setting priorities and characterizing challenges which can then be addressed within the framework of the objectives and strategic directions of the national gender policy. The policy's development has involved the following steps: The preparatory study underwent a pre-validation and validation process which included a second reading, followed by a national validation process Once the first draft of the policy paper was ready, it was examined by the members of a multisectoral committee during a workshop held for that purpose, after which it was pre-validated by planners and senior officials of the relevant ministerial departments and by the resource persons Regional workshops for the pre-validation of the draft policy paper were organized to garner the support and national consensus needed for the policy's implementation 24. The mandate for the policy's development is based on the Convention and the Government's commitments regarding the promotion of equality between the sexes. 25. The policy's vision statement reads as follows: "By 2020, Chad will be free of all forms of gender-related inequality and injustice and of all forms of violence and will be a country in which men and women will have the same opportunities to access and control resources and participate equitably in decision-making with a view to the attainment of sustainable development." 26. The policy is also focused on putting into practice the constitutional principles of equality and respect for human rights and on honouring Chad's national and international commitments relating to the promotion of gender equity and equality. Response to paragraph 8 of the list of issues and questions 27. The establishment of the Ministry of Micro-Finance made it possible to form a committee in 2006 to support the effort to combat poverty and food insecurity. The Ministry has provided support for women's organizations in the outlying areas of N'Djamena and in the countryside. Advocacy and the provision of credit by the Ministry of Micro-Finance, together with the campaign to combat poverty that was launched in 2007, have reached 42,183 beneficiaries, 90 per cent of whom are women. 28. The National Fund for Occupational Training (FONAP) has conducted capacity-building activities for tradeswomen and women entrepreneurs. 29. Local production projects, including projects on the development of a line of shea products and the production of spirulina, which are being piloted by the Ministry of Social Action, National Solidarity and the Family and the Ministry of Agriculture, respectively, are being financed by the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. Temporary special measures Response to paragraphs 9 and 10 of the list of issues and questions 30. While no law has been passed, several solemn declarations have been made: In 1996, steps were taken to recruit female teachers to the teacher training academy. There is a 30 per cent quota for female teachers. In the past five years the President has made solemn declarations to encourage women to participate in decision-making mechanisms on a mass scale. Special measures have been taken to recruit a total of 250 young women security officers. Stereotypes and harmful practices Response to paragraph 11 of the list of issues and questions 31. Actions taken in this connection include the following: A national strategy to combat gender-based violence is in place A coordinated national effort to combat and address gender-based violence has been mounted On 15 December 2010 the President issued a statement calling for an end to violence against women and children A road map for the elimination of female genital mutilation has been established Response to paragraph 12 of the list of issues and questions 32. A report has been prepared following the fact-finding mission undertaken in 2010 to investigate the practice of levirate and sororate marriage in the Mayo-Kebbi and Tandjilé regions. 33. The anti-AIDS task force organized round-table discussions on these practices for administrative, military, traditional and religious authorities in N'Djamena in 2005, in Bongor in 2006 and in Pala in 2007. 34. Food taboos are no longer widely observed. Violence against women Response to paragraph 13 of the list of issues and questions 35. Article 275 of the Criminal Code stipulates that anyone guilty of rape shall be sentenced to forced labour for a specific period of time. 36. Article 276 states that when the rape is committed against a child under the age of 13 or with the help of one or several other people or by a relative in the ascending line, the punishment shall be forced labour for life. 37. The draft revised Code of Criminal Procedure includes provisions for punishing those who violate women's fundamental rights. 38. Other measures include a coordinated national effort to combat and address gender-based violence and an action plan for that purpose. Response to paragraph 14 of the list of issues and questions 39. The campaign to eliminate violence against women and children by 2015 aims to: Build stakeholders' capacity to combat gender-based violence Disseminate instruments and laws protecting women and children in Chad Advocate on behalf of women and children in State institutions Establish a national coordination mechanism to combat gender-based violence Develop the national strategy for combating and addressing gender-based violence 40. This campaign is aimed at a diverse audience which includes the judiciary; defence and security forces; medical workers; administrative, traditional and religious authorities; and the country's major institutions. 41. This campaign has had repercussions: there have been violent incidents in various districts, including some targeting human rights organizations, and people have begun using a dedicated hotline. 42. A human rights project on assistance for women and girl victims of sexual abuse, rape and armed conflict was implemented. 43. The Darfur crisis, which has triggered flows of refugees into Chad, and armed conflicts in eastern Chad have led to increased gender-based violence. In response, the Ministry of Social Action, Solidarity and the Family, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme, launched a human rights project aimed at providing assistance for women and girl victims of sexual abuse, rape and armed conflict. 44. This project was implemented from 2007 to 2009 in refugee camps and among the local population in eastern Chad. Its aim was to provide legal protection and psychological assistance to women and girls who were victims of sexual abuse, rape or armed conflict. 45. The project was expected to produce the following results: Psychological support for women who had been victims of rape and sexual abuse Effective legal action against perpetrators Establishment of a psychological support centre in Abéché Training of members of the local population to serve as counsellors and their deployment in the field Basic training in human rights and international humanitarian law for local authorities and protection and security officials 46. In view of the widespread violence directed against women and children throughout the country, the Ministry of Social Action, Solidarity and the Family entered into an agreement with the United Nations Development Programme to expand the project to urban areas in 2010. 47. The main objectives of this phase are: To conduct studies designed to contribute to a fuller understanding of gender-based violence To support focal points and women's committees in the camps To provide psychological support in the social centres of Abéché, N'Djamena and Moundou in 2010 48. The project is receiving US$ 150 00 in financing. Response to paragraph 15 of the list of issues and questions 49. The Committee is not victims' only recourse; there are also subcommittees, including a subcommittee that provides technical support to the committee responsible for following up on the report of the Commission of Inquiry concerning the events that occurred in Chad between 28 January and 8 February 2008. 50. In addition, the following units have been established: Legal unit Security unit 51. The monitoring committee monitors victims' status and that of their compensation and other claims. It can also take legal action against perpetrators. Trafficking and prostitution Response to paragraph 16 of the list of issues and questions 52. With regard to the trafficking and exploitation of children, formal coordination arrangements have been established by the Ministry of Social Action, human rights associations, civil society organizations and faith-based associations. There is also a national action plan to combat the abuse and sexual exploitation of children. Participation in political and public life Response to paragraph 17 of the list of issues and questions 53. Other than the provisions of articles 12 and 13 of the Constitution, no specific measures have been adopted to increase the full and equal participation of women or their representation at all levels of the Government, including the legislative and judiciary branches, or at the international level. Education Response to paragraph 18 of the list of issues and questions 54. Despite the major efforts of the past decade and the sums invested in education, Chad continues to face difficulties with regard to quality. With a literacy rate below 30 per cent, it is one of the four African countries with the lowest literacy rates, and there is a very large disparity between men and women. 55. Given this situation, the national authorities have established four literacy directorates under the Ministry of Education: Directorate for Literacy Directorate for Non-Formal Basic Education Directorate for the National Language Directorate for the Advancement of Girls' Education 56. A programme to train officials to work as literacy trainers has been launched at the University of N'Djamena. 57. The main actions in this area have been the creation of incentives (scholarships, prizes) to encourage the best girl students to stay in school and the provision of tools (mills, carryalls, wheelbarrows, etc.) to local mothers' associations in order to lighten their workload. 58. A campaign has been launched to encourage communities to send girls to school and to allow them to stay in school. 59. Parent associations have been formed to support the education-related efforts of the Government and its partners. Employment Response to paragraph 19 of the list of issues and questions 60. There are no provisions for punishing sexual harassment. Response to paragraph 20 of the list of issues and questions 61. Child protection legislation to combat child labour is being drafted. Health Response to paragraph 21 of the list of issues and questions 62. When the results of the 2004 demographic and health survey were published, they showed that maternal health had deteriorated despite support from the Government and its partners in this area. As a result, the national health policy was placed under review, and a national health care development plan has been drawn up to implement the new policy. A road map for efforts to reduce maternal, infant and neonatal mortality has been developed for the period 2009 - 2015, reflecting the Government's desire to take vigorous action to alleviate women's suffering. An overview of tangible achievements in this connection is provided below. 63. Infrastructure works designed to decentralize access to health care in rural zones include the following: Health-care facilities at the district level that are now in operation afford women improved access to care (19 district hospitals and 72 clinics have been or are being built) The construction of a 250-bed mothers' and children's hospital in N'Djamena has been a signal achievement The mobile reproductive health-care strategy has been implemented in six regions and covers prenatal consultations, distribution of contraceptives and provision of other health care to women and children in remote villages far from health centres 64. A total of 52 doctors, 74 State-registered nurses, 38 State-registered midwives, 96 health technicians and paramedical staff (State-registered laboratory technicians, nursing officers, etc.) have been assigned to care for patients in rural areas, and this has facilitated women's access to health care. 65. The following steps have been taken in the area of obstetrical care: Training in emergency obstetrical and neonatal care in Sarh and N'Djamena Training in family welfare in Sarh Training in focused prenatal care Training in post-abortion care Bringing a mobile clinic to Mongo to treat fistulas, with support from the United Nations Population Fund for treatment and awareness-raising (approximately 90 women were treated) In-service training in the treatment of cervical cancer is being provided to one doctor On 1 April 2006, the President announced that emergency obstetrical care would be provided free of charge Provision, in the road map, for attendance at normal deliveries free of charge and for equipment and enhanced human resources for obstetrical and neonatal emergency care in order to stem the increase in maternal, neonatal and infant mortality 66. It is urgent to improve displaced women's access to health care. The Government is therefore encouraging and helping humanitarian agencies to set up operations in areas harbouring refugees and displaced women so that they can provide health care to these population groups. 67. In the area of reproductive health, in addition to Ordinance No. 008/PR/93 of 30 April 1993 on the regulation of contraception in Chad, the Government adopted Act No. 006/PR/02 of 15 April 2002 on the promotion of reproductive health. Additional legislation is, however, needed in order to permit effective implementation of the national health policy with regard to reproductive issues. A decree containing implementing regulations for the Act has been prepared and is in the process of being signed. In the meantime, current measures to increase the percentage of women using contraception focus on educating women about reproductive health and sensitizing them to the issue. 68. Examples of measures that have been taken include: The Chadian Association for Family Welfare (ASTBEF) has opened two new clinics outside the capital. A strategy for the delivery of reproductive health and family planning services by mobile units was successfully piloted in a rural area near Pala in 2007. The results included rates of increase of 133 per cent for uptake, 403.6 per cent for prenatal consultations, 92.5 per cent for assisted deliveries, 323 per cent for post-natal consultations and 126.3 per cent for family welfare consultations. On the basis of these results, the Government extended the strategy's coverage to five other regions of the country. Activities to increase awareness of reproductive health issues have been conducted in collaboration with religious institutions such as the Alliance of Evangelical Churches and Missions in Chad (EEMET). Traditional leaders of the Logone Oriental region have been sensitized to the issue of reproductive health. In May 2007 the national maternal and infant health centre became a national centre for reproductive health and the treatment of fistulas. Response to paragraph 22 of the list of issues and questions 69. Chad has abundant water resources. A master plan for water and sanitation services for the period 2003 - 2020 has been established that gives the country a strategy and a programming tool. In an effort to reach the Millennium Development Goal on access to safe drinking water, the Government has set an access target of 60 per cent of the population. To ensure that rural populations, and in particular women and girls, have access to safe drinking water, the Government has placed priority on improving village water supplies. Major investments in community-managed hand-operated water pumps between 2000 and 2010 have made it possible to increase rates of access to safe drinking water from 17 per cent in 2000 to 30 per cent in 2005 and 48 per cent in 2010, which is in line with the country's projections for reaching the Millennium Development Goals. 70. To prevent epidemics, including cholera, the Government has instituted a national hand-washing awareness day. On that day, educational and awareness-raising activities are organized on the topics of sanitation and healthy living. Response to paragraph 23 of the list of issues and questions 71. The new approach to combating HIV/AIDS, as outlined in the strategic plan, focuses on raising awareness among young people and preventing mother-to-child transmission. In addition to intensifying information campaigns aimed at changing behaviours that increase the risk of HIV infection by, for example, increasing the number of voluntary screening centres, training peer educators and holding social action sessions, the Government has stepped up awareness-raising activities by strengthening nationwide, sectoral and regional coordination of efforts to combat HIV/AIDS through the establishment of regional committees and improved access to voluntary, anonymous HIV screening services. 72. Steps taken to prevent mother-to-child transmission include: Increasing the number of facilities that focus on the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS Instituting routine screening during prenatal consultation Making antiretroviral medicines available free of charge to all infected persons and routinely administering antiretroviral medication to children born with HIV 73. A national HIV/AIDS awareness day has been instituted to publicize the 2007 law. Associations working to combat AIDS are also making an enormous contribution to publicizing the law. Rural women Response to paragraph 24 of the list of issues and questions 74. Measures aimed at empowering women and improving their access to health care, education and employment opportunities include the following: Provision of microcredits to women to finance income-generating activities. Provision of labour-saving devices. Training and awareness-raising for women. As part of the shea products project in Koumra, in the Mandoul region, four platforms have been set up in Koumra, Kol, Kemkyan and Matkaga. Ten management committees, whose membership includes eight women, have been set up as part of a project to support the reduction of poverty and food insecurity in the Chari-Baguirmi, Mandoul and Moyen-Chari regions. A cotton textile project is in place which is aimed at the development of craft industries, and local product processing projects are being financed by the United Nations Development Programme. An all-woman spirulina production project is being implemented. Project CHD 5 G104, which is designed to empower rural women, is being funded by the United Nations Population Fund and coordinated by the Directorate for Agricultural Education, Training and Promotion of Rural Development. Under this project, training and awareness-raising activities are organized that focus on education for girls, training in functional literacy for rural women and young people, reproductive health and management skills. 75. All these projects, which have been launched by the Government and its partners, incorporate the gender dimension. Internally displaced and refugee women Response to paragraph 25 of the list of issues and questions 76. In response to the Committee's questions, the following should be mentioned: The African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention) was ratified in August 2010 The National Committee oversees the provision of material assistance to refugees and displaced persons The United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad and the Integrated Security Detachment (DIS) are responsible for protecting women's rights and security, including the right to education and health DIS staffing has been increased through the recruitment, among others, of 250 young women Response to paragraph 26 of the list of issues and questions 77. To protect the civilian population, the Government has taken the following steps: Strengthening DIS staffing and logistics The provision of training by the national police force to 250 young women recruited by DIS Training for 90 soldiers in children's rights and protection began in November 2010 and will continue until 2012 Marriage and family relations Response to paragraph 27 of the list of issues and questions 78. All technical difficulties have been eliminated and the draft personal and family code has been submitted to the Government for adoption by the Council of Ministers. 79. The fact that, under the new draft marriage code, polygamy is now an option indicates that the practice is on its way out. 