%%%OBSERVER STATUS|INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|

Substantive session of 2011 Geneva, 4-29 July 2011 * E/2011/100 and Corr.1. ** Additional information on the organization has been deposited with the secretariat of the Economic and Social Council and can be examined by Member States upon request. Item 1 of the provisional agenda* Adoption of the agenda and other organizational matters Application of an intergovernmental organization for observer status with the Economic and Social Council Letter dated 30 May 2011 from the Chair of the International Anti-Corruption Academy International Transition Team** addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council The International Anti-Corruption Academy (IACA) presents its compliments to the United Nations in general and the Economic and Social Council in particular and has the honour to recall that IACA, with its official seat in Laxenburg, Austria, but global outreach, gained the status of a fully fledged international organization effective 8 March 2011. IACA, originally established by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Austria, the European Anti-Fraud Office and other stakeholders, is a pioneering institution in the field of anti-corruption. The Academy aims to promote the prevention of and fight against corruption and further the goals of the United Nations Convention against Corruption as well as all other relevant international and regional anti-corruption instruments, thus contributing to the strengthening of good governance and the rule of law. In pursuing that objective, IACA will function as an independent centre of excellence by following a holistic, interdisciplinary, intercultural and intersectoral approach. Such a perspective seems necessary for tackling all the complexities of the offence, which is often linked to transnational threats, including organized crime, terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and human trafficking. The components of IACA programmes and activities will mainly focus on: (a) Providing anti-corruption education and training; (b) Undertaking and facilitating research into all aspects of corruption; (c) Providing other relevant forms of technical assistance in the fight against corruption; (d) Fostering international cooperation and networking. According to its article XVIII, paragraph 3, the Agreement for the Establishment of the International Anti-Corruption Academy as an international organization enters into force 60 days after the deposit of the instruments of ratification, approval or accession by three States or international organizations. Therefore, following the completion of the ratification process by Austria, the European Public Law Organization and the International Centre for Migration Policy Development, IACA, became, from a legal point of view, an international organization on 8 March 2011. Currently, IACA has 55 members from all corners of the globe, 7 of which have already ratified the Agreement. In addition, two States have recently acceded to it. The Austrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, acting as the Depository of the Agreement, can provide detailed information on the status of IACA membership, including recent developments related to accessions and ratifications (as of 11 May 2011). For the latest status of signatures and ratifications please see the IACA website, at www.iacainfo.org (under "Partners"). Moreover, IACA has concluded various cooperation agreements with other international organizations, including the Organization of American States, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the International Development Law Organization and other entities (such as the World Bank and the World Economic Forum), which share the same objectives in the fields of anti-corruption and good governance. At the IACA inaugural conference, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon, in explicitly pledging his full support to the Academy, along with many other high-level representatives from all over the globe, stated: The launch of the International Anti-Corruption Academy is a milestone in the efforts of the international community to fight corruption. It has great potential to advance the goals of the landmark United Nations Convention against Corruption. If we are serious about tackling corruption, we will use the Academy to the fullest. We are hence more than grateful for the lasting achievements towards these goals that were accomplished until now and we are confident that the strong and fruitful collaboration with all our parties, signatories and stakeholders will further contribute to and safeguard the impact of IACA towards a more corruption-free and, subsequently, just world. In accordance with rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure of the Economic and Social Council, I have the honour to request the participation of IACA as an observer in all deliberations of the Council on questions that fall within the scope of IACA activities, including questions related to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs. I look forward to your favourable response as we stand ready to establish a fruitful cooperation for the benefit of both sides and, ultimately, both of our constituencies. (Signed) Martin Kreutner Chair International Transition Team 