%%%REGIONAL COOPERATION|SUSTAINABLE ENERGY|DEVELOPMENT|ASIA AND THE PACIFIC|

Substantive session of 2011 New York, 4-29 July 2011 * E/2011/100 and Corr.1. Item 10 of the provisional agenda* Regional cooperation Regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Matters calling for action by the Economic and Social Council or brought to its attention Summary The present addendum to the report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields contains resolutions and decisions adopted at the sixty-seventh session of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific convened in Bangkok from 19 to 25 May 2011. Full texts of the resolutions are available at http://www.un.org/regionalcommissions/ sessions.html. Page Matters calling for action by the Council Matters brought to the attention of the Council 1. At its sixty-seventh session, held in Bangkok from 19 to 25 May 2011, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) adopted resolution 67/2, based on which the following resolution is submitted for action by the Council: Promoting regional cooperation for enhanced energy security and the sustainable use of energy in Asia and the Pacific The Economic and Social Council, Taking note of resolution 67/2 adopted at the sixty-seventh session of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (annex I), which, inter alia, requests the Executive Secretary to convene in 2013 the Asian and Pacific Energy Forum at the ministerial level to discuss the progress achieved in the Asia-Pacific region in addressing the energy security challenges at the regional, national and household levels, and to facilitate continuous dialogue among member States with a view to enhancing energy security and working towards sustainable development; Endorses Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific resolution 67/2 on promoting regional cooperation for enhanced energy security and the sustainable use of energy in Asia and the Pacific, as set out in annex I to the present resolution. Annex I Resolution 67/2 The Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, Recalling the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, in particular those parts which concern energy, and General Assembly resolution 65/151, in which the Assembly decided to declare 2012 the International Year of Sustainable Energy for All, Recalling also its resolutions 63/6 on the implementation of intercountry energy cooperation to enhance energy security for sustainable development with a view to widening access to energy services in least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, and 64/3 on promoting renewable sources of energy for energy security and sustainable development in Asia and the Pacific, Taking note of the Ministerial Declaration on Environment and Development in Asia and the Pacific, 2010, adopted by the sixth Ministerial Conference on Environment and Development in Asia and the Pacific on 2 October 2010, Recognizing that energy security is a key development issue for all countries in the Asia-Pacific region, in particular for the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States, Recognizing also that nearly 1 billion people in the Asia-Pacific region today do not have access to modern affordable energy services, Emphasizing the need to improve access to reliable, affordable and environmentally sound energy resources for the achievement of internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, Recognizing that energy demand in the Asia-Pacific region is rising faster than in other regions and is projected to almost double by the year 2030 and that fossil fuels are likely to remain the main source of energy for meeting that demand, Expressing concern that volatile oil prices may threaten the region's nascent recovery from the global economic crisis and its prospects for achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015, Recognizing the potential of various new and renewable energy technologies in meeting the challenges presented by unmet energy demand, Expressing appreciation for the work of the secretariat of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in promoting subregional energy cooperation with a view to enhancing energy security and sustainable development, Welcoming the ongoing efforts of Governments to promote regional and interregional cooperation for enhanced energy security and sustainable use of energy resources, 1. Calls upon all members and associate members to further promote regional cooperation in addressing energy security challenges and to formulate and implement coherent energy policies based on comprehensive assessments of their environmental and social impacts; 2. Urges members and associate members, as appropriate, to give due attention to supply-side constraints, the management of energy demand and the consequences of price volatility and potential disruptions to energy supply; 3. Calls upon members and associate members to cooperate proactively in the development and deployment of cost-effective new and renewable energy technologies, and to promote cooperation on increasing energy efficiency, in particular, in the context of South-South cooperation; 4. Encourages all members and associate members to develop and strengthen efficient policy and regulatory structures at the national and subnational levels that will encourage private sector investment in energy products; 5. Also encourages members and associate members to actively engage the private sector in order to enhance investments, to generate innovations and to take leadership as a partner in creating a sustainable energy future; 6. Invites Governments, donor countries, relevant United Nations bodies, agencies, international and subregional organizations, international and regional financial institutions, as well as the private sector and civil society, to actively consider contributing towards the implementation of the present resolution; 7. Requests the Executive Secretary: (a) To strengthen the role and capacity of the secretariat of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific in the area of energy security; (b) To ensure effective coordination with other United Nations bodies and agencies, in particular through UN-Energy, and with multilateral agencies and subregional organizations in working towards enhancing the capacity of States members of the Commission; (c) To collaborate effectively with development partners in order to mobilize financial and technical support to promote regional cooperation for enhanced energy security; (d) To assist members and associate members in meeting their energy security challenges through: (i) the collaborative development of energy security scenarios; and (ii) the organization of meetings and regional networking arrangements aimed at promoting the exchange of experiences and information; (e) To convene, in 2013, the Asian and Pacific Energy Forum at the ministerial level to discuss the progress achieved in the Asia-Pacific region in addressing the energy security challenges at the regional, national and household levels, and to facilitate continuous dialogue among member States with a view to enhancing energy security and working towards sustainable development; (f) To report to the Commission at its seventieth session on the progress in the implementation of the present resolution. Annex II Statement of programme budget implications for implementing resolution 67/2 on promoting regional cooperation for enhanced energy security and the sustainable use of energy in Asia and the Pacific 1. The full implementation of the resolution will require additional extrabudgetary resources estimated at $500,000 per year to support the implementation of the required activities and regular budgetary resources of $50,000 above the proposed programme budget for 2012-2013 for the provision of interpretation and translation services for the Asia-Pacific Energy Forum at ministerial level. 2. The Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific has reviewed the resources proposed for the biennium 2012-2013 and the outputs expected to be delivered with the level of proposed resources and has concluded that it would not be possible to defer, change or discontinue any of these outputs in order to absorb the additional resource requirements resulting from the draft resolution. In other words, it is not possible for the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 to absorb the additional resource requirements and there are no extrabudgetary resources foreseen that could finance the interpretation and translation services. 3. The secretariat will formulate the proposed strategic framework for the period 2014-2015, taking into account the request to strengthen the role and capacity of the secretariat of the Commission in the area of energy security and review the staffing needs in this area in the formulation of the regular budget for 2014-2015. To the extent possible, the secretariat will review whether the staffing needs in this area can be addressed through internal redeployments. 2. At its sixty-seventh session held in Bangkok on 19 to 25 May 2011, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific adopted its resolution 67/13, based on which the following resolution is submitted for action by the Council. Revision of the statute of the Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific Taking note of resolution 67/13 adopted at the sixty-seventh session of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (annex), which adopts a revised statute for the Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific, the text of which is annexed to the said resolution, to inter alia, provide for the term of the members of the Governing Council to be changed to a period of three years from the current five years, Endorses resolution 67/13 on revision of the statute of the Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific, as set out in the annex to the present resolution. Annex Resolution 67/13 Recalling its resolution 61/2 on the statute of the Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific, Noting the suggestion made by members of the Commission at the sixth session of the Governing Council of the Institute, Recognizing the fact that both the members of the Governing Council and the non-members have participated in the discussion on the Institute's activities, Recognizing also the desirability of increasing the frequency with which the election to the Governing Council takes place in order to enhance the scope for countries in the region to influence the make-up of the Council and the direction of the Institute's operations, 1. Decides, in this regard, to adopt a revised statute for the Institute, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution, to provide for the term of the members of the Governing Council to be changed to a period of three years from the current five years; 2. Also decides that the revised statute shall be applied to the term of the current members of the Governing Council, which is changed from five years to three years, accordingly, effective as of the date of its adoption by the Commission. Statute of the Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific Establishment 1. The Statistical Institute for Asia and the Pacific (hereinafter referred to as "the Institute"), established in May 1970 as the Asian Statistical Institute, and accorded the legal status of a subsidiary body of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (hereinafter referred to as "the Commission") pursuant to Commission resolutions 50/5 of 13 April 1994 and 51/1 of 1 May 1995, shall continue in existence under the same title and under the terms of the present statute. 2. Participation in the training and other activities of the Institute is open to all members and associate members of the Commission. 3. The Institute has the status of a subsidiary body of the Commission. Objectives 4. The objectives of the Institute are to strengthen, through practically oriented training of official statisticians, the capability of the developing members and associate members and economies in transition of the region to collect, analyse and disseminate statistics as well as to produce timely and high-quality statistics that can be utilized for economic and social development planning, and to assist those developing members and associate members and economies in transition in establishing or strengthening their statistical training capability and other related activities. Functions 5. The Institute will achieve the above objectives by undertaking such functions as: (a) Training of official statisticians, utilizing existing centres and institutions for training available in member States; (b) Networking and partnership with other international organizations and key stakeholders; (c) Dissemination of information. Status and organization 6. The Institute shall have a Governing Council (hereinafter referred to as "the Council"), a Director and staff. The Commission shall keep separate accounts for the Institute. 7. The Institute is located in the Tokyo Metropolitan Area, Japan. 8. The activities of the Institute shall be in line with relevant policy decisions adopted by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Commission. The Institute shall be subject to the Financial and Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the applicable administrative instructions. Governing Council 9. The Institute shall have a Governing Council consisting of a representative designated by the Government of Japan and eight representatives nominated by other members and associate members of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific elected by the Commission. The members and associate members to be elected by the Commission shall be elected for a period of three years but shall be eligible for re-election. The Executive Secretary of the Commission or his or her representative shall attend meetings of the Council. 10. The Director of the Institute shall serve as Secretary of the Council. 11. Representatives of (a) States that are not members of the Council, (b) United Nations bodies and specialized and related agencies and (c) such other organizations as the Council may deem appropriate, as well as experts in fields of interest to the Council, may be invited by the Executive Secretary to attend meetings of the Council. 12. The Council shall meet at least once a year and shall adopt its own rules of procedure. Sessions of the Council shall be convened by the Executive Secretary of the Commission, who may propose special sessions of the Council at his or her own initiative and shall convene special sessions at the request of a majority of the Council members. 13. A quorum for meetings of the Council shall be a majority of its members. 14. The nine representatives constituting the Council under paragraph 9 of the present statute shall have one vote each. Decisions and recommendations of the Council shall be made by consensus or, when this is not possible, by a majority of the members present and voting. 15. The Council shall, at each regular session, elect a Chair and Vice-Chair, who shall hold office until the next regular session of the Council. The Chair or, in his or her absence, the Vice-Chair shall preside at meetings of the Council. If the Chair is unable to serve for the full term for which he or she has been elected, the Vice-Chair shall act as Chair for the remainder of that term. 16. The Council shall review the administration and financial status of the Institute and the implementation of its programme of work. The Executive Secretary of the Commission shall submit an annual report, as adopted by the Council, to the Commission at its annual sessions. 17. The Council shall review and endorse annual and long-term workplans consistent with the programme of work. Director and staff 18. The Institute shall have a Director and staff, who shall be staff members of the Commission appointed under the appropriate United Nations regulations, rules and administrative instructions. The Council will be invited to nominate candidates for the position of Director, once the vacancy is announced, and provide advice, as appropriate. Other members and associate members of the Commission may also submit nominations for the post. The Director and Professional staff shall be appointed for a total term, in principle, not exceeding five years. All appointments shall be for a fixed duration and shall be limited to service with the Institute. 19. The Director shall be responsible to the Executive Secretary of the Commission for the administration of the Institute, the preparation of annual and long-term workplans and the implementation of the programme of work. Resources of the Institute 20. All members and associate members of the Commission should be encouraged to make a regular annual contribution to the operations of the Institute. The United Nations shall administer a joint contribution trust fund for the Institute, as referred to in paragraph 6, in which these contributions shall be deposited and utilized solely for the activities of the Institute, subject to paragraph 22 of the present statute. 21. United Nations bodies and specialized agencies and other entities should also be encouraged to make voluntary contributions to the operations of the Institute. The United Nations shall maintain separate trust funds for voluntary contributions for technical cooperation projects or other extraordinary voluntary contributions for activities of the Institute. 22. The financial resources of the Institute shall be administered in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations. Amendments 23. Amendments to the present statute shall be adopted by means of a resolution of the Commission. Matters not covered by the present statute 24. In the event of any procedural matter arising that is not covered by the present statute or rules of procedure adopted by the Governing Council under paragraph 12 of this statute, the pertinent part of the rules of procedure of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific shall apply. Entry into force 25. The present statute shall enter into force on the date of its adoption by the Commission. II. Matters brought to the attention of the Council 3. At its sixty-seventh session, held in Bangkok from 19 to 25 May 2011, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific adopted several resolutions (apart from the two resolutions highlighted for action by the Council in chapter I) which are hereunder brought to the attention of the Council. Ulaanbaatar Declaration: Outcome of the High-level Asia-Pacific Policy Dialogue on the Implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action and other Development Gaps Faced by the Landlocked Developing Countries (resolution 67/1) 4. The Commission noted with appreciation the convening of the High-level Asia-Pacific Policy Dialogue on the Implementation of the Almaty Programme of Action and other Development Gaps Faced by the Landlocked Developing Countries, which was organized jointly by the Government of Mongolia and the secretariat of ESCAP, in Ulaanbaatar from 12 to 14 April 2011, and the Ulaanbaatar Declaration, the outcome of the Policy Dialogue, which focused on issues related to the Millennium Development Goals and other development challenges, market access and trade opportunities, and transit transport connectivity as well as South-South and triangular cooperation. It urged landlocked developing countries in the Asia-Pacific region to sign and ratify the Multilateral Agreement on the Establishment of the International Think Tank for the Landlocked Developing Countries at their earliest convenience, in order to bring the think tank, which was established in Ulaanbaatar on 27 July 2009, to full operation. 5. The Commission, inter alia, requested the Executive Secretary of ESCAP to assist landlocked developing countries in the Asia-Pacific region, in cooperation with other relevant international entities, in implementing the recommendations of the Ulaanbaatar Declaration, and to provide, in collaboration with relevant international organizations, necessary assistance to the landlocked developing countries in the Asia-Pacific region during the final review of the Almaty Programme of Action, which is scheduled for 2013. Sixth Ministerial Conference on Environment and Development in Asia and the Pacific (resolution 67/3) 6. The Commission noted with satisfaction the successful holding of the Sixth Ministerial Conference on Environment and Development in Asia and the Pacific, held in Astana from 27 September to 2 October 2010, at which the Ministerial Declaration on Environment and Development in Asia and the Pacific, 2010, and the Regional Implementation Plan for Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific, 2011-2015, were adopted, and welcomed and endorsed the Astana "Green Bridge" Initiative: Europe-Asia-Pacific Partnership for the Implementation of "Green Growth", as outcomes of the Sixth Ministerial Conference on Environment and Development. It emphasized that the Ministerial Declaration on Environment and Development in Asia and the Pacific, 2010, which outlines Asian and Pacific perspectives and approaches to achieving sustainable development, could serve as a regional input to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. 7. The Commission, inter alia, requested the Executive Secretary to assist members and associate members, upon request, in implementing the provisions of the Ministerial Declaration and in the execution of the Regional Implementation Plan. It also decided to convene the Seventh Ministerial Conference on Environment and Development in Asia and the Pacific in 2015. Establishment of the Asian and Pacific centre for the development of disaster information management (resolution 67/4) 8. The Commission expressed deep appreciation to the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran for its generous offer to support the establishment of the Asian and Pacific centre for the development of disaster information management as a regional facility serving ESCAP in the related areas. It decided to initiate the process for the establishment of the Asian and Pacific centre for the development of disaster information management in the Islamic Republic of Iran and invited all members and associate members to participate actively in the process of developing the programmes of the centre and to support its activities, as appropriate, in a comprehensive manner. 9. The Commission, inter alia, requested the Executive Secretary to include in the secretariat's evaluation plan for 2013 an evaluation of the activities highlighted in the resolution and the need for, and benefit of, establishing the centre as a subsidiary body of the Commission for the development of disaster information management, and to submit the results of that evaluation to the Commission at its seventieth session. Full and effective implementation of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing in the Asia-Pacific region (resolution 67/5) 10. The Commission decided to convene the Asia-Pacific High-level Intergovernmental Meeting on the second regional review and appraisal of the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing in early 2012 to provide a regional input to the global review, and encouraged all members and associate members to accelerate the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action and to conduct a national review and appraisal of it using, among other things, a bottom-up participatory approach. 11. The Commission, inter alia, requested the Executive Secretary to provide members and associate members, upon request, with technical assistance to strengthen their capacity for effective implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action, including its review and appraisal, and to encourage the participation of all key stakeholders, including civil society organizations and the private sector, in the preparatory process for the second global review and appraisal of the Plan of Action. Enhancing accessibility for persons with disabilities at the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (resolution 67/6) 12. The Commission noted the progress made by the secretariat in improving the accessibility of its facilities and services for persons with disabilities and acknowledging the need to continue such efforts in line with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It requested the Executive Secretary to continue and strengthen, as appropriate, her efforts to improve accessibility for persons with disabilities at ESCAP, including through developing and implementing further measures, in consultation with United Nations Headquarters, to enhance the accessibility of the secretariat's physical environment, information and communications systems, and other facilities and services, and support the development of assistive technologies for persons with disabilities, taking into account, as appropriate, the principles and relevant articles of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 13. The Commission further requested the Executive Secretary to work with United Nations Headquarters to establish an inter-agency advisory group, comprising concerned United Nations entities, and conduct an open dialogue with key stakeholders to review the accessibility of facilities and services in the United Nations complex in Bangkok; to make recommendations for their further improvement; and to establish a mechanism within the secretariat to promote the full inclusion and rights of persons with disabilities to work, on an equal basis with others, bearing in mind United Nations system-wide policies and the principles and relevant articles of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Role of cooperatives in social development in Asia and the Pacific (resolution 67/7) 14. The Commission recognized the growing role and important contribution of cooperatives in alleviating poverty and improving the livelihood of people in the Asia-Pacific region, and encouraged Governments to take appropriate policy measures to create and promote a supportive and enabling environment for the development and enhancement of cooperatives through close partnership with the cooperative movement, better legislation, wider advocacy of the role and contribution of cooperatives to the socio-economic development of their countries, and awareness-raising activities. The Commission requested the Executive Secretary to assist members and associate members, upon request, in preparing for and observing the International Year of Cooperatives and to facilitate the sharing of experiences and good practices of cooperatives at the regional level. Strengthening social protection systems in Asia and the Pacific (resolution 67/8) 15. The Commission called upon members and associate members to accord higher priority to social protection policies and programmes based on universal principles as a core component of development policy and planning at the national level; and to further strengthen and build effective systems of social protection in order to shield people better from many of the risks of daily life, through the development of integrated approaches to social protection that are rooted in universalism and a rights-based framework, and that effectively address processes of discrimination and exclusion based on national capacity. It further called for investment in building social protection systems that might form the basis of a "social protection floor", which would offer a minimum level of access to essential services and income security for all, and subsequently enhancing the capacity for extension, according to national aspirations and circumstances. 16. The Commission requested the Executive Secretary to support members and associate members in their capacity-building by mainstreaming social protection concerns into diverse development sectors by, inter alia, providing a regional platform for the sharing and dissemination of knowledge related to social protection; undertaking analytical studies and comprehensively documenting good practices on social protection in order to develop a toolbox of policy and programme options for social protection, for use by member States, as appropriate; promoting South-South and triangular cooperation, in order to enhance the affordability, scope and depth of social protection; and undertaking advocacy on investing in social protection in order to create enabling environments for programmes based on universal principles and within a rights-based framework. Asia-Pacific regional review of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS (resolution 67/9) 17. The Commission called upon members and associate members to further intensify the full range of actions to reach the unmet goals and targets of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS by: (a) developing national strategic plans and establishing strategic and operational partnerships at the national and community levels; (b) enhancing financial sustainability, national ownership and capacity, and committing a greater proportion of national resources to improve the effectiveness of responses to HIV; (c) encouraging stakeholder consultation in promoting access to affordable medicines; (d) initiating reviews of national laws, policies and practices to enable the full achievement of universal access targets; and (e) increasing the effectiveness of national responses by prioritizing high-impact interventions for key affected populations, and developing national strategies to address all forms of gender-based violence, including sexual violence, particularly against women and girls. 18. The Commission requested the Executive Secretary to coordinate with other relevant United Nations agencies to produce an overview of the progress made in achieving universal access and bring the present resolution to the attention of the high-level meeting on AIDS to be convened by the General Assembly from 8 to 10 June 2011. A core set of economic statistics to guide the improvement of basic economic statistics in Asia and the Pacific (resolution 67/10) 19. The Commission endorsed the recommendation of the Committee on Statistics to use a core set of economic statistics as a regional framework to focus regional efforts, coordinate training and mobilize donor support for capacity-building, and recommended that members and associate members use, as appropriate, the core set of economic statistics as a framework and guide in the development of their national statistical systems. Strengthening statistical capacity in Asia and the Pacific (resolution 67/11) 20. The Commission endorsed the strategic direction of the Committee on Statistics, as proposed by the Committee at its second session, with the two overarching goals of (a) ensuring that all countries in the region have the capability to provide an agreed basic range of population, economic, social and environmental statistics by 2020, and (b) creating a more adaptive and cost-effective information management environment for national statistical offices through stronger collaboration. It called on members and, as appropriate, associate members to prioritize the strengthening of their national statistical systems and to align resources and institutional arrangements to support statistics development in Asia and the Pacific by 2020. 21. The Commission requested the Executive Secretary to assist members and, as appropriate, associate members, upon request, in (a) developing their statistical systems and strengthening their capacity with a view to achieving the goals for statistics development in Asia and the Pacific by 2020; (b) promoting the importance of developing the capacity not only of national statistical offices but also, where appropriate, of other parts of national statistical systems across the region; (c) providing members and, as appropriate, associate members with assistance in strengthening their capacity to monitor the progress made in achieving the Millennium Development Goals and other internationally agreed development goals; (d) facilitating the coordination of international capacity-building activities related to the development of official statistics in the region; and (e) raising awareness of the significance of enhancing the use of administrative data as a means of increasing the effectiveness of the production of official statistics. Improvement of civil registration and vital statistics in Asia and the Pacific (resolution 67/12) 22. The Commission encouraged all members and associate members to review and assess the current functioning of the civil registration systems and the quality of the vital statistics produced internally within each country, and recommended that the results of country assessments be utilized by members, associate members and stakeholders to develop and implement comprehensive national strategies and plans to strengthen civil registration and vital statistics systems, and to strengthen the capacities of relevant institutions to improve civil registration and vital statistics in their countries. 23. The Commission, inter alia, requested the Executive Secretary to convene a high-level regional meeting of decision makers from national statistical organizations, civil registration offices, ministries of health and other relevant stakeholders to raise awareness and foster increased commitment to improving civil registration and vital statistics; facilitate the formation of a regional platform aimed at promoting the exchange of experiences and information on strategies and plans to strengthen civil registration and vital statistics systems; take a lead role in the region, in partnership with regional knowledge hubs and technical agencies, including the World Health Organization, the United Nations Statistics Division and the secretariat of the Pacific Community in developing and disseminating standards, evidence, tools and guidelines for civil registration and vital statistics; and facilitate, in close collaboration with technical partners and United Nations agencies, technical assistance, including training and advisory services, to build national capacity in civil registration and vital statistics. Cooperation between the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and other United Nations and regional and subregional organizations serving Asia and the Pacific (resolution 67/14) 24. The Commission recalled General Assembly resolution 64/289, in particular paragraph 22, in which the Assembly acknowledged efforts by developed countries to increase resources for development, including commitments by some developed countries to increase official development assistance, called for the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments and encouraged member States that have not yet done so to make concrete efforts in accordance with their commitments, as contained in paragraph 22 of General Assembly resolution 64/289. It invited member States to provide extrabudgetary funding should any additional resources be required to implement the resolution. 25. The Commission requested the Executive Secretary to assess the manner in which the secretariat carries out its mandate and coordinates its work with regional and subregional organizations operating in Asia and the Pacific, including the functioning, decision-making and results of the regional coordination mechanism, and consult with member States, including with the Advisory Committee of Permanent Representatives and other representatives designated by members of the Commission, and present the results to the Commission as part of the biennial reporting on the secretariat's evaluation activities, beginning with the sixty-eighth session of the Commission and continuing in future biennial reports. Midterm review of the functioning of the conference structure of the Commission (resolution 67/15) 26. The Commission reiterated its unique role as the most representative body for the Asia and Pacific region and its comprehensive mandate as the main economic and social development centre of the United Nations system for the Asia and Pacific region, and requested the Executive Secretary to carry out further study and analysis to facilitate the final review of the functioning of the conference structure of the Commission and submit the findings, including the questionnaire results, and recommendations to the Commission at its sixty-ninth session, especially on the following issues: (a) the duration of the Commission session in order to gain efficiencies in time and cost; (b) the governance structure of the regional institutions vis-à-vis the respective roles and relevant mandates of the Commission, the committees and the governing councils; (c) further integrating the regional institutions into the work of the relevant subprogrammes, the relevance of regional institutions to each subprogramme and committee, and the review of budget allocations to improve support for regional institutions through such mechanisms as staff exchanges and joint projects to support their work; and (d) the feasibility of promoting and developing the role of the Advisory Committee in order for it to assist the Commission in carrying out and coordinating its tasks during the intersessional period. 