%%%DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES|EDUCATION|EDUCATIONAL POLICY|GERMANY|

Substantive session of 2011 Geneva, 4-29 July 2011 * E/2011/100. Item 2 (b) of the provisional agenda* High-level segment: annual ministerial review Letter dated 2 May 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Economic and Social Council Attached herewith is the national report of Germany on progress towards the achievement of the internationally agreed goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, for the annual ministerial review to be held during the high-level segment of the substantive session of 2011 of the Economic and Social Council (see annex). I should be grateful if you would circulate the present letter and its annex as a document of the Council, under item 2 (b) of the provisional agenda. (Signed) Peter Wittig Ambassador Permanent Representative Voluntary national presentation of Germany on implementing the internationally agreed goals and commitments in regard to education, for the annual ministerial review of the Economic and Social Council in 2011 Contents Page Summary It is time for action The role of education in achieving the Millennium Development Goals Facts and figures about German development policy in the field of education The German vision for education The German draft education strategy for development The way ahead Education is one of the crucial challenges for development and development policy worldwide. The latest Education for All (EFA) Global Monitoring Report, issued in 2011, reveals the multifaceted nature of the challenges in the education sector in developing and emerging countries. The Millennium Development Goal summit held in September last year made very clear the important role of education in achieving the Millennium Development Goals as a whole. In order to respond to the pressing problems and contribute to solutions Germany has decided to restructure its development cooperation in the field of education and to draft a new, holistic education strategy. Germany attaches particular importance to improving the quality of the provision of education, in which qualified and sufficient teaching staff are a key factor. The promotion of education in fragile States is also something that Germany rates particularly highly, as people in countries where conflicts are taking place are especially likely to suffer education poverty. The focal region for action is to be Africa, where Germany decided to double its expenditure on the promotion of education by 2013. Germany promotes a holistic approach to education, with a focus directed at strengthening the education system. Each subsector, from early childhood education to literacy for adults, is considered on an inclusive basis, as every stage of teaching and learning builds on the preceding one. Germany champions the approach of lifelong learning and also stresses the importance of non-formal and informal education. The new draft education strategy defines 10 strategic objectives for education: 1. Overcoming educational deprivation is the top priority; 2. Promote education on a holistic basis; 3. Improve the quality of and access to basic education; 4. Further expand vocational education and training; 5. Strengthen higher education and research instead of neglecting the talent available; 6. Replace outmoded concepts with innovative approaches in education; 7. Involve all important actors to a greater degree; 8. Cooperate more closely with the private sector; 9. Make education measures more effective; 10. Make education more relevant and more visible. 1. The situation is dramatic: education is and remains one of the crucial challenges for development and development policy worldwide. The most pressing problems in the field of education in developing countries need to be addressed in a joint effort. 2. Seven hundred fifty-nine million people -- about 17 per cent of adults worldwide -- still lack basic literacy skills, of whom nearly two thirds are women. Despite the progress that has been made, gender disparities with regard to access to and transition from primary to secondary school are still present. Over 67 million children throughout the world still do not attend school, more than half of them girls. The progress towards reaching Millennium Development Goal 2 has slowed. Without joint extra efforts, there is the risk that more children will be out of school in 2015 than today. 3. The quality of school education remains low in many countries. Students leave school without adequate reading, writing and numeracy skills. The shortage of teachers -- 1.9 million teachers are needed by 2015 to achieve primary education -- remains a great challenge at the primary and secondary school levels. 4. Global crises affect national education budgets. 5. African countries are particularly at risk not to achieve the six EFA goals and Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3. 6. Other development problems also have consequences for the level of education in partner countries: poverty is and remains the principal impediment to education. Hunger and undernourishment cause irreparable damage to the cognitive development of children below 5 years of age and jeopardize their educational success. Diseases (first and foremost HIV/AIDS) cause disruptions in education because teaching staff are absent as a result of illness and death. Natural disasters destroy infrastructure and affect national budgets. Countries suffering from armed conflict very often cannot provide education in an adequate way and register the least progress in the achievement of the EFA goals. 7. Development problems have a direct or indirect influence on the educational opportunities of people in developing countries. The equation also works the other way around: deprivation of education causes further development problems. 8. Deprivation of education causes income poverty, and income poverty causes education deprivation. Education poverty is still, even today, one of the key factors hindering social development in many developing countries. Education poverty is said to be suffered by people who have attended fewer than four years of school. In combination with poor-quality provision of education, this has a huge impact on the development opportunities of the individual and of society as a whole: without education, people are unable to realize their potential, and without educated human resources there will be no sustainable economic growth or sustainable social development. 9. Deprivation of education restricts human rights and freedom. Without education, it is generally impossible for individuals to develop their own potential, take their own decisions or lead a life of their own choosing. Education is also a prerequisite for the population's taking an active part in political decision-making processes. Education is therefore a human right. 10. Successes have been achieved. Remarkable progress has already been made towards the attainment of Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3. The average school enrolment rate in developing countries rose significantly, from 82 per cent to 89 per cent, between 1999 and 2008. The improvements were particularly marked in sub-Saharan Africa, with school enrolment rising from 58 per cent to 76 per cent. Despite rising population growth, the number of children not attending school fell from 106 million in 1999 to 67 million in 2008. The overall gender ratio in access to education improved considerably at the primary school level in many developing countries between 1999 and 2008. That shows that partner countries and donors are on the right track, and that investment in education pays. 11. Despite these positive trends, however, it is likely that it will not be possible to achieve most of the EFA goals and Millennium Development Goals by 2015 on a global scale. In particular, it is considered that there is little hope of achieving the goals in countries where armed conflicts are taking place. The time to act is now. As a response to the manifold challenges of the education situation in many partner countries, Germany is currently working on a new strategy for education in order to give its share in countering the most pressing problems in developing and emerging countries. II. The role of education in achieving the Millennium Development Goals 12. The overarching goal of Germany's development policy is to alleviate poverty and to contribute to achieving the Millennium Development Goals worldwide. Education is a key factor and catalyst in achieving not only the education-related Goals 2 and 3, but also the Millennium Development Goals as a whole. Education is a prerequisite for overcoming extreme poverty. Education for girls and women improves their social position over the long term, and thus contributes to gender equity. Awareness-raising, education and research can reduce child mortality, improve the health of mothers and help in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Education promotes sustainable economic development, environmental protection and the conservation of natural resources at the local level. Therefore, Germany has placed education at the centre of its development cooperation. In more detail, German development policy sees the relationship between education and the eight Millennium Development Goals as follows: Millennium Development Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger 13. Education equips people with the necessary knowledge and skills to secure their livelihoods through their own production or by taking on paid work. Education enables agricultural production to be increased in rural regions and makes an important contribution to preventing famines. Furthermore, education enables people to engage in entrepreneurial activity and promote poverty-reducing economic growth by creating jobs. Millennium Development Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education 14. This Millennium Development Goal has the most obvious direct connection with education development cooperation. The promotion of primary education is the foundation for all subsequent levels of learning, which is why it is particularly important for development. At this stage, learners are meant to be successfully taught not only how to read and write, but also the basic functions of arithmetic and other basic knowledge. The fundamental aspect here is learning how to learn. Millennium Development Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women 15. The education of girls and women secures and promotes the social, political and economic development of developing countries. Educated girls/women get married later in life, tend to have fewer children, and make sure that their children are well nourished, receive necessary medical treatment and go to school. In addition, the education of girls and women encourages their participation in decision-making in family, political and economic affairs. Education also improves the productivity of women and girls, which enables them to earn their livelihoods independently. Millennium Development Goal 4: Reduce child mortality 16. Promoting the education of children has a major influence on how they behave later as adults and parents. Children of parents who have at least completed primary school have a greater chance of surviving past their fifth birthday than those of parents with no schooling. In particular, mothers with primary education demand more effective curative and preventive health services for the benefit of their children. The effects of the fight against child mortality are reinforced if the provision of education is backed up by school health programmes that give parents advice on combating malaria, HIV/AIDS and specific childhood diseases. Millennium Development Goal 5: Improve maternal health 17. Links between education and maternal health are strong. Women who went to school tend to have their first child at a later age than women without any school education. The latter often become mothers for the first time when they are still adolescents, a fact that is associated with particular risks to life and health during pregnancy and childbirth. Moreover, pregnant women with appropriate basic education make use of screening examinations at health facilities more often and are more likely to give birth to their children in the presence of professional midwives than those with no education. Millennium Development Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases 18. Education can pass on knowledge about HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. People with no education have less knowledge of infectious pathways, prevention measures and possible treatments for diseases such as HIV/AIDS and malaria. Education also has a particularly important role to play in overcoming discrimination against people affected by HIV/AIDS. Students who have been systematically informed about HIV/AIDS in their school years display greater acceptance of people who are HIV-positive. Millennium Development Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability 19. Education is a matter of strategic importance in ensuring environmental sustainability. Children at school learn values and behaviours that are conducive to a more sustainable way of life. These include learning about environmentally friendly methods of production and modifying consumer behaviour. Education can help to improve the prospects of people living in countries particularly affected by climate change. By integrating disaster control into school curricula, people will be able to develop more effective protective measures. Millennium Development Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development 20. EFA and its Fast Track Initiative (FTI) serve as models for other sectors. As a result of the FTI, donors focused on those countries that were in need of particular support in working to achieve Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3 and the EFA goals. Furthermore, FTI serves as a platform for improving the coordination processes between donors and the applicant countries and thus contributes to the implementation of the Paris Declaration. In order to master global challenges, people are needed who are enabled to participate in economic and social development processes worldwide. Education is a basic prerequisite for this, because only a well-educated population can act independently under its own responsibility, take decisions and bring about change. By promoting education now, Germany also wants to contribute its share to deal with global challenges in this field. III. Facts and figures about German development policy in the field of education 21. Education is a joint task of many. Transparency is essential in promoting education in developing countries on a collaborative basis with partner countries and other donors. Germany is developing its education strategy in a transparent joint process with all relevant actors in order to create trust and encourage common determination. At the same time, transparency regarding the level and the nature of the use of funds is important for our partners so that they can plan for the longer term. Transparency is equally important for the donor community, so that the division of labour and harmonization can be improved in accordance with the principles of Paris and Dakar. 22. Education is one of the key areas of German development policy. Germany is the world's second-largest donor in education among the countries of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). German contributions to the education sector as a whole amounted to Euro1.23 billion in 2009. This is equivalent to roughly 20 per cent of total German bilateral official development assistance. Germany's overall bilateral education official development assistance is divided up among the individual subsectors as follows: in primary education, gross official development assistance disbursements amounted to Euro106 million in 2009, representing 8.6 per cent of bilateral German official development assistance for education. Germany has constantly increased its contributions to primary education since 2005. Gross disbursements for secondary education were Euro5 million in 2009, while gross disbursements for vocational education and training were Euro75 million, equivalent to 6.1 per cent of bilateral German official development assistance for education. The largest proportion of German education official development assistance is directed to the field of higher education, totalling Euro858 million. Of this, Euro662 million is attributable to so-called student-imputed costs in higher education, which originate exclusively from the German federal states for students from developing countries studying in Germany. Official development assistance for higher education accounts for 70 per cent of bilateral German official development assistance for education. The regional distribution of the German funding of education shows that the largest amount of bilateral official development assistance in 2009 went to Asia, with 47 per cent of the funds, followed by Africa, with 24 per cent, and Europe and Latin America, each receiving 12 per cent. The large proportion of official development assistance funds attributable to Asian partner countries can be explained by the large number of students from Asian countries studying in Germany. In the field of primary education in 2009, 47 per cent of official development assistance funds went to Africa, 41 per cent to Asia and 8 per cent to Latin America. In the field of vocational education and training, 52 per cent of bilateral official development assistance funds went to Asia, 35 per cent to Africa, 10 per cent to Latin America and 8 per cent to Europe. With regard to higher education, 54 per cent of official development assistance funds were allocated to Asia, 21 per cent to Africa, 5 per cent to OECD recipient countries in Europe and 3 per cent to partner countries in Latin America. 23. In the context of German bilateral development cooperation with eight partner countries, education was agreed upon as a priority area of cooperation. In general, the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development supports education in almost every partner country, either as an important part of programmes in other sectors (such as energy or health), as a regional project or in the context of non-governmental development cooperation through non-governmental organizations, German political foundations or churches. With its new strategy, Germany counts on increasing the number of partner countries with education as an agreed priority area by 2013. IV. The German vision for education 24. Germany's guiding vision is a holistic approach to education. The central focus of Germany's development approach is the individual person. The vision is more education for all -- from the very beginning, for the whole of life. This holistic approach includes all levels of education: early childhood education and development, primary education, secondary education, vocational education and training, higher education and adult education. It must be possible for all persons to learn and to acquire knowledge throughout their lives. 25. Millennium Development Goal 2 makes it quite clear: primary education is the foundation for the entire education system and for all learning. It equips students to engage in independent learning and to participate in a global information and knowledge society. It is the first stage in the acquisition of skills, which all subsequent stages build on. Basic education includes early childhood and preschool education as well as primary school education, but also out-of-school education for children, young people and adults who have previously had no access to education. 26. Germany understands secondary education as general and vocationally oriented education that follows on from primary education and serves as preparation for higher education or entering the job market. Secondary education will become increasingly important in future as the number of primary school leavers rises in many developing countries in line with growing populations, meaning that the pressure on the provision of secondary education will constantly intensify. 27. Vocational education and training enables individuals to acquire, maintain and further develop skills, abilities and attitudes that are needed for gainful employment. Vocational education enables people to earn an income. This also improves their opportunities to participate in society. Key qualifications obtained through vocational education enable people to shape their own work and life situations. 28. Germany is a world leader in vocational education and training. Thanks to its experience, especially with the dual vocational training model, the link to the labour market and the substantial involvement of the private sector, Germany -- as the world's largest donor in vocational education and training -- has particular comparative advantages in vocational training, looking back on decades of experience and calling upon special expertise that partners explicitly demand. The issue here is to develop precisely tailored solutions for partner countries in accordance with German best practice, with greater proximity to companies at the local level and less focus on central vocational training establishments. 29. Developing and emerging countries need capable leadership elite, among other things, to take on social and political responsibility. A country's experts and leaders are educated at universities, which is why Germany also promotes higher education and academia in its partner countries. Germany sees it as a matter of principle that no one may be denied the chance to become part of that educated elite on account of his or her origin. Development requires science and research, which must be oriented to the needs of the labour market and to the talents of the country. This is where the links between universities and local industry are critical. The mobility of students from developing countries is increased by providing scholarships. Academics who have spent time studying in Germany can advance democratic reforms and good governance in their home countries. At the same time, it is essential to counteract the brain drain. Local capacities have to be built up incountry so that academics will find appropriate work in their homeland. 30. The presence of an adequate pool of well-qualified experts does not give rise to economic growth on its own. It goes without saying that other factors are also important for this. The level of education of a population, however, is one of the decisive preconditions for investment and production. Germany therefore considers the promotion of secondary education, vocational education and training as well as higher education as making a direct contribution to economic growth, which, given fair distribution, leads to the alleviation of poverty (Millennium Development Goal 1). 31. In addition to formal education, Germany promotes non-formal and informal education, attaching particular importance to out-of-school education aimed at strengthening education integrally. Germany considers these forms of learning vitally important, because, among other things, they are well received in those regions where sexuality and health are all too often seen as sensitive matters. Forms of informal and out-of-school education lend themselves very well to conveying content that helps to prevent the further spread of HIV/AIDS (Millennium Development Goal 6). Unconventional learning methods can be used to provide mothers with crucial knowledge about hygiene and also nutritional tips, for example. This can help to save lives and contributes directly to the achievement of Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5. 32. Germany follows the approach of lifelong learning: education must begin in early childhood and continue through all phases of life, right into old age. No one must be excluded from this. For the first time, the German development policy will combine all of these elements in a unified strategy in education. 33. Germany's vision is made more concrete in the 10 aims of its education strategy. These are core themes to be pursued in future German development policy. V. The German draft education strategy for development 34. In early 2011, the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development worked very closely with its partners, such as civil society, development cooperation experts from German implementing agencies, specialists from academia and the private sector, to write the first draft of a holistic education strategy for development policy. On 1 March, the Federal Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development, Dirk Niebel, presented this draft to a wide international audience in Berlin. Emphasis was quite deliberately placed on involving a broad spectrum of all relevant actors in preparing the draft at an early stage. The commitment by Federal Minister Niebel to doubling German funds for education in Africa by 2013 is particularly relevant. It shows Germany's recognition of the special obligation of donor countries to make education a top priority and to increase expenditure on education, at times when international trends are to the contrary. The German education strategy sets out the development-policy framework for how Germany specifically wants to achieve the EFA goals. The 10 aims for education set out in the strategy will also, above and beyond advancing Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3, make a fundamental contribution to the other six Goals, either directly or indirectly. 35. The core issues for the strategy are: improving the quality of and access to primary education, expanding vocational education, strengthening universities and broadening cooperation with business and industry. In addition, as a co-founder and active member of the Education for All Fast Track Initiative (EFA FTI), Germany also contributes to the achievement of Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3 and the six EFA goals in the context of this important international process. The FTI was brought into being in order to lend particular support to those countries which would have had no chance of achieving the above goals without additional financial assistance. Germany's payments to the FTI to date amount to Euro14.5 million. Further contributions at the present level are already firmly scheduled up to 2013. Germany sets great store by the joint efforts carried out as part of the EFA FTI, and consequently, within the framework of its new education strategy, further specific measures to provide even greater support to the Initiative are envisaged. 36. For Germany, education is a strategic key to development. The challenge of making good-quality education available for all is more urgent than ever. Germany stands for a holistic approach to education -- from primary education through secondary education and vocational education and training to higher education and the provision of non-formal basic and further training. Germany's strategic education objectives are set out in the 10 aims for education, which will serve as a sound foundation for all of Germany's activities in development cooperation in the field of education. 1. Overcoming educational poverty is the top priority 37. In order to expand the promotion of education in development cooperation effectively and in a sustainable way, Germany wants to make education a priority area with a significantly increased number of partner countries and to strengthen regional education programmes. Since Africa remains the continent with the largest education deficit and the need for education is most dramatic there, Germany will double its development contributions for education in Africa by 2013 and also increase its contributions to education at the global level. 2. Promote education as an integral whole 38. Germany wants to strengthen education systems in their entirety. The promotion of individual areas of education will no longer occur in isolation, but with reference to adjacent areas. 39. Germany also wants to continue to shape the pioneering role of its development cooperation and to increasingly put forward this holistic approach in both bilateral and multilateral cooperation, and establish it to serve as an example. To that end, Germany will actively make use of our opportunities to help shape matters with respect to multilateral and supra-national donors and institutions within the scope of like-minded dialogues and consultations. To supplement its bilateral education projects and programmes for developing countries, Germany also wants to continue to play an important part in the commitment to education within multilateral organizations such as the European Union and intends to make the case in Brussels for a strategic realignment and deeper embedding of education in European development policy. In close cooperation with its partner countries, Germany will promote an effective division of labour with other bilateral and multilateral donors in the education sector. 3. Improve the quality of and access to primary education 40. This objective will permit Germany to make a direct contribution to Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3. Primary education will continue to occupy a key position in our education promotion policy. Germany will champion high-quality primary education that is accessible, without discrimination. Good-quality primary education is the key to success at all subsequent stages of education and in all its forms. In order to improve the quality of training, Germany will focus in particular on promoting teacher training in our partner countries. Germany is also committed to early childhood education and development, at which stage crucial cognitive and social prerequisites are established for all subsequent learning processes. Germany wants to promote talent beginning with primary education. This includes both providing special learning opportunities of high quality and improving access to good education. Achievement should be rewarded and promoted, irrespective of gender, social origin, ethnic background, physical impairment or religion. 41. Germany will intensify its cooperation with the EFA FTI. Above and beyond its role in helping to shape content, Germany will continue to make funds available for enabling partner countries to tap further funds to improve their national education systems. At the same time, Germany will be actively involved in the implementation of the EFA FTI reforms, which are aimed at making procedures and structures more efficient and effective. 42. Germany sees particular responsibility in the field of education in countries affected by fragility and conflict. Education systems cannot perform well in the face of violence and conflict. The Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development will, therefore, closely dovetail the promotion of education with peacebuilding and crisis prevention, as well as with the promotion of democracy and good governance. 4. Further expand vocational education and training 43. Governments alone cannot overcome the challenges in the education sector. Building on the basic principles of dual vocational education and training -- in particular demand-oriented, decentralized, practical and modular training -- Germany will therefore initiate new vocational education and training partnerships between the private and public sectors in our partner countries. New avenues will be explored and will make it easier to use private know-how and private capital for development processes. Germany wants to contribute to raising awareness worldwide of the importance of vocational education and training for the long-term competitiveness of countries' economies in a rapidly changing world. Germany will increasingly train local experts on the ground in conjunction with business -- especially for industries of the future in the fields of renewable energy and/or natural resources, and to provide people with infrastructure, energy, financial or health services. In particular, Germany wants to promote all those industries in which local private companies are represented and where there is particularly high demand in the labour market, and those that are innovative and focus on the provision of services. By promoting vocational education, Germany will contribute to the achievement of Millennium Development Goals 1, 7 and 8, among others. 5. Strengthen higher education and science instead of neglecting talent 44. University graduates are crucial change agents in the development processes of our partner countries. As national decision makers, they shape and are responsible for developments in politics, business and society. In promoting higher education and science as part of our development policy, Germany will devise concepts precisely tailored to the differing needs of its partner countries. In addition, contact with alumni and academics from developing countries will be intensified in order to make better use of their expertise for the development of their home countries. Germany echoes the demands of civil society and churches, and wants to increase support for repatriation in order to prevent institutional brain drain and thus help to strengthen the academic strata in its partner countries. Germany will increase the level of promotion of innovative regional and supra-regional education projects in higher education -- specifically with a view to promising industries for the future, such as those concerning renewable energy, climate change, water management and securing the supply of raw materials. In this connection, this engagement is to be seen as a direct contribution to supporting environmental sustainability (Millennium Development Goal 7). 6. Innovative approaches to education instead of obsolete concepts 45. Germany will break new ground in the testing of innovative education approaches. Germany is therefore planning five flagship projects which pick up on our new conceptual approaches particularly convincingly: (a) In primary and secondary education, a regional programme is under implementation that will support partner countries in Africa through capacity-building in order to better tap existing multinational financing options in the education sector. The focus in this case is on countries wishing to improve their administrative capacity, often as a result of conflict. Beneficiaries can be Government as well as civil society. Close cooperation with the EFA FTI secretariat is part of the concept; (b) In vocational education and training, Germany wants to shape the innovative instrument of triangular cooperation with emerging economies. In this way, German experience is linked with that of partner countries and thereby can contribute to South-South networking; (c) In Africa, Germany intends to improve the quality of higher education. For this purpose, Germany wants to support the African Union in establishing a panAfrican university. The German contribution to this university network will be through an innovative combination of our higher-education instruments; (d) Free media encourage Governments to engage in good governance. They uncover shortcomings and enable people to take well-informed decisions. Germany will therefore promote the training of media professionals, especially the training of journalists, in new programmes in Africa and Latin America. In this field, synergies will be exploited by further dovetailing German expertise in the training of media professionals with instruments of technical and financial cooperation; (e) In order to devote particular support to promoting talent, Germany intends to expand its provision of special leadership training schemes for the local leaders of tomorrow in partner countries. 7. Increase the involvement of all important stakeholders 46. Education is the responsibility of States and Governments, but at the same time it is a task for society as a whole. Interchange between governmental and nongovernmental actors must be promoted in order to create a demand-driven, effective range of educational opportunities and integrate various points of view. Germany therefore wants to involve churches, as well as civil society and the private sector in Germany and the partner countries, more closely than before in development cooperation. In order to increase the involvement of civil society in partner countries, German development policy wants to pool forces, embark on new paths and intensify its cooperation with German political foundations and their decentralized networks. 8. Cooperate more with the private sector 47. Germany wants to enhance the crucial role of private enterprises for the development of countries. Germany will therefore support companies, for example, by training urgently needed local experts and managerial personnel. At the same time, Germany wants to call on them to play their part when it is necessary to finance the provision of training for members of non-governmental organizations and the population in connection with local investment or to make training opportunities available for local workers, for example, within the framework of public-private partnerships. 48. Germany will also better integrate concepts such as corporate social responsibility, innovative methods of education financing, and technology transfer into its approaches in promoting education in development policy. Germany intends to expand new forms of cooperation with local and German private enterprises -- such as education fairs, the promotion of interactive networks and the targeted training of experts to meet demand in the private sector. In this way, Germany wants to contribute to the leveraging of private investment in partner countries specifically for this type of development. This cooperation with the private sector is guided by the 10 principles of the United Nations Global Compact, which cover human rights, labour, the environment and anti-corruption efforts. 9. Raise the effectiveness of education measures 49. Increasing investment in bilateral and regional education promotion and improving the effectiveness and efficiency of Germany's contributions are two sides of the same coin: German development policy will double its investment in education in Africa by 2013, increase it on a global scale and expand the number of partner countries with education as a priority area. This goes along with significantly raising the quality, and hence the effectiveness, of Germany's programmes in the education sector by performing more intensive independent evaluations. In order to better evaluate whether the objectives will be achieved, Germany is developing education indicators that make the success of development activities measurable according to plausibility criteria. Germany wants to make its actions comparable and to contribute to the transparency needed. 50. Increasing efficiency is a crucial concern for Germany's bilateral development cooperation as well as in multilateral education contributions. In order to raise the effectiveness of multilateral initiatives, Germany will continue to support the reform of the international education initiative Education for All and the associated Fast Track Initiative. With the objective of increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of development cooperation in education, Germany is still committed to the principles of the international division of labour as codified in the European Union Code of Conduct on Division of Labour in Development Policy and the OECD International Good Practice Principles for Country-Led Division of Labour and Complementarity. Germany therefore coordinates its contributions with the international donor community and is committed to joint analyses and evaluations in the education sector in partner countries. A further step to improve the effectiveness of German development cooperation in general was to merge our governmental implementing organizations of technical cooperation, GTZ, InWEnt and DED, to form the new implementing organization Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). 10. Increase the relevance and visibility of education 51. To highlight the close link between lack of education and poverty, and thereby also illustrate the connection between education and the Millennium Development Goals, Germany wants to put education more firmly and visibly on the agenda of development policy. Germany wants to increase the transparency of development policy, to motivate citizens to support its objectives, and to raise awareness of matters relating to education and development policy among young people in particular -- as the future decision makers in society -- and encourage their engagement in civil society. Germany will advance this goal in the context of its development policy awareness-raising and education work, which supports the education work of relevant actors, such as non-governmental organizations in Germany. VI. The way ahead 52. The remaining challenges for the future can be tackled successfully only in a joint effort by all stakeholders. Universal primary education (Millennium Development Goal 2) is likely to be achieved in almost half of the developing countries and most emerging economies by 2015. Gender equality is on a good course but needs further attention. Germany will make a particular effort to support those countries where there is a high risk that Millennium Development Goals 2 and 3 might not be achieved on time. Success in increasing access to primary education requires solutions for education at further levels and allows more concentration on quality in education. Therefore, Germany will respond to the rising demand in these fields and support quality at all levels of education. 53. Unforeseeable environmental disasters such as that currently occurring in Fukushima strengthen our resolve to continue to invest in forward-looking branches of renewable energy. Germany has long-standing experience in renewable energy. Therefore, it is only fitting that Germany further promotes the training of local experts and managerial staff in these fields. 54. Far-reaching problems such as climate change demand forward-looking provision of education today aimed at elites in partner countries who are oriented towards the future and who will be able to respond independently in their localities to the consequences of global problems. 55. There have recently been impressive examples of what an important role media can play in overcoming autocratic systems. Value-oriented education promotes good governance, liberal and democratic values, and a critical attitude towards Governments. Media help to disseminate these values and information. That is why Germany wants to invest more in the training of media professionals. 56. It is also to be expected that the consequences of the global financial and economic crisis will continue to have a negative impact on the national budgets of many countries, and therefore also on their education budgets. This is a question of reallocation and of political will on the part of donor and partner countries alike. 57. At the same time, Germany sees the urgency of identifying alternative financing options. The private sector must become more involved in the training of experts locally in partner countries. This is a win-win situation: the companies receive excellently trained experts, and their funds complement those from the Government's coffers. There will also be an increasing number of public-private partnership projects for education. The mobilization of new funding sources for education is subject of the Taskforce on Innovative Financing for Education, in which Germany actively participates. Several types of new financing resources, such as a sports tax on transfers of players, notably in the football sector (soccer levy), a levy on teacher trade unions in countries of the North or the setting-up of an international fund on the basis of individual voluntary and corporate contributions (legacy fund) are currently being discussed. Germany will also pursue triangular development cooperation with emerging economies. 58. The importance of education in achieving each of the Millennium Development Goals has been demonstrated above. In order to pool results and exploit reciprocal cause-and-effect relationships between the sectors (particularly health and rural development), cross-sectoral projects involving education will be further expanded in future. 59. Germany challenges itself with ambitious development-policy goals -- which are nothing less than helping to make the world more equitable through education -- for each individual, as an opportunity to realize his or her development potential, and for society as a whole, as an opportunity for more democratic and more sustainable economic and social development. We can only do this together. The time to act is now. 