%%%EDUCATION|RIGHT TO EDUCATION|

Substantive session of 2011 Geneva, 4-29 July 2011 * E/2011/100. Item 2 (b) of the provisional agenda* High-level segment: annual ministerial review Statement submitted by International Organization for the Right to Education and Freedom of Education, International Volunteerism Organization for Women, Education and Development and Istituto Internazionale Maria Ausiliatrice delle Salesiane di Don Bosco, non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. * The present statement is being issued without formal editing. Statement* :: Recalling that the development of the human person is the primary objective of education as universally recognized by international instruments, the Millennium Development Goals and the Agenda for Development, :: Noting that the emergency situations and instability to which many children are exposed pose new challenges to education, :: Reaffirming that persons living in vulnerable situations must receive particular attention in order to ensure de jure and de facto equal opportunities in education, We remain convinced that education in the widest and truest sense consists of all of the actions taken for the integral development of the human person's potential. Education is not limited to teaching and school activities in the narrowest sense. Rather, it takes the form of specific attention to the human person through a wide range of activities. According to this conceptual framework, school is the privileged, but not the exclusive, basis of learning. At least as important as formal education are informal education and the various types of educational support that effectively bridge the gap between the most vulnerable pupils and other schoolgoers. Any action taken in the area of education should therefore aim to create a new educational culture and, indeed, to adopt a human rights approach allowing each pupil to develop fully and confront difficult situations. As regards the right of the most vulnerable groups to education, the experience of our partners in the field shows that free education and the presence of adequate structures do not in themselves guarantee every individual an equal opportunity for a successful education. They are admittedly the first, necessary step towards that objective; but they are not enough. Action in the area of education should go beyond structure and school materials. Through teaching staff, it should also tackle the practical difficulties faced by pupils and families and, hence, the issues facing society as a whole. Education should be a motivating and encouraging force, especially for children and younger persons at risk. It should be able to convince them that there is an alternative to the street, prison or child labour. It should give them the tools to become active and informed members of society. We therefore recommend that in implementing policies on education, Member States should place particular emphasis on teaching staff, providing them with the training and means to give fresh attention to pupils and their families. 