%%%EDUCATION|RECONCILIATION|INTERCULTURAL EDUCATION|

Substantive session of 2011 Geneva, 4-29 July 2011 * E/2011/100. Item 2 (b) of the provisional agenda* High-level segment: annual ministerial review Statement submitted by Foundation for Subjective Experiments and Research, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. * The present statement is being issued without formal editing. According to the substantive agenda of the Economic and Social Council high-level segment, innovation is a priority of the Council to strengthen the Millennium Development Goals. Innovation requires efficient education tools, especially in fragile States in conflict or post-conflict situations. Primary education needs to be developed within a holistic approach to education; many factors outside of school affect the likelihood of a child enrolling. S.E.R. Foundation's goals are focused on supporting well-being, personal growth and development, especially of children, in all areas of life. Therefore, S.E.R. Foundation put five best practices of education and reconciliation projects together from Burundi, Germany and Switzerland. They show different aspects of reconciliation for specific groups of children, have many years of experience, and have won several awards. The specific topic of S.E.R. Foundation's presentation is "Universal education through reconciliation". In the Rainbow House, Germany, living together among all generations in a sound and stable environment is possible. Lost values and traditions are revived and lived. S.E.R. Kinderhilfe, Germany, has been advancing children and youngsters from 6 to 14 years in its spare time since 1997. It is open to all social levels, religions and cultures. Children have the opportunity to be together, be creative and develop social skills with others. The project works thanks to volunteers and donations and is welcomed by children, parents and politicians. The Ideas Office, Switzerland, was set up in 2002 in a bilingual school in order to contribute to dialogue between cultures and to reduce tensions. Troubled children can deposit their worries in a letter box. Volunteer counsellors invite them to come and discuss their problems. The children look for a way out of their distress together. Monitoring ensures that the measures have been carried out and that the solution is lasting. Through this reconciliation- and solution-oriented approach, children's social competence is strengthened and prepares them for a responsible life in a free society of peace and tolerance. Youth for Peace and Reconciliation: The non-governmental organization JAMAA, Burundi, promotes a conscious youth, and its tools are dialogue, exchanges and information for better understanding. Their cartoon entitled "The Best Choice" was selected by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization as a good tool to educate children about reconciliation. The general objective is to mobilize young people in particular and the population in general on their role in consolidating peace and reconciliation. Radio Chico, Switzerland, links young people and adults around the world, sparks curiosity and self-responsibility and makes people aware of what is good and beautiful in the world. It helps to spread the message of dealing with humans and nature in a respectful way and contributes to a stable and sustainable world. In interviews by Radio Chico, children and youth are asked about their questions, feelings, wishes and vision they have for their future in a sustainable society with high ethical values and on the basis of education and reconciliation. 