%%%DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|HUMAN RIGHTS EDUCATION|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|

Substantive session of 2011 Geneva, 4-29 July 2011 * E/2011/100 and Corr.1. Item 2 (b) of the provisional agenda* High-level segment: annual ministerial review Statement submitted by IUS PRIMI VIRI International Association, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. The twentieth century produced a large volume of texts and declarations on the rights of human beings. But 60 years after the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted, and 16 years after the proclamation of the Decade for Human Rights Education, destruction and conflicts still dominate the world. Declarations of goodwill have to be followed by actions. We urgently need to create something to help build a new society capable of solving conflicts. Even the Millennium Development Goals on universal primary education or girls' education are not enough. We can change this situation through a different educational approach with an integrated methodology and effective communication which are based on the true values of life. Education must allow individuals to choose, understand and achieve the main purpose of life, and grow up with the awareness that no one is a slave to another individual or nation, and that all must be united in building a world fit for all human beings. What shall we do in order to favour a change towards a universal education that is designed for the good of all mankind? A real mentality change is needed through education, including of women who can nurture a new generation with a mentality based on unselfish values of dignity, respect, love, justice, freedom and finally create this utopian world we are all dreaming of. IUS PRIMI VIRI International Association, whose institutional purpose is to promote the consciousness of human rights through an integrated multidisciplinary methodology to give scientific value to human rights foundations, intends therefore to realize a Mediterranean project for managing and resolving conflicts through education, a pilot course for trainers, especially women, as women educate and train the new generations in their first years of life. The course will provide knowledge and skills for the promotion and defence of human rights and for the management of conflicts arising at both the macro and the microcultural level. Its interdisciplinary structure will help to train trainers to prepare projects and actions to foster knowledge for peace, sustainable development, and intercultural dialogue. It will be divided into three modules. The first will be devoted to human rights as a universal tool for recognizing each other as human beings, integrating differences, and sharing values that do not belong to single cultures, but to mankind in general; the second will focus on human rights education through an effective communication to provide trainers with effective tools to establish partnerships in their field of activity; and the third module will include conflict management and resolution. * The present statement is being issued without formal editing. 