%%%CONFERENCES|WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT|

Substantive session of 2012 New York, 2-27 July 2012 Item 13 (k) of the provisional agenda* Economic and environmental questions: women and development Statement submitted by Women's World Summit Foundation, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. Convening of a Fifth World Conference on Women as a means of achieving the Millennium Development Goals While two of the Millennium Development Goals are specific to women, nothing can be achieved without the full participation of women. As a means of empowerment and equality, a Fifth World Conference on Women would promote productive capacity, employment and decent work for women. Efforts to eradicate poverty for women in turn would contribute to inclusive, sustainable and equitable economic growth at all levels. We strongly appreciate and support the statement made on International Women's Day, 8 March 2012, by the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who jointly proposed the convening of a global conference on women by the United Nations in 2015, 20 years after the last women's summit in Beijing. In their statement, the need for Member States' support was emphasized at the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly. A Fifth World Conference on Women could tackle emerging issues, in particular those relating to women and political participation, Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), which deals with women and peace and security, equal access to decent work and decision-making and the involvement of rural women and girls. Solutions that have a positive impact on women will benefit nations and societies as a whole. Real changes in society occur when a critical number of people change attitudes and biases. A tipping point is reached, after which perceptions shift, and the inclusion of women at all levels of decision-making becomes possible. Towards this end, a Fifth World Conference on Women, with the full use of communications technology, would raise consciousness about problems and solutions worldwide, and through the involvement of women, would bring about real change, which achieving the Millennium Development Goals would signify. We encourage the member States of the Economic and Social Council to initiate and support the resolution at the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly on convening a Fifth World Conference on Women. 