%%%EMPLOYMENT|

Substantive session of 2012 New York, 2-27 July 2012 * E/2012/100. Item 2 (c) of the provisional agenda* High-level segment: annual ministerial review Statement submitted by Fundación Hernandiana, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. Promoting employment: our goals The present statement is directed towards achieving decent employment as a foundation for development. The following has to be done: (a) Get Governments to commit to and work seriously and jointly towards achieving decent and full employment. This is a mission of the United Nations; (b) Create employment demand where there are not enough jobs and establish development goals locally and immediately in a bigger context in line with the Millennium Development Goals. This is an immediate mission for leaders from each and every country, through the daily work of technicians; (c) Regenerate work culture to instil in people the necessity of working. This is a mission to be led by politicians, teachers and non-governmental organizations from each country, not only to instil the concept of working but also its importance for development; (d) The future has to be prepared through education for development. This is a task to be performed by teachers and non-governmental organizations, who know that development is always in progress and never ends. It will exist and renew itself as long as there are people on Earth; (e) Discourage speculation, profits without work and effort, the leisure culture, unlimited Keynesianism and the exploitation of human beings. These tasks involve every one of us. If we fulfil these tasks, we will promote productive capacity and decent employment and eradicate poverty in the context of growth. There are no magic formulas. The only way is to neutralize adverse factors. As for whether it is possible to accomplish the Goals despite these adverse factors, the answer is that if we do not try, it will be impossible. The questions the organization would like to raise are as follows: :: Are Member States willing to commit to and work seriously and jointly with other States towards promoting full employment without putting political interests and power before this goal? :: Are economic corporations willing to give up spaces and profits to support this vital aim we are pursuing? :: Are non-governmental organizations willing to work fully and unconditionally to fulfil these goals in order to establish culture and employment demand as immediate aims, among others? These are the main commitments to conquer. They should not be left in spoken words; they should be public and well-known commitments for immediate action. Whether or not our goals are achieved, the important thing is to try. 