%%%PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES|UNEMPLOYMENT|

Substantive session of 2012 New York, 2-27 July 2012 High-level segment: annual ministerial review Statement submitted by Community-Based Rehabilitation Network (South Asia), a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. Look at the person, not at the disability It has been over six decades since many countries in South Asia, as matured democracies, have taken many small and big steps to create opportunities for persons with disabilities at the State and central levels. Some countries like Afghanistan and Sri Lanka have experienced conflicts, and India has several challenges at the socioeconomic level. Bangladesh has natural disasters which cause major upheavals almost every year; and Nepal, Maldives and Bhutan have their own challenges. The organization would like to bring to the attention of the member States of the Economic and Social Council that persons with disabilities in South Asia live in the same communities and are equally affected by development as well as by poverty, conflicts, and natural disasters -- just like any other citizen of the countries they reside in. Persons with disabilities need no charity, but need opportunities. Here, the organization wishes to quote Stephen W. Hawking: "Disability need not be an obstacle to success. I have had motor neuron disease for practically all my adult life. Yet it has not prevented me from having a prominent career in astrophysics and a happy family life". It is so true. It is not disability that is an obstacle, but the social and political, economic, and cultural environments that create obstacles in a person's life. Such obstacles affect all genders and age groups equally. However, it is apparent that women, young children and senior citizens with disabilities are affected more severely than others. Young men and women with disabilities are frustrated without jobs; in the current environment of globalization and privatization, there is less social responsibility and only token gestures to include persons with disabilities as a part of the corporate social responsibility culture. This is not enough since persons with disabilities have no jobs, despite quotas provided by the Governments and the corporate social responsibility efforts of private employers. The organization argues the need to move beyond mere quota systems and corporate social responsibility, and replace them with a vision and policy developed by Governments to recruit persons with disabilities on a priority basis. Private companies must develop policies on the reasonable accommodation and recruitment of persons with disabilities on a preferential basis. It seems a dream to have a world that recognizes the intrinsic worth of a person with disabilities and appreciates his/her efforts to overcome the barriers and still manage to apply for a job based on potential and qualifications and not on a disability label. The organization looks forward to the day when quotas and corporate social responsibility are replaced by "preferential" and "priority" policies in recognizing the talents of persons with disabilities. 