%%%REGIONAL PROGRAMMES|REGIONAL SECURITY|AFRICA|AGRICULTURE|FOOD SECURITY|RURAL DEVELOPMENT|INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT|INTERNATIONAL TRADE|MARKET ACCESS|ENVIRONMENT|POPULATION|URBANIZATION|HUMAN DEVELOPMENT|RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|RECOMMENDATIONS|

Committee for Programme and Coordination Fifty-first session Organizational session, 28 April 2011 Substantive session, 6 June-1 July 2011 * E/AC.51/2011/1. Item 4 (b) of the provisional agenda* Coordination questions: New Partnership for Africa's Development United Nations system support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development Report of the Secretary-General Summary The contribution of the United Nations is one of the important dimensions of the international community's contribution to the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) of the African Union. The present report provides an overview of individual and collective activities undertaken by entities of the United Nations system since June 2010 in support of NEPAD. The overview is prepared according to the nine clusters established under the Regional Coordination Mechanism of the United Nations agencies working in Africa convened by the Economic Commission for Africa. The report examines various dimensions of individual and collective activities by entities of the United Nations system in support of NEPAD, including resource mobilization, as well as the challenges faced by the United Nations system, in particular in the light of the recent crises in African countries 1. At its forty-fifth session, the Committee for Programme and Coordination recommended that the General Assembly should request the Secretary-General to report to the Committee, at its forty-sixth session, and annually thereafter, on the support by the United Nations system to the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) of the African Union (A/60/16, para. 237). The request was endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/244. II. Support for the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's Development 2. The report describes the activities undertaken by United Nations system entities in support of NEPAD since June 2010, drawing on inputs received from the individual entities. This support is organized around the nine thematic clusters corresponding to the priorities of NEPAD. A. Infrastructure development 3. The infrastructure cluster coordinated by the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) comprises four sub-clusters: water and sanitation, energy, information and communication technologies, and transport. An important development was the launch of the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa at the fifteenth ordinary session of the African Union Summit in Kampala in July 2010, which now guides the cluster's activities. 4. In the area of water and sanitation, the cluster provided substantial support to the African Ministerial Council on Water for the development and harmonization of water policies and strategies. It also helped to raise funds for the African Water Facility, disseminate information through publications such as the Africa Water Report and the Africa Water Journal, and strengthen the water units of the regional economic communities and river and lake basin organizations. 5. The World Bank continued to support the NEPAD short-term action plan on infrastructure and administered, through a multi-donor trust fund, $191 million for the Nile Basin Initiative. Through the Initiative the member countries seek to utilize the river's resources in a sustainable manner, share substantial socio-economic benefits and promote regional peace and security. Support under the trust fund is delivered through technical assistance projects and investments at the sub-basin level. 6. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), together with the Global Environment Facility (GEF), proposed a strategic framework for the management of the Nubian aquifer project. A model simulating the behaviour of the aquifer in response to significant drawdown was developed, and the existing legal framework for using this shared water resource was reviewed in the countries involved (Chad, Egypt and the Sudan). 7. In the field of energy, ECA's emphasis was on access, efficiency and renewables. Support was given to the African Union Commission for the preparation of the Africa Energy Vision 2030. ECA also conducted studies on rural energy systems, sustainable biofuels development and the establishment of a clean energy finance facility by the African Development Bank (AfDB). 8. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat continued to support NEPAD through its initiative on capacity-building for inter-regional electricity access and supply in Africa, strengthening the capacity of regional economic communities to establish the appropriate policy, institutional and regulatory frameworks for regional electricity grid interconnection. During the review period, a capacity-building study tour of the Southern Africa Power Pool and Eskom in South Africa was organized, for 16 participants from the Eastern Africa Power Pool and the Central Africa Power Pool. 9. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and GEF conducted feasibility assessments for the establishment of mini-hydropower stations in various African countries. UNIDO also assisted the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in establishing the Regional Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency in Praia. The Centre will, inter alia, promote the development of renewable energy and energy efficiency markets in West Africa and implement demonstration projects with a potential for regional scaling-up. 10. In the area of information and communications technology development, the Regional Coordination Mechanism cluster helped to formulate the African Regional Action Plan on the Knowledge Economy and provided substantive inputs into a 2009 African Union summit meeting on the theme, "Information and communications technology in Africa: challenges and prospects for development". It is currently collaborating in the implementation of a project on the harmonization of information and communications technology policies in Africa. 11. In the field of transport, ECA's work focused on providing support for the implementation of the Sub-Saharan African Transport Policy Programme and the implementation of the Yamoussoukro Decision on liberalized access to air transport markets. B. Governance 12. The governance cluster, coordinated by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), supports the governance programmes of the African Union Commission, the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency and the regional economic communities. The cluster's 2010-2012 business plan is closely aligned to the African Union Commission strategic plan (2009-2012) and the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency business plan (2010-2014). 13. The annual retreat of the cluster, held in September 2010, agreed on a new sub-cluster structure: economic and corporate governance, led by ECA; human rights, led by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); elections, led by the United Nations Office to the African Union; public service and administration, led by ECA/UNDP; and democracy and governance, led by UNDP. Cluster members, in particular UNDP, ECA and AfDB, continued to provide advisory and technical services and financial support to the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency. 14. In their support to the African Peer Review Mechanism, United Nations agencies supported missions to Djibouti and Sierra Leone and a country review mission in Zambia. UNDP and ECA examined how four countries designed, costed and integrated their African Peer Review Mechanism national plans of action into national development plans. UNDP also provided institutional support to the secretariat of the Mechanism and conducted sensitization meetings for parliamentarians and civil society, to promote better participation in the process. As a result, the number of countries that have acceded to the Mechanism has reached 30, out of which 14 countries have completed the review. 15. ECA publishes the African Governance Report, which assesses and monitors the progress of African countries on governance, identifies capacity gaps in governance institutions, and makes policy recommendations on how to improve governance on the continent. Its flagship publication Economic Report on Africa contains an extensive analysis of recent economic and social developments on the continent as well as current and emerging development issues. The 2011 edition focuses on the role of the State in economic transformation and advocates for a stronger State role in guiding development efforts and for strengthening the capacity and accountability of States in that regard. 16. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs continued to collaborate with the African Association for Public Administration and Management to enhance the knowledge and skills of public service employees in Africa. In November 2010, it facilitated the thirty-second Round-table Conference in Durban, South Africa. It also facilitated a session on enhancing public administration effectiveness through strengthening local governance leadership capacity. 17. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) focused its support on electoral processes, capacity-building for parliamentarians to support women's empowerment agendas and gender-responsive civic and voter education. In the Sudan, it collaborated closely with the National Electoral Commission and African Union election observers and monitors to strengthen gender equality throughout the electoral process. As a result, over 600 women candidates and 86 political parties, as well as 400 journalists, benefited from its capacity-building activities. To learn about Rwanda's experience in translating the constitutional principle of gender equality into action, a study visit was organized for 25 South Sudanese parliamentarians. 18. The United Nations Global Compact Office, together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), signatories to the Convention on Business Integrity and a development partner, convened a round table on anti-corruption in Lagos, Nigeria, in 2010, at which Nigerian business executives endorsed the first global disclosure framework on corporate anti-corruption efforts. They pledged to integrate the principles in their individual operations and disclosure efforts. 19. The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) provided assistance in the preparation, amendment and adoption of new competition laws in eight countries and organized training courses and seminars related to competition law. It also contributed to the establishment of competition agencies in a number of countries. C. Peace and security 20. The peace and security cluster is co-chaired by the United Nations Office to the African Union on behalf of the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the secretariat of the African Union Peace and Security Council. The cluster comprises three sub-clusters: the peace and security architecture of the African Union; post-conflict reconstruction and development; and human rights, justice and reconciliation. 21. The Department of Political Affairs provided support to the African Union Commission in the areas of conflict prevention, mediation support, electoral assistance, gender mainstreaming and the African Union border programme. It also continued to enhance its cooperation with subregional organizations on conflict prevention and mediation, electoral assistance and post-conflict peacebuilding. Through the United Nations Office for West Africa, it sought to enhance the partnership between the United Nations and ECOWAS with respect to conflict prevention, peace consolidation and the promotion of good governance. Joint good offices and mediation missions were dispatched to Benin, Guinea, the Niger and Togo to promote dialogue and secure the continued cooperation of all key national stakeholders on the implementation of peace and political processes. In August 2010, the Department began implementing a project aimed at enhancing the early-warning, mediation and conflict-prevention capacity of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS). 22. The Department is fully engaged with the Southern African Development Community (SADC) in implementing a mutually agreed cooperation programme on conflict prevention. In April 2010, it established a liaison team with SADC, based in Gaborone. In December 2010, it deployed a senior political adviser to Madagascar to work with the United Nations country team to provide coordinated United Nations support to the SADC mediation team. To improve the effectiveness of the African Union-United Nations mediation partnerships, the Department, the African Union and the Folke Bernadotte Academy organized the second joint African Union-United Nations course on capacity-building in dialogue and mediation through experience sharing in Nairobi in October 2010. 23. In line with the African Union Commission strategic plan (2009-2012), support from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support focused on the operational development of the African peace and security architecture and the African standby forces. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations also contributed to the development of the Continental Early Warning System through cooperation with its situation centre and the African Union's situation room. 24. In consultation with the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on Africa, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa prepared the Secretary-General's comprehensive review of the implementation of the recommendations contained in the (1998) report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa (see A/65/152-S/2010/526). Based on a review of achievements and an identification of challenges in the implementation of the recommendations made in 1998, the report proposed a more proactive United Nations engagement with Africa, aligned with the continent's priorities. 25. With the addition of Guinea and Liberia, the number of African countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission rose from four to six during the reporting period. The Commission continued to deepen its partnership with the African Union by holding an annual consultation meeting with the African Union Peace and Security Council in New York in July 2010. The Peacebuilding Fund currently provides funding for peacebuilding activities in 14 African countries. The Commission assists these countries by providing political support and accompaniment in the transition from war to durable peace, helping to marshal resources for agreed priorities, and fostering coordinated action among all relevant actors engaged in peacebuilding in these countries. 26. UNODC continued to support the implementation of the Programme of Action for Africa (2006-2010) on strengthening the rule of law and the criminal justice systems in Africa. It also provided technical assistance to the African Union Commission and various regional and subregional organizations and mechanisms, including NEPAD, for the implementation of the African Union Plan of Action on Drug Control and Crime Prevention (2007-2012). 27. In collaboration with the United Nations country teams, UN-Women leveraged its support to Member States for the elaboration and implementation of national action plans on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as evidenced by their adoption in Côte d'Ivoire, Liberia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone. Key elements included the prevention of gender-based violence and the protection of survivors, the participation and representation of women in peace processes, and training peacekeeping forces in women's human rights and issues related to gender-based violence. In Somalia, support from UN-Women and the United Nations gender theme group led to the establishment of a task force on resolution 1325 (2000) in June 2010, with UN-Women playing the role of secretariat. 28. UNHCR worked closely with UN-Women and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) on continental programmes related to the protection and assistance of women and children affected by armed conflict. The long-standing and strong partnership between UNHCR and the African Union resulted in the adoption of the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa. To date, the Convention has 31 signatures and 4 ratifications, and is expected to prevent forced displacement and improve the conditions of its victims. D. Agriculture, food security and rural development 29. The cluster supports the NEPAD agenda for agriculture, food security and rural development, in particular through the implementation of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme. A key outcome of the cluster meeting held in November 2010 was an agreement on the formulation of a comprehensive and integrated capacity-building programme for the African Union Commission and the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency. 30. The support of the cluster helped the country round-table process to gain considerable momentum. As at March 2011, 23 countries and one regional economic community (ECOWAS) had signed their compacts, which outline their strategy for implementation of the Programme. A total of 19 of the 23 countries have prepared detailed investment plans. The Programme's development partners' task team, which seeks to ensure synchronized support at the country and regional levels and to mobilize technical, political and financial support from the institutions it represents, also provided support in the formulation of Programme compacts and investment plans. As a result, and with the support of the International Fund for Agriculture (IFAD) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), five African countries successfully accessed funds from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Programme. 31. The World Bank has been administering a $31 million multi-donor trust fund for the implementation of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme since 2008. It has also administered trust funds specifically to support the regional institutions responsible for the implementation of pillar IV, agricultural research. Two such trust funds are currently under implementation: $25 million for the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa and $52 million for the Association for Strengthening Agricultural Research in Eastern and Central Africa. 32. During the reporting period, FAO assisted the African Union Commission and the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency in the preparation of the documents for the Conference of African Ministers for Agriculture held in Lilongwe in October 2010. One of the outcomes of the conference was the establishment of a food basket strategic group composed of 17 member countries, the World Bank, FAO and AfDB, with the task of leading and monitoring the process of turning Africa into a food basket. At the conference, ECA launched the framework and guidelines for the land policy initiative in support of the implementation of the African Union/ECA/AfDB joint initiative on land policy in Africa. The initiative aims to harness resources and build effective partnerships in support of improving Africa's management and governance of land and resources. 33. The purchase for progress pilot programme of the World Food Programme (WFP) links WFP's demand for staple food commodities with the technical expertise of a wide range of partners, enabling smallholders to boost agricultural production, sell their surpluses and increase their incomes. As at September 2010, WFP had contracted over 75,000 metric tons of food from targeted farmers' organizations, small and medium traders and agro-dealers in Africa, using innovative pro-smallholder procurement modalities, and had trained over 6,000 farmers, warehouse operators and small and medium traders in farming as a business, farming techniques, quality control, warehouse management and post-harvest handling. 34. As a follow-up to the High-level Conference on the Development of Agribusiness and Agro-Industries in Africa held in Abuja in 2010, UNIDO carried out field missions in selected countries and will provide a detailed value chain analysis that maps out the creation of economic value at all steps for one or two key agricultural products selected by local authorities. About 1 million euros has been made available for the project for the period from August 2010 to August 2012. 35. UNCTAD prepared the Technology and Innovation Report 2010 to investigate how to improve food security in Africa by raising the agricultural productivity of its farmers through the use of science, technology and innovation policies. To stabilize revenues of agricultural commodity producers in Africa, UNCTAD organized workshops with the Governments of Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana under the All ACP Agricultural Commodities Programme. These workshops led to the outlining of an action plan for developing a "cotton guarantee fund" in Côte d'Ivoire, the identification of constraints in financing cocoa and coffee marketing and the examination of ways to improve access to credit by the stakeholders involved in cocoa and coffee chains in Cameroon, and the development of a warehouse receipts/warrantage system and commodity exchanges to improve the functioning of cereals markets in West Africa. 36. IAEA strengthened the capacities of African member States for the application of international standards on irradiation and the use of nuclear and related analytical technologies in the management of food and environmental hazards. E. Industry, trade and market access 37. The cluster continued supporting African regional and subregional organizations in strengthening their capacity to lead the development, resource mobilization, implementation and monitoring of NEPAD programmes and projects in the area of industry, trade and market access. 38. In support of the process leading to the Third Global Review of the Aid for Trade Initiative, the World Trade Organization (WTO) held a number of regional training events to assist developing country members in completing the self-assessment questionnaires and facilitate the preparation of Aid for Trade-related case studies. In order to strengthen private sector involvement in the Initiative, WTO and AfDB co-hosted a meeting with African private sector officials at the 2010 African Economic Conference in Tunisia. WTO also increased its secretariat support to the WTO African Group in Geneva and provided support for members without physical representation in Geneva. 39. Under the Enhanced Integrated Framework initiative, UNCTAD supported African countries in preparing their trade development strategies and in updating and implementing their diagnostic trade integrated studies. A regional workshop benefiting five francophone African countries was organized in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in collaboration with the Enhanced Integrated Framework secretariat, UNDP and the United Nations Office for Project Services, to facilitate trade mainstreaming in national development plans and to strengthen trade policy capacities. 40. Under the Enhanced Integrated Framework, the International Trade Centre (ITC) strengthened the capacity of export-oriented small and medium enterprises in nine African countries. Under its Export-led Poverty Reduction Programme, ITC carried out several activities linking poor communities to the world market by integrating them into value chains of products and services in 12 least developed countries, including Burundi, Guinea, Rwanda and Senegal. 41. ITC continued working with regional economic communities under the regional Programme for African Capacity-building (PACT II), which covers the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), ECOWAS and ECCAS and fosters the network among specialized national and regional trade support institutions. ITC also provided trade facilitation support through the SADC supply chain and logistics programme, linking small-scale producers with national and regional supermarkets. 42. ITC convened the African Private Sector Forum on the margins of the fifteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union in July in Kampala. The Forum was attended by leaders from business, civil society, government and Global Compact networks in Africa and concluded with the adoption of a declaration which outlines priority actions to enhance the competitiveness of African industries. 43. ECA also contributed to fast tracking the establishment of an African continental free trade area through a report on intra-African trade recommending the harmonization of trade liberalization policies by the regional economic communities presented at the sixth ordinary session of the African Union Conference African Ministers of Trade in Kigali in November 2010. ECA organized three regional workshops and study tours on trade facilitation and intra-African trade in Ghana, Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania in 2010. The workshops enabled stakeholders to share and learn from experience and best practices in trade facilitation, port operations and corridor management. As a result, the West African subregion embarked on a programme to harmonize and liberalize cross-border transportation of goods. 44. The Common Fund for Commodities assisted Cameroon, the Central African Republic and Gabon in promoting the further development of processed timber to increase value addition and job creation. In Ethiopia and Rwanda, it implemented a credit guarantee scheme that empowers smallholder farmers to access commercial loans to purchase improved processing equipment and to enable the cooperative societies to export high quality coffee. In Mozambique and Zambia, the Fund trained farmers in hygiene and sanitary standards, improved animal husbandry, entrepreneurship and business linkages to improve their productivity, market access and incomes. It also promoted the integration of subsistence farmers into the market economy by linking them to end-user industries in eastern and southern Africa. F. Environment, population and urbanization 45. The focus of the environment, population and urbanization cluster is to address the challenges of growing populations and the movement of people, rapid growth of towns, environmental degradation, and the lack of demographic statistics. 46. The need for the Regional Coordination Mechanism clusters to play an active role in regional preparations for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) in Brazil in 2012 was one of the central themes of the eleventh session of the Regional Coordination Mechanism, held in Addis Ababa in November 2010. To facilitate Africa's participation, ECA held workshops on institutional and strategic frameworks for sustainable development and on a sustainable indicator framework jointly with the African Union Commission, AfDB, the regional economic communities and United Nations system agencies in March 2011. 47. As the secretariat of the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) continued to support the implementation of the Conference's work programme, which is an integral part of the Action Plan of the Environmental Initiative of NEPAD. UNEP also supported the current review of the Action Plan by the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency, the African Union Commission and the Conference. This involved a comprehensive stocktaking exercise, analytical work, the preparation of relevant documents with recommendations, a key stakeholders consultative meeting, and the establishment of a partnership platform. UNEP also supported a special Pan-African high-level ministerial conference on biodiversity and poverty alleviation in Libreville in September 2010, which adopted concrete actions valuing biodiversity, ecosystem services and renewable natural resources. As a result, Cameroon and the Democratic Republic of the Congo embarked on developing national environmental framework laws that take into account the conservation of regional and cross-border forests and wildlife. 48. UNIDO initiated the Guinea Current Large Marine Ecosystem Project. The trans-boundary waters of this region are rich in diversity and are of crucial economic, ecological and social importance. The project aims to ensure the recovery and restoration of depleted fisheries and degraded habitats and a reduction of pollution by establishing a regional management framework for sustainable use of living and non-living resources. Through its ecotourism project, UNIDO provided support to nine African countries in reducing coastal degradation by capturing best environmental practices to reduce contaminants. It also conducted training in conducting needs assessments of project coordinators in 11 demonstration sites. 49. WFP is supporting the African Union Commission in establishing a continental climate disaster risk pool that will enable countries to aggregate climate risks across regions and establish a contingency fund for climate disasters. Preliminary findings indicate a 50 per cent savings from diversification of drought-related losses across the continent. This makes the African risk pool an attractive financing mechanism in support of African food security. 50. The International Maritime Organization (IMO) provided training courses on marine pollution prevention and protection of the marine environment, workshops on the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, ballast water management, oil spill issues and the handling of dangerous goods, a training workshop on the safety of maritime transport, and advisory missions to prepare a draft legislative bill and a draft national strategy for ballast water management in various African countries. 51. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO), in partnership with the African Union Commission, organized the First Conference of Ministers responsible for Meteorology in Africa in April 2010. The Conference led to the Nairobi Declaration, which established the African Ministerial Conference on Meteorology. The Conference will provide guidelines on the development of meteorology for sustainable environmental protection in Africa. 52. In collaboration with the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) and selected partner cities developed the NEPAD cities programme which, since 2007, has been led by the city of Durban (eThekwini municipality), South Africa. Under the programme, UNHabitat continued to provide technical support for the monitoring of progress of African cities in the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals and in the exchange of knowledge and best practices in pro-poor housing and urban development, and for the implementation of pilot demonstration initiatives. 53. A United Nations University-World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU-WIDER) project assessed the impact of climate change on economic development opportunities in North Africa. In October 2010, UNU-WIDER and the United Nations University office in New York organized an event on climate change and low-income countries to discuss approaches for analysing the implications of climate change and the development of appropriate policy responses in low-income economies. G. Social and human development 54. The social and human development cluster has six sub-clusters: health, HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases; education and human resources; gender, youth and development; social welfare, protection and human trafficking; labour and employment; and sports and culture. 55. During 2010, the cluster and sub-clusters carried out a number of joint activities. In October, the cluster organized an African Development Forum VII preevent on climate change and social development in Addis Ababa. To monitor Africa's progress towards the implementation of the Abuja commitment on HIV and AIDS, Malaria, Tuberculosis and other Infectious Diseases, the respective subcluster worked on the five-year review of the Abuja Call for Accelerated Action towards Universal Access to HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Tuberculosis Services. 56. In 2010, the Measles Initiative, a partnership led by the American Red Cross, the United Nations Foundation, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, UNICEF and the World Health Organization (WHO), targeted 26 countries in Africa, Asia and Europe, with plans to vaccinate approximately 76 million children. Since 2001, the Initiative has contributed to an 89 per cent reduction in measles deaths in Africa. 57. The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) collaborated on the Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Plan for Africa with AfDB, the World Bank and ECA. In partnership with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the United Kingdom Department for International Development and the William J. Clinton Foundation, WHO and the World Bank funded a consortium to support the African Medicines Registration Harmonization Initiative, which aims to help African countries to build effective medicine registration systems through regional harmonization and capacity-building at the regional economic community level. 58. WHO, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the African Union Commission developed the Campaign for Accelerated Reduction of Maternal Mortality in Africa to reverse high maternal mortality and meet the global target of reducing maternal mortality by 75 per cent. To date, support was provided to 24 African countries to launch national campaigns. 59. In collaboration with the African Union Commission and with the involvement of other partners, UNICEF successfully concluded an evaluation report on the African Committee of Experts on the Rights and Welfare of the Child and its 2010-2014 strategic plan. The recommendations of this evaluation led to favourable decisions at the fifteenth ordinary session of the African Union Summit. 60. The United Nations Foundation's Nothing But Nets campaign distributed millions of long-lasting insecticide-treated bed nets to households and children across Africa and has raised more than $30 million in support of distribution projects implemented by UNICEF and WHO since 2006. In addition, the United Nations Foundation is collaborating with UNHCR to provide bed nets to vulnerable refugee populations. It has also been an active partner in the Global Polio Eradication Initiative together with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, WHO, UNICEF, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Rotary International. In 2010, it mobilized significant resources in support of polio vaccination campaigns in Africa. 61. In the area of health and the environment, the implementation of the 2008 Libreville Declaration on Health and Environment has helped to identify gaps in knowledge on linkages between health and the environment. The second InterMinisterial Conference on Health and Environment in Africa, jointly organized by UNEP and WHO in Luanda in November 2010, adopted three key documents that will assist countries to move the Libreville Declaration process ahead: the Luanda Commitment, to address the continent's health and environmental priorities; the Health and Environment Strategic Alliance, a mechanism to stimulate policies and investments for health and the environment; and the African Ministers of Health and Environment Joint Statement on Climate Change and Health, which was tabled at the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Cancun, Mexico. 62. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs has collaborated with UNDP and the World Bank since 2006 to execute a Development Account project on realizing the Millennium Development Goals through socially inclusive macroeconomic policies, covering Senegal, South Africa and Uganda. The project focuses on a core set of Millennium Development Goals related to extreme poverty reduction, education, health and water and sanitation. In addition, the Department is working on a technical assistance project on macroeconomic policies to achieve the Goals in Chad. During the reporting period, it supported NEPAD by strengthening the economic and social councils in Africa to enhance their contributions to development policies. 63. As part of activities to mark the International Year of Youth, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, in collaboration with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the United Nations Inter-Agency Network on Youth Development hosted a panel discussion on the theme "Youth and the future of Africa: challenges and opportunities" in New York in December 2010. The event focused on the positive role youth can play as a key resource for stability, peace and sustainable development. 64. IAEA strengthened its support for the transfer of scientific and technical know-how related to the peaceful uses of atomic energy through training courses, fellowships and scientific visits. In 2010, 597 fellowships and scientific visits took place, and 1,689 scientists and technicians participated in regional training courses and technical workshops. The Agency also supported the establishment of a regular academic Master's degree programme in nuclear sciences in Egypt and Ghana, launched a virtual "human health campus" and started an e-learning portal providing resources for health professionals engaged in delivering radiation medicine and nutrition. 65. IMO organized a training workshop in China for heads of African maritime administrations from 15 countries in October 2010. It also provided training equipment and materials to maritime training institutes and universities in Cape Verde, Côte d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana and Liberia. H. Science and technology 66. The science and technology cluster's support focuses on the implementation of the NEPAD Africa's Science and Technology Consolidated Plan of Action, which is built on three interrelated pillars of capacity-building, knowledge production and technological innovation. 67. UNESCO provided capacity-building through its African Science, Technology and Innovation Policy Initiative. To date, over 25 African Member States have requested assistance from UNESCO for the review and reformulation of their national science, technology and innovation policies. Policy reviews were conducted through a subregional workshop held in Bamako in May 2010, at which over 60 policymakers from the ECOWAS region were trained. 68. The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) supports the development and implementation of country-owned national intellectual property and innovation strategies. To strengthen and modernize intellectual property administration, research and development institutions, enterprises and professional associations in the use and management of intellectual property for development, WIPO undertook various training programmes, seminars and workshops. 69. WIPO provided technical assistance in innovation promotion and technology transfer as well as technical advice and capacity-building in patent drafting, intellectual property valuation, funding and marketing, technology transfer offices, intellectual property hubs, and technology and innovation support centres. In 2010 and 2011, such support centres were or are being established in four African countries, and a pilot project was launched to establish technology transfer offices in Algeria, Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia. WIPO also assisted Member States in the elaboration of harmonized regional instruments for the protection of traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, which led to the adoption of the Swakopmund Protocol on the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and Expressions of Folklore within the framework of the African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO) at Swakopmund, Namibia, in August 2010. 70. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs continued to strengthen parliamentary capacities for the application of information and communications technology in collaboration with the Pan-African Parliament and the Africa Parliamentary Knowledge Network, through the Africa i-Parliaments Action Plan. It also strengthened the Network's capacity as an institutional mechanism for collaboration among African parliaments. I. Communication, advocacy and outreach 71. The primary objective of this cluster, which is coordinated by the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, is to promote advocacy and support for NEPAD at the international, continental and regional levels. 72. In order to improve coherence in communications and advocacy activities, the Office requested the conveners of each cluster and sub-cluster to appoint a focal point for communication. As a follow-up, it was agreed at a workshop in Dakar that the Office would take the lead in establishing a system for information-gathering and dissemination to support the production and circulation of a quarterly NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency newsletter highlighting success stories and positive examples of cluster activities. 73. The Office joined forces with the members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)-NEPAD Investment Initiative and the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency to improve international and regional cooperation for growth and development in Africa. In October 2010, the partners, with the support of the Department of Public Information, launched a joint study recommending further diversification of African economies as well as a series of policy briefs on foreign direct investment, infrastructure, debt and aid. 74. The Department of Public Information continued to support NEPAD by arranging and facilitating press briefings and interviews for the Chief Executive Officer of the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency and the Special Adviser on Africa. It also continued to cover NEPAD in its quarterly magazine Africa Renewal, which is published in English and French, through stories on NEPAD's achievements and challenges, reaching 40,000 readers in both languages. 75. As part of its outreach efforts, ECA continued to prepare a report on United Nations system-wide support to the African Union and its NEPAD programme, for presentation to the Joint Annual Meetings of the African Union Conference of Ministers of Economy and Finance and ECA Conference of Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It also prepared a number of promotional materials on various aspects of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa and its clusters, with a view to enhancing communication and the sharing of information among clusters and between clusters and other stakeholders. Recent promotional materials include the newsletter NEPAD Today (with over 3,000 subscribers), and a directory of the members of the Mechanism. III. Policy issues in the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's Development A. Strengthening of the cluster system and enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union 76. In the past year, the United Nations system strengthened its support for the implementation of NEPAD and the ten-year capacity-building programme for the African Union. The Regional Coordination Mechanism benefited from strengthened coordination processes and the establishment of stronger leadership and ownership by the African Union Commission, especially following the transformation of the existing Regional Coordination Mechanism secretariat into a joint United Nations-African Union secretariat. At the eleventh session of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa, it was noted that the integration of NEPAD into African Union structures and processes had led to concrete results including joint programme planning and harmonization between the African Union Commission and the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency in key programmatic areas such as peace and security, agriculture and food security (Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme), infrastructure (Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa) and the environment. 77. ECA continued to house and provide human resources for the operations of the Regional Coordination Mechanism secretariat, intensified its coordination efforts and played a critical role in providing strategic coordination and support to the Mechanism. In collaboration with partners, it convened a one-day consultation meeting of cluster and sub-cluster coordinators and co-coordinators to deliberate on the functioning of the Regional Coordination Mechanism cluster system in Addis Ababa in June 2010. The meeting was attended by coordinators and members of most clusters and sub-clusters. 78. In the Declaration entitled "Enhancing United Nations-African Union cooperation: framework for the ten-year capacity-building programme for the African Union" signed by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission (see A/61/630, annex), both organizations agreed to take stock of efforts to implement the programme at three-year intervals. In that regard, the Secretary-General issued the report entitled "Review of the ten-year capacity-building programme for the African Union" (A/65/716-S/2011/54) outlining the activities of the United Nations system and stressing the need for better coordination and a gradual expansion of the scope of activities to include socio-economic dimensions. 79. At the eleventh session of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa, it was noted that progress had been made in establishing subregional coordination mechanisms in Central, Eastern and Southern Africa. Participants in the inaugural meeting of the task force of United Nations agencies and organizations set up to operationalize the subregional coordination mechanisms in Eastern and Central Africa, held in Kigali in October 2010, identified thematic areas, outlined working modalities and emphasized the need for the subregional mechanisms to focus on programme areas where United Nations agencies had a comparative advantage and could add value. 80. While acknowledging progress achieved, the participants in the eleventh session called for further strengthening of inter-cluster coordination, in particular on cross-cutting issues, as well as advocacy. It was also recommended that clusters should focus on a limited number of projects or deliverables. The participants called for strengthened efforts by the United Nations system to mobilize resources to implement joint projects in support of the African Union and its NEPAD programme. B. Support for mobilization of financial resources for the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's Development 81. As a follow-up to the high-level meeting on Africa's development needs held in 2008, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa prepared, in consultation with OECD, AfDB, ECA, the African Union Commission and the NEPAD Planning and Coordination Mechanism, the report of the Secretary-General on a monitoring mechanism to review commitments towards Africa's development needs (A/65/165), which highlighted, inter alia, the potential of mutual accountability to improve development practices, policies and actions. 82. ECA and OECD continued to work on developing an institutional framework for the Mutual Review of Development Effectiveness process in the context of NEPAD. The 2010 Mutual Review assessed the delivery of commitments, their effectiveness and future policy priorities. The summary of the 2010 Mutual Review of Development Effectiveness was endorsed by the NEPAD Heads of State and Government Orientation Committee at its twenty-third summit in July 2010 in Kampala. 83. ECA hosted an African Union Commission/NEPAD technical consultative meeting on the Africa Platform for Development Effectiveness in September 2010. The meeting focused on the three interrelated themes of aid effectiveness, South-South cooperation and capacity development. Participants agreed on a road map outlining concrete actions, targets, design and management mechanisms for the effective launching of the continent-wide Platform. 84. In December 2010, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa organized and hosted an expert group meeting on the theme "Microfinance in Africa: overview and the way forward", with a view to developing specific policy recommendations on how to harness the potential of microfinance in Africa. Discussions highlighted the importance of effective regulation as well as building the capacity of regulators, and encouraged peer learning as a powerful tool. Africa Investor, in collaboration with the United Nations Office for Partnerships, NYSE (New York Stock Exchange) Euronext, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency and the NEPAD Business Group, hosted the Africa Investor Index Series Summit in September 2010 at the New York Stock Exchange. The Summit engaged business leaders, investors and philanthropists in practical investment partnerships that support the pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals in Africa. 85. As part of helping African countries to mobilize investment, UNCTAD completed investment policy reviews for Burundi and Sierra Leone. Implementation reports were finalized for Ethiopia and the United Republic of Tanzania. Investment guides were prepared for four countries; Namibia received assistance in drafting a new investment code; and Benin successfully installed the "i-Track" system, which is used to manage online applications for investment licences. The "e-regulations system" became operational in six African countries, and UNCTAD helped five other countries to raise funds to install the system in the future. UNCTAD's Debt Management and Financial Analysis System provided direct technical assistance to 22 African countries during the reporting period. The software for the system was installed in Egypt and capacity-building missions on training countries to use the system and on debt statistics were carried out in several countries. 86. The Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Trust instrument of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) provided three new concessional facilities, which support country-owned poverty reduction efforts, with more flexibility in documentation and rigorous safeguards on social and other priority spending. IMF lending in the context of the global economic crises increased threefold for subSaharan African countries in 2009. The Fund's medium-term capacity for concessional lending also doubled. Moreover, the Fund is providing temporary interest relief until end-2011 on lending to low-income countries. Sub-Saharan African countries received the equivalent of $11.9 billion as a result of the increased special drawing rights allocation in 2009. 87. IMF provided over $4.7 billion in debt relief to sub-Saharan African countries, reducing the debt burden of heavily indebted poor countries and freeing resources for poverty-reducing expenditures. To date, debt reduction has been approved for 35 countries, 29 of which are in Africa, providing $60 billion (in end-2008 net present value terms). By end-2008, 18 sub-Saharan African countries had reached the completion point and received irrevocable debt relief from IMF under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative. Three sub-Saharan African countries reached the completion point in 2009 and 2010. 88. The Fund worked with international partners to promote growth and poverty reduction in low-income African countries especially as they sought to recover from the food, fuel and global financial crises. The operational contexts of this support are the national poverty-reduction strategies and the mobilization of resources for achieving the Millennium Development Goals. The Fund focused on fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policies and on other structural and institutional reforms relevant to macroeconomic stability. C. Cross-cutting issues 89. In its role as focal point and secretariat for the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States embarked on an extensive preparatory process, including the organization of thematic pre-conference events, seminars and the meetings of the Preparatory Committee, in collaboration with other stakeholders, including development partners, United Nations agencies and organizations and civil society organizations. To ensure adequate participation of the 33 African least developed countries in the preparatory process for the Conference, the Office funded the participation of representatives from the capitals of those countries and from their permanent missions to the United Nations in various events. 90. UN-Women, UNFPA and UNICEF have been partnering with security institutions in Rwanda since 2008, resulting in the establishment of a gender desk and a "one-stop centre" within the Rwanda National Police to fight violence against women. These have become centres of learning for other African countries, receiving delegations from 15 African countries. A one-stop centre manual was also prepared, introducing the multidisciplinary investigative and intervention approach used by the Isange One-Stop Centre and providing standardized guidelines for service delivery to survivors of gender-based violence. 91. ITC continued to work on gender mainstreaming. Its Women and Trade Programme helps Governments and trade support institutions to take a gender-inclusive approach to trade strategies, with the aim of realizing the export potential of female entrepreneurs. Its Ethical Fashion Programme, which connects marginalized African communities with the international fashion industry, continued to expand, employing over 5,000 people by linking large fashion houses with marginalized communities in East Africa. D. Institutional support 92. Since the establishment of the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency in February 2010 and its integration into the structures and processes of the African Union, the Agency successfully completed the formulation of its strategic direction for 2010-2013 and business plan for 2010-2014, which is now part of the capacity-building programme alignment process. ECA supported the establishment of the Agency, notably the development of its strategic direction for 2010-2013 and subsequent alignment to the African Union Commission's strategic plan. 93. UNDP is supporting the Agency by playing a critical support role in rolling out the African Union/NEPAD Capacity Development Strategic Framework, which has become a key policy framework to ensure coherence in capacity development. Endorsed at the fourteenth African Union Assembly in February 2010, the Framework aims to assist Governments, national institutions and development stakeholders to focus capacity development on leadership reforms and to empower citizens to bring about socio-economic transformation. 94. FAO continued to provide experts to the Agency and the African Union Commission. The experts' primary role was to enhance the organizations' capacity in policy and advocacy work, in support of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme implementation, monitoring and reporting. 95. The employment and labour sub-cluster convened by ILO and the African Union Commission provides support for the implementation of the 2004 Ouagadougou Declaration and Plan of Action on Employment and Poverty Alleviation. ILO gives direct support to NEPAD in the collection and dissemination of information from Member States on its implementation. ILO and the employment and labour sub-cluster also supported the second African Decent Work Symposium held in Yaoundé in October 2010 and the implementation of the social protection floor for Africa, as declared in Yaoundé. 96. Following a series of preparatory meetings in 2010, and in close collaboration with UNICEF, the DevInfo support group, AfDB and ECA, the AfricaInfo database was launched formally in December 2010. AfricaInfo will monitor commitments made by African Union member States to implement targets agreed to in various declarations. The African Union Commission is responsible for the management of AfricaInfo in 2011 and beyond, with continued support from UNICEF and other partners. 97. UNFPA supported the African Union Commission and its NEPAD programme in the roll-out of the African Union Youth Volunteer Corps initiative which was endorsed by the 2010 African Union Conference of Ministers in Charge of Youth. This was followed by the production of training materials, the training of many young people, the conduct of surveys and the establishment of a virtual database of youth experts. E. Challenges and constraints 98. While progress was achieved in providing coordinated support to NEPAD, a number of challenges were identified by the Regional Coordination Mechanism and the different clusters. The main common concerns include: (a) The lack of human and financial resources allocated to cluster and subcluster activities; (b) The need to shift the focus of clusters and sub-clusters from activities to results and impacts; (c) The need to strengthen the capacity of clusters and sub-clusters for planning, monitoring and evaluation, communication and advocacy; (d) Strengthening coordination at the subregional level and better alignment of the activities of subregional coordination mechanisms with the priorities of regional economic communities; (e) The need to harmonize continental and regional policies with country-level implementation. IV. Conclusions and recommendations 99. The United Nations system continued to provide substantial support to priority areas of the NEPAD programme through the nine clusters of the Regional Coordination Mechanism and the funding of programmes and projects, capacity- and institution-building, resource mobilization and advocacy, and humanitarian relief. 100. The United Nations system should strengthen the Regional Coordination Mechanism secretariat to enable it to function effectively. To further improve the Mechanism, the business plans of the clusters should focus on selected strategic and high-impact activities in line with continental priorities. As joint planning and programming is being developed, it is necessary to ensure appropriate human and financial resources to effectively implement cluster activities. Cluster members should include resource requirements for cluster activities in their respective programme budget submissions and undertake joint fundraising efforts in support of the cluster activities. 101. Within the cluster system, United Nations system organizations should strengthen the mechanisms whereby each institution communicates and shares information, best practices, know-how, field expertise and benefits from effective and coherent coordination practices. This will strengthen United Nations system synergy in its support to NEPAD and minimize duplication of work and inefficient use of resources. 102. Effective and results-based monitoring of the impact of cluster activities is also needed to improve advocacy and communication on concrete results. Evaluation and monitoring mechanisms with clear timelines, expected accomplishments and indicators of achievement should be fully incorporated into the respective business plans of clusters and sub-clusters. 103. United Nations entities should also align their planning, programming and budget cycles with the clusters, in order to facilitate joint planning and programming. The United Nations system should assist regional economic communities in mobilizing financial resources to participate effectively in the Regional Coordination Mechanism process. 104. Development actors such as non-governmental organizations, philanthropic foundations, bilateral donors and the private sector are increasingly engaged at the country level and are providing support to African countries. United Nations entities should further strengthen collaboration with these non-United Nations development partners in the design and implementation of programmes. 105. As 2011 marks the tenth anniversary of the adoption of NEPAD, the United Nations system needs to re-commit to the programme and streamline a system-wide results-based mechanism to monitor and evaluate the impact of its support in the implementation of the NEPAD programme. 