%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2011 resumed session 16-24 May 2011 Quadrennial reports for the period 2006-2009 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Asian Institute of Transport Development Big Brothers Big Sisters International Centrist Democratic International European Union of Jewish Students International Lesbian and Gay Association -- Europe Mariano y Rafael Castillo Cordova Foundation Movimiento Manuela Ramos National Federation of International Immigrant Women Associations World ORT Union Special, 2002 I. Introduction The Asian Institute of Transport Development is an independent, not-for-profit organization devoted to non-partisan research, education and training in the area of infrastructure with a special focus on the transport sector. The Institute also fosters inter-country cooperation in South and South-East Asia. A. Aims and purposes of the organization Its principal purpose is to promote balanced, equitable and sustainable development to enhance the overall welfare of communities. The focus of activities includes poverty alleviation, human resources development, regional integration, trade facilitation and eco-friendly systems. B. Significant changes in the organization The Institute was nominated as the nodal agency for the organization of training courses for the railway personnel of the countries that form part of the southern leg of the Trans-Asian Railway network. It was also nominated as the secretariat of the Asian Railways Association, which was set up to develop the overall coherence of the railway systems of these countries. II. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations The Institute promoted the development of regional networks as the building blocks of the Trans-Asian Railway and the Asian Highway networks. In December 2007, it organized together with the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific a subregional workshop in New Delhi for the countries of South Asia on identifying investment needs and development priorities for these networks. It undertook interdisciplinary, comparative studies of different modes of transport to enhance social sustainability. It also organized regional training courses as part of its inter-country cooperative activities and dialogues between India and Bangladesh to promote understanding and learning in the areas of microfinance and transport networks. A. Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities The Institute actively participated in the meetings organized by the Commission and made significant contributions to its deliberations, which are duly reflected in the relevant reports. Examples include: 2006: (a) Committee on Managing Globalization, third session, September, Bangkok; (b) Ministerial Conference on Transport, November, Busan, Republic of Korea. The Conference noted with appreciation the Institute's valuable role in arranging training courses for railway personnel from South and South-East Asia to assist in the development of the Trans-Asian Railway network. 2007: Committee on Managing Globalization, fourth session, September, Bangkok. 2008: (a) Regional meeting on promoting the role of the Asian Highway and TransAsian Railway networks, June, Bangkok; (b) Committee on Transport (first session), October, Bangkok. 2009: (a) Interregional expert group meeting on public-private partnerships in infrastructure development, February, Bangkok; (b) Forum of Asian Ministers of Transport, December, Bangkok. The Forum welcomed the training courses conducted by the Institute for a broad range of railway managers from across the region and supported the organization of more courses in future. B. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters The Commission and the Institute co-organized a regional workshop on developing bankable public-private partnership projects on infrastructure development in November 2008 in India. The project was financed from the United Nations Development Account. Participants from 13 countries attended the workshop. In 2007, the Commission and the Institute published the second edition of Towards an Asian Integrated Transport Network. In the foreword, Kim Hak-Su, Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations and Executive Secretary of the Commission, stated that it was but the latest example of the many years of fruitful collaboration between the Commission and the Institute for the benefit of the countries of Asia and the Pacific. C. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals The current level of understanding of the relationship between transport infrastructure and the socio-economic well-being of the people, the poor in particular, is inadequate. The Institute developed a suitable conceptual and theoretical framework and appropriate econometric methodology for a follow-up study on the socio-economic impact of improving national highways on the rural population living in their proximity (2009). The empirical studies indicate that, among other interventions, large-scale public investments in road infrastructure development can be an effective and viable policy measure for improving the wellbeing of the rural population. At the Forum of Asian Ministers of Transport of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific held in Bangkok in December 2009, the Chairman of the Institute apprised the participants of a number of initiatives to reduce poverty through improved rural transport and logistics, including nonmotorized transport. He also offered to assist the secretariat in the collation and dissemination of good practices in this particular area. 2. Big Brothers Big Sisters International Special, 2006 In 2006, Big Brothers Big Sisters International restructured its organization, creating global standards of practice and formal affiliation agreements to provide a foundation for quality Big Brothers Big Sisters mentoring services well into the future. Aims and purposes of the organization Primary efforts focused on consulting with the organization's 12 country affiliates, to enable them to fully comply with these new standards. The organization has affiliates in Australia, Bermuda, Bulgaria, Canada, Germany, Ireland, Israel, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, the Russian Federation and South Africa. The organization has plans to further expand its programmes in Europe and Latin America and is fully committed to increasing the number of vulnerable children and youth that benefit from its model of mentoring. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals Through this effort, the organization elevated the quality of service provided for nearly 28,000 children annually. However, as a result of the global economic downturn, it decreased its staff to three full-time employees and had to prioritize activities that directly affect the children it serves. 3. Centrist Democratic International Special, 1950 Centrist Democratic International brings together parties, organizations and political associations that inspire ideas and behaviour in accordance with the principles of Christian or integral humanism, namely humanism open to solidarity and fraternity. The organization is open to all parties and political associations that share the same convictions regarding religious and philosophical material as Centrist Democratic International. It carries out its work with its member regional political organizations. (a) The affirmation and updating of its political identity shared with Christian and popular democratic organizations and associations that have a centrist position; (b) The strengthening of relations between the party and political organizations that are members, in a spirit of mutual and solid support and aid; (c) The preparation, representation and diffusion of the common positions that characterize its profile; (d) Solidarity and cooperation in the fields of human rights and population development, with a focus on defending the weak and combating poverty. The organization maintains a policy aimed at achieving quality of life, while respecting the environment; (e) The promotion and strengthening of its political presence, in particular with respect to increasing challenges and international opportunities; (f) These objectives are pursued with regional political organizations. In the period under review, Centrist Democratic International participated in many civil society activities in support of the work of the United Nations. Centrist Democratic International participated in various Department of Public Information/NGO conferences and Human Rights Council sessions, speaking on such topics as lack of freedom of expression, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, impunity and truth, torture and arbitrary detentions, human rights defenders, political prisoners and international cooperation and development. It also attended the meetings of the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly on the Western Sahara each year. Centrist Democratic International participated in the World Food Summit held by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in Rome in November 2009. C. Activities in line with Millennium Development Goals The organization started various collaborations in the fight against maternal and infant mortality caused by poverty and lack of information and education. 4. European Union of Jewish Students The European Union of Jewish Students is an umbrella organization for 34 national Jewish student unions in Europe and the former Soviet Union, representing over 200,000 Jewish students. The Union's mission is grounded in its constitution, created at the time of its founding in Grenoble, France, in 1978. The constitution states that the Union's purpose is to foster the unity of Jewish students at the European level and to ensure their participation in the fulfilment of the aspirations of the Jewish people, its continuity and the development of its religious, spiritual, cultural and social heritage. In March 2006, the Union held a three-day seminar for 90 members at the United Nations Office at Geneva, with the goal of providing participants with greater in-depth knowledge of the United Nations and its bodies. It also coorganized a rally under the international initiative "Global Day for Darfur". In 2007, at its "summer university" in Rome, it offered all-day workshops and activities to 600 participants on diplomacy, Jewish youth as active citizens in Europe and Israel, Shoah and genocide education. Special emphasis was placed on interfaith dialogue, including joint interactive sessions with members of the Italian Muslim community and a meeting with Pope Benedict XVI. In 2008, at its "summer university" in Istanbul, it devoted a day to promoting, discussing and reflecting on various aspects of intercultural dialogue. and its subsidiary bodies In 2006, the Union participated in the fourth special session of the Human Rights Council on the human rights situation in Darfur, Sudan. At the Council's seventh regular session in 2008, it co-sponsored a joint NGO statement on the human rights situation in Darfur and delivered an oral statement regarding the Durban Review Conference. At the Council's ninth special session on the theme "The grave violations of human rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territory including the recent aggression in the occupied Gaza Strip" in 2009, the Union brought a student from Sderot, Israel, to testify about life under constant bombardment from Hamas rockets. Since obtaining special consultative status in 2006, the Union has focused its attention and resources mostly on educating its members about being a constructive element of civil society. In due course, it hopes to cooperate with United Nations bodies or specialized agencies, although being a student organization poses certain difficulties with respect to financial and human resources. C. Additional information Regarding certain incidents that occurred during the Durban Review Conference in Geneva in April 2009, it should be noted that the fight against racism and racial discrimination is at the core of nearly all programmes and events organized by the Union and is an issue that European Jewish students feel very passionate about. Because an exceptional number of students wished to attend the Conference, the Union created a programme beyond the scope of its regular seminars. Unfortunately, the size of the delegation and difficulties in communication led to small groups acting against the ground rules laid down by the Union. As a result, certain individuals contributed to confusion and disorder at the United Nations. The Union deeply regrets the incidents and has refrained from forming such large delegations ever since. Measures such as greater care in selecting participants and making respectful behaviour inside and around the United Nations a fundamental condition have been implemented. It is now guaranteed that no one can act in violation of the rules established by the Union leadership. 5. International Lesbian and Gay Association -- Europe International Lesbian and Gay Association -- Europe is a non-governmental umbrella organization that represents primarily organizations of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons at the European level. Its vision is of a world freed from any form of discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression, a world where the human rights of all are respected and everyone can live in equality and freedom. Its membership comprises around 300 organizations from all over Europe. International Lesbian and Gay Association -- Europe was established as a separate branch (and legal entity) of the International Lesbian and Gay Association in 1996. In addition to its consultative status at the Economic and Social Council, the Association has participative status at the Council of Europe and receives financial support from the European Commission. It is a member of the Platform of European Social NGOs. It is registered under Belgium law and has an office in Brussels. The Association's mission is to act as a European voice for the rights of those who face discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression; promote the right to equality and freedom from discrimination through lobbying and advocacy and by educating European and international institutions, media and civil society; strengthen the capacity of European human rights organizations fighting against discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression to work for equality through their involvement in advocacy, campaigning and networking, the exchange of best practices, the dissemination of information and capacity-building programmes. For more information see www.ilga-europe.org. The Association contributed to the work of the United Nations by submitting shadow reports to the Human Rights Council in relation to the universal periodic review. These included (a) a report on the human rights situation of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered people in the Czech Republic and Poland for the first session of the universal periodic review; (b) a report on the human rights situation of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered people in Romania for the second session; (c) a joint submission with Labris and COC Netherlands on the status of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights in Serbia for the third session; (d) a joint submission by the International Lesbian and Gay Association, International Lesbian and Gay Association -- Europe, the Pan Africa International Lesbian and Gay Association, LeGaBiBo -- Lesbians, Gays and Bisexuals of Botswana, the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission and ARC International on the human rights situation of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered people in Botswana for the third session; (e) a joint submission with the Malta Gay Rights Movement on the human rights situation of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered people in Malta for the fifth session; (f) a submission on the situation of human rights for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered people in Cyprus for the sixth session; (g) a joint submission with Arcigay on the human rights situation of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered people in Malta for the seventh session. A. Participation in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary entities The Association participated in a number of sessions of human rights-related forums, including the Human Rights Council, the Universal Periodic Review Working Group, the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. B. Activities in line with the Millennium Development Goals Actions by the Association to support Goal 6 (Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases) included collaboration on a regional project on prevention and empowerment in the Commonwealth of Independent States, in the framework of which it advocated for the inclusion of policies on the prevention of HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections in the regional programmes of various international organizations. It commemorates World AIDS Day every year by issuing a public statement that is disseminated to public institutions and civil society organizations. To commemorate World AIDS Day, it launched, on 30 November 2007, an electronic guide to international human rights references on sexual and reproductive health and rights as related to lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered people, HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections. 6. Mariano y Rafael Castillo Cordova Foundation The Mariano y Rafael Castillo Cordova Foundation is a non-profit organization dedicated to improving the quality of life of the people of Guatemala. The Foundation focuses on development, the environment and disaster relief. It provides nutritional and medical assistance and free hospitalization to undernourished children, and works to improve the economic and social well-being of poor women in Guatemala. The Foundation works to promote the goals of the United Nations in the areas of health, education and women's empowerment. In support of Goal 1, the Foundation trained farmers in four municipalities, established food assistance programmes for community food pantries in 1,920 municipalities, and set up 10 recuperation centres for undernourished children. In support of Goal 2, it implemented a "healthy schools" programme. In support of Goal 3 and Goal 7, it promoted vegetable production, the breeding of pelibueyes (a cross between sheep and goats) and a recycling project. 7. Movimiento Manuela Ramos Movimiento Manuela Ramos is a Peruvian feminist non-profit organization that has been working for over 32 years to improve the situation and position of women. It carries out advisory, advocacy, training, research and dissemination work as well as work in defence of the legal, economic, social, reproductive and political rights of women from different cultures in Peru. It is implementing several development projects in a number of cities and areas in Peru, including Amazonas, Apurimac, Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Huaraz, Lima, Piura, Puno, San Martin, Trujillo and Ucayali. To promote the exercise of full citizenship for women and the elimination of all forms of discrimination and exclusion, demonstrating the effects of such discrimination on women's lives, their rights and autonomy, in the context of a modern democracy. A. Cooperation with United Nations bodies and/or specialized agencies in the field and/or at Headquarters The Movement collaborated with the United Nations Population Fund on a number of projects concerning, for example, opinion trends and commitments to a gender agenda and women's rights, the prevention of gender-based violence and the provision of legal and psychological aid to affected communities through community centres, the promotion of regulations and measures to guarantee the enforcement of sexual and reproductive rights in a human rights context and the promotion of adolescents' rights and the elimination of barriers against their exercise. It also worked on a project with the United Nations Development Fund for Women to promote sustainable strategies to increase the prevention of and attention to gender-based violence in the Puno region. Goal 3 (a) Establishment of community banks for women entrepreneurs; (b) Provision of legal advice in cases of domestic and sexual violence; (c) Provision of training to civil servants, leaders and authorities in the prevention of domestic and sexual violence; (d) Provision of training in and information on domestic and sexual violence issues for the population in the various intervention areas; (e) Strengthening the individual and collective capacities of women to exercise their rights and strengthen their citizenship. Goal 5 (a) Training for health and education professionals who work at health and educational facilities in sexual and reproductive health; (b) Orientation sessions on family planning; (c) Training for adolescent mothers in sexual and reproductive health rights; (d) Medical campaigns for free screening and treatment of sexually transmitted infections and HIV; (e) Sensitization of adolescent mothers about responsible use of contraceptives; (f) Sensitization campaigns for local authorities on the problem of adolescent pregnancy. Goal 6 (a) Development of information activities on HIV/AIDS, aimed at adolescents; (b) Organization of public forums to discuss the infringement of adolescents' sexual and reproductive rights as a determinant in HIV transmission; (c) Sensitization campaigns on the prevention of HIV/AIDS transmission, through information workshops, fairs, forums and the presentation of short films. 8. National Federation of International Immigrant Women Associations Special, 1998 The National Federation of International Immigrant Women Associations is known in Sweden as the Swedish Federation of Immigrant Women. It is not affiliated with any religion or political party and serves all women regardless of their faith or nationality. The first local branch in Sweden was established in 1968 to enable members to meet and exchange experiences in living in a new country. The Federation is an advocacy group working to improve the conditions of immigrant women in Sweden. Its main goal is to facilitate the integration of immigrant and refugee women in Swedish society while encouraging them to preserve their ethnic identity and guiding them to achieve equality in the social, cultural and political life of their host country. It strives to increase the awareness of its members about civil rights and their responsibilities in their new home country. It also aims to increase understanding and contact between the immigrant and Swedish communities. The Federation addresses human rights issues from the perspective of women and is concerned about the living conditions of immigrant women. Its activities include projects on health issues; information campaigns about female genital mutilation, and the prevention of HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases; and support groups for assaulted and battered women. In 2006, the Federation arranged several courses and activities aimed at increasing awareness of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) among its members and at training women to become agents for peace. It is also a member of "Operation 1325", an initiative involving five major women's organizations aimed at furthering the implementation of the resolution in Sweden and internationally. It attended the sixth European Ministerial Conference on Equality between Women and Men in June 2006. The Federation participated in the fifty-first, fifty-second and fifty-third sessions of the Commission on the Status of Women, at which it organized seminars on such issues as honour-related violence, forced marriage and female genital mutilation. It also participated in the 2009 annual ministerial review of the Council. The Federation took part in the Third World Forum on Human Rights, held in Nantes, France, in 2008, which was a commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In support of Goal 3, the Federation organized an international women's conference on equality and integration in Stockholm in February 2008. In November of the same year, it took part in an international women's conference in Laayoune, Morocco, on local gender equality strategies, violence against women, family law and the Moroccan autonomy project. 9. World ORT Union World ORT Union is one of the largest and oldest non-governmental educational and training organizations in the world, running a network of programmes, training centres and schools and operations in more than 100 countries. Its mission is to deliver high-quality education and training to provide low-income graduates and disadvantaged populations with a window of integration and real competitive advantage when seeking opportunities for employment, enabling them to undertake fulfilling careers. World ORT is a nonprofit NGO with seven field offices, activities in 60 countries, 200 professional expert consultants and approximately 270,000 students per year. To date, it has helped more than 3,000,000 beneficiaries and has developed 350 projects in 100 countries. The Union's mission is to work for the advancement of Jewish and other people through training and education; provide communities with the skills and knowledge necessary to cope with the complexities and uncertainties of their environment; and foster economic self-sufficiency, mobility and a sense of identity through state-of-the-art technology. Through international cooperation programmes, it supports non-sectarian economic and social development in underdeveloped parts of the world, with vocational training and the provision of technical assistance. The Union has provided training and universal education to more than 3 million people over the past 130 years in more than 100 countries. Through its international cooperation programmes, it has been providing technical assistance to newly emerging and developing nations for half a century. It has designed and implemented more than 350 projects in 100 countries at the request of international agencies, local communities, host Governments, foundations and private firms. Its training programmes are designed to meet local needs and are particularly successful in overcoming economic, cultural and linguistic barriers. The Union regularly attends United Nations meetings and contributes to the annual Department of Public Information/NGO conference as well as civil society organization conferences. The Union has designated representatives with all the United Nations bodies. They regularly attend the meetings and workshops and present papers and ideas. The Union frequently cooperates with the Working Group on Girls of the NGO Committee on the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Association of the United States of America, the Committee on the Status of Women, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Subcommittee on Older Women, the seminars on unlearning intolerance, the Outreach Division of the Department of Public Information, the Human Rights Subcommittee and the Informal Jewish NGO Caucus. In the area of primary education, one of the Union's partners, the Albanian rights NGO Illyricum, advocated for the need to relocate an Albanian language teacher-training course from Nikšić, Montenegro, to Podgorica, which is where most of the Albanians live. In Montenegro, the Union worked consistently with two disabled persons organizations, the Association of Disabled Youth and the Association of Paraplegics to amend the General Law on Education of Montenegro to gain better legal protection for disabled children and greater equity of access to educational facilities. With respect to the promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of women, one of the Union's long-term NGO partners is a domestic violence and women's rights group called the SOS Telephone for Women and Children Victims of Violence. This NGO partner successfully completed an advocacy initiative aimed at convincing the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Public Administration of Montenegro to adopt official guidelines on how police should intervene in cases of domestic violence. With respect to combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases, the Union worked with the Montenegrin Association against AIDS (CAZAS) both on regulations for anonymous HIV testing and on monitoring the implementation of certain health laws to ensure that HIV patients were not being discriminated against. Using new skills learned through Union training, this NGO advocated for the adoption of a regulation to allow for anonymous HIV testing in Montenegro, based on international standards of medical confidentiality and patients' rights. The regulation was adopted by the Government as a separate by-law to the Law on Infectious Diseases in late 2004. In the area of environmental sustainability, the Union worked with several NGO groups interested in ensuring environmental sustainability. 