%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2012 regular session 30 January-8 February, and 17 February 2012 Quadrennial reports for the period 2007-2010 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Movement for a Better World National Committee for UNIFEM (Japan) National Council of German Women's Organizations National Council of Women of the United States National Wildlife Federation Network Women in Development Europe Nonviolent Peaceforce Northern Ireland Women's European Platform PanAmerican-PanAfrican Association Pax Christi International Paz y Cooperación Permanent Assembly for Human Rights Program for Appropriate Technology in Health Ramola Bhar Charitable Trust Romanian Independent Society of Human Rights 1. Movement for a Better World Special, 2003 Introduction The Movement for a Better World is a Catholic international organization with 650 members based in 32 nations worldwide. Aims and purposes of the organization The Movement is committed to the promotion activities related to the building of a "better world". The main course of action of the Movement is: (a) to be identified in a process of spiritual and cultural formation of single and corporate consciences, in order to create the conditions for people and communities to understand the complexity of the present situation of the world; (b) to develop the instruments to react to the challenges that are posed to the future of mankind; and (c) to elaborate projects with objectives related to the transformation of society and the making of a better world. Significant changes in the organization There have been no significant changes. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations See "Initiatives taken by the organization in support of the Millennium Development Goals" below. Participation in meetings of the United Nations :: Sixteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development: review session on drought and desertification (5-16 May 2008) :: Seventeenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (4-16 May 2009) Cooperation with United Nations bodies Initiatives taken by the organization in support of the Millennium Development Goals Initiatives included: (a) Preschools in Côte d'Ivoire (Goal 2). the Movement for a Better World of Côte d'Ivoire has promoted the financing of 11 special preschools located in 10 rural villages. The preschools give hospitality to 1,200 children between 3 and 6 years of age. The possibility of a preschool learning process has consistently increased the percentage of children who manage to complete primary school. That percentage has increased from 4 to 80. Experience has shown that, since such schools were established, children who have entered primary school manage to continue the learning process as they have the language tools (knowledge of French) needed to understand the teachers during the lessons and avoid an inevitable isolation. (b) Telematic project for the promotion of literacy of women in Peru (Goal 3). the objective is to offer women who have not had the possibility of accessing an education system a way to literacy with interactive methods that assist in developing their critical consciousness and empower them to participate in the development of their communities, by cultivating their personal and cultural values, through a dialogue based on respect and acceptance of differences, and the rejection of any type of discrimination, as a way to a just and peaceful society through solidarity. The experience is taking place, with the attendance of dozens of women, in the Mountains of San Genaro in the suburbs of Lima. Many more wish to learn; however, excessive work, in addition to caring for their children without a husband, oblige women to make do with their timeframes and possibilities; (c) Corporation of the New Society of the North-east region of Colombia (Goal 8). this organization, created by the Movement through one of its bishops, promotes specific programmes for development through solidarity of the whole northern region of Santander. The corporation envisions this goal through the active participation of public and private institutions, international organizations, base communities, women's groups, youth and children's groups, as well as the production, cultural and educational sectors, all with the goal of a new society that promotes dignified life conditions for citizens. 2. National Committee for UNIFEM (Japan) Special, 2007 The Japan National Committee for the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) was inaugurated in 1992. To support the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) by raising funds and publicizing its activities in Japan. On 17 June 2008, the Japan National Committee for UNIFEM (now UN-Women) was successfully accredited with the privileged status of "authorized non-profit organization" in Japan, which allows donations from our supporters to be tax exempted. This gave us an important momentum towards increasing support from private sectors and individuals. The status has been renewed and extended until 30 June 2015. Companies and individuals alike favourably recognize this status. Shiseido Co., Ltd., which has been supporting the Committee for more than five years, generously contributed over 2 million yen in 2010. Chuo Roudou Kinko (Chuo Labour Bank), which started a social contribution programme whereby depositors can donate their acquired points depending on the amount in their bank account, kindly chose the Committee as one of its recipients. Such contributions by private companies to the Committee through their civil society-related activities are on an increasing trend. The name of the Committee will be changed from the "Japan National Committee for UNIFEM" to the "Japan National Committee for UN-Women" in 2011 in line with the merger of UNIFEM with three United Nations agencies and the establishment of UN-Women. In accordance with this change, the Committee is now working on the necessary legal procedures as well as on the amendment of its charter. Our contributions to UN-Women (UNIFEM until 2010) are as follows: In 2007, total contributions amounted to $60,460.11 for: :: Support to the Ministry of Women's Affairs in Afghanistan-microfinance component: $15,529.58 :: Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, Initiative, Afghanistan: $24,930.53 :: Cambodia Community of Women Living with HIV/AIDS: $10,000.00 :: Laos Handicraft Association: $10,000.00 In 2008, total contributions amounted to $78,196.86 for: :: Microfinance for Women In Afghanistan: $18,014.14 :: Facilitating implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women towards the realization of women's human rights in South-East Asia (training in Timor-Leste): $17,545.67 :: United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against Women: $42,637.05 In 2009, total contributions amounted to $92,688.86 for: :: Women's Economic Rights and Security: Opportunities to build Sustainable Economic Assets in Afghanistan: $17,053.11 :: Beyond the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women-Facilitating Implementation of National and International Commitments to Realize Women's Human Rights in Pakistan-phase 2: $30,000.00 :: Multimedia campaign for youth "Say No to Violence Against Women": $18,131.40 :: UNIFEM-managed United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against Women: $27,504.35 In 2010, total contributions amounted to $128,538.98 for: :: Women's Economic Rights and Security: Opportunities to build Sustainable Economic Assets in Afghanistan: $20,946.00 :: Beyond the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women: Facilitating Implementation of International and National Commitments to Realize Women's Human Rights in Pakistan: $30,000.00 :: Increasing awareness of gender-based violence and the role of women in interreligious dialogue: $12,000.00 :: Women's Peace and Security in Mindanao: Capacity-building of Bangsamoro Women on Local Implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the Philippine national action plan 1325: $20,238.00 :: United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against Women: $25,370.08 :: Core capital: $19,985.90 :: Fifty-second session of the Commission on the Status of Women in New York (25 February-7 and 13 March). :: Fourth Tokyo International Conference on African Development: side event in Yokohama organized by UNIFEM and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, "The African Development and Girl's Education Symposium" (27 May). :: Global Coalition of National Committees for UNIFEM (annual) (19-20 September). Based on our mission as a national committee for UN-Women, we have been supporting the entity by publicizing its programmes and activities to Japanese citizens and by collecting donations from private sectors and individuals. The Committee also lobbies the Government of Japan regularly to increase their support to UN-Women. In 2009, various activities for ending violence against women were undertaken by regional committees and Committee members in 12 venues in Japan thanks to the generous financial contribution from Avon Japan, and the activities were compiled into a report last year. The collaboration with Avon Japan to support activities to end violence against women will continue in 2011, during which lectures and training on Wen-Do, martial arts for women to protect them from physical violence, will be conducted. 3. National Council of German Women's Organizations Special, 1987 The National Council of German Women's Organizations, founded in 1951, is a federation of women's associations and women's groups in mixed associations in Germany. Linking 57 organizations which are characterized by great diversity, it brings together the political, religious, professional and cultural experience of about 11 million women in Germany. The Council's aims are to achieve gender equality, equal opportunities and equal status for women and men in society, employment and family life, politics, business and culture, as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in article 3 of the German Constitution. The Council has always worked towards promoting equal rights for migrant women and for German women with migration backgrounds. Therefore, it welcomed the application for membership of the Federation of Migrant Women. The Federation became a member of the Council in 2007. In November 2010, a representative of the Federation was elected to the board. The National Council of German Women's Organizations is a member of the Vienna-based non-governmental organizations Committee on the Status of Women, the Vienna Alliance of NGOs on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and the Vienna NGO Committee on Ageing. One of the priorities of the National Council in this area is lobbying for the implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. In addition to this, the Council lobbies actively for the Beijing Platform for Action, for the final documents of the United Nations World Conferences of the 1990s, for the Millennium Development Goals, for Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009), as well as for other relevant United Nations conventions and resolutions. The Council is a member of an alliance of German human rights organizations, "Forum Menschenrechte" (Forum on Human Rights). In this forum, the principle of "Women's Rights are Human Rights" is discussed and promoted. The Council is a member of an alliance of German NGOs celebrating the tenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) in 2010. This alliance requests from the Government of Germany that it develop and adopt a national action plan ensuring the effective implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the following resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009). In November 2010, the general assembly of the Council adopted a comprehensive position paper on peace and security policies. The Council contributed to the delivery of two joint written statements on "legislation for gender equality and the empowerment of women in care work" and on "equal participation of women in decision-making processes at all levels" (see E/CN.6/2009/NGO/42 and E/CN.6/2009/NGO/43). In relation to the fifteenth anniversary of the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, the Council participated in the NGO forum prior to the Economic Commission for Europe preparatory meeting in Geneva in October 2009, in the NGO Global Forum and in the fifty-fourth session of the Commission on the Status of Women in New York (1-12 March 2010). It organized a workshop in the German Mission on "Equal Pay Day". The vice-president of the Council became the leader of the International Equal Pay Day Task Force. The Council delivered a joint statement on "Gender Sensitive Medicine and Empowerment of Women". The Council works in close contact with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna, partly in bilateral cooperation, partly in coordination with the Vienna NGO Alliance on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, which has an excellent relationship via the "Civil Society Team" of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In April 2008, the Council delivered information on its advocacy in supporting United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice according to Economic and Social Council resolution 2007/21, namely, those related primarily to victim issues. The National Council of German Women's Organizations attaches great importance to the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals. 4. National Council of Women of the United States Special, 1999 The National Council of Women serves as a forum to promote progressive ideas, influence policy decisions and to be a united voice for women's issues. The National Council of Women of the United States aims to address the diverse concerns of women in pursuit of health, education and social, economic and political equality while serving as a united voice and forum to promote progressive ideas and influence policy decisions that impact human rights. The organization joined with its affiliates in identifying the scope of the problem of obstetric fistula in Ethiopia and Malawi and presented side events on the extent of the problem to the Commission on the Status of Women at its fifty-third and fifty-fourth sessions. The organization and its affiliates funded and oversaw the installation of 60 water wells in rural villages in Ghana. In 2006, the organization: :: Sponsored a conference on the establishment of the State international forum series to promote awareness of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals on the part of local governments and State officials, Hartford, Connecticut (20 January) :: Sponsored and chaired a health environment forum on the theme "Are neighbourhood chemicals blurring the gender in our children?", in New York (27 February) :: Sponsored and chaired a panel discussion on the theme "Promoting gender equality for women: health, education and human rights", in New York (6 March) :: Co-sponsored, with the United States Department of Labor Women's Bureau, a round table and dialog seminar on challenges faced by women in the workplace on the theme "New initiatives and flex options", Felician College, Bergen County, New Jersey (16 May) :: Collaborated with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to present a programme on the UNDP Water Initiative in Ghana (with support from the Prem Rawat Foundation), United Nations, New York (21 April) :: Attended the conference on the theme "Unfinished business: effective partnerships for human security and sustainable development", at the United Nations, New York (6-8 September) In 2007, the organization: :: Co-sponsored with the International Medical Women's International Association, a lecture and panel discussion on the theme "Health of the girl child is global wealth" in New York (2 March) :: Sponsored a panel discussion with youth and expert panellists on the theme "The girl child: critical awareness -- the impact of the global media on the girl child", in New York (8 March) :: Sponsored and hosted a distinguished leadership and awards luncheon on the theme "Empowerment of women: executive women leaders of New Jersey" and with the keynote speaker being the Special Adviser to the President of the General Assembly (Seton Hall University Law School, Newark, New Jersey, 30 September) In 2008, the organization: :: Attended a side event on the theme "Mental health: employment challenges and outcome" at the forty-sixth session of the Commission for Social Policy and Development, United Nations, New York (2-6 February) :: Sponsored a side event on the theme "Empowerment of women: health, education and political leadership" at the fifty-second session of the Commission on the Status of Women, United Nations, New York (25 February-7 March) In 2006, in collaboration with UNDP, the organization procured a grant in the amount of $100,000 from the Prem Rawat Foundation for the UNDP Water Wells Systems project and the Council's Water Wells Project in Ghana. Initiatives taken by the organization in support of the Millennium Development Goals The following actions were performed in the Ashanti region of rural Ghana: :: Dozens of 100-lb bags of rice were donated to mothers and children in eight rural regions in Ghana. The number of villagers served amounted to over 36,000 :: 100 orange trees were planted in rural schools in Ghana to provide food and a source of income for students and village residents. Oranges from the trees will yield fruit for consumption, thus improving nutrition for residents, and will provide fruit for sale :: A lunch programme was established for children in the local schools. The number of students served amounted to 4,500. 5. National Wildlife Federation Special, 1991 In working to advance the achievements of the development agenda of the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations at large, the National Wildlife Federation has advocated for environmental sustainability in both national and international forums. In 2007, representatives of the Federation attended the following meetings in relation to climate change and sustainable development: :: United Nations Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting for the Commission on Sustainable Development, fifteenth session, New York, New York (26 February-2 March) :: Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, thirteenth session, Bali, Indonesia (3-15 December) In 2008, representatives of the Federation attended the following meetings: :: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change intersessionals on climate change in Bangkok (31 March-4 April); Bonn (2-13 June); and Accra (21-27 August) :: Twenty-eighth session of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice in Bonn (4-13 June) :: Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, fourteenth session, Poznan, Poland (1-12 December) In 2009, representatives of the Federation attended the following meetings: :: United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development, seventeenth session, New York, New York (4-15 May) :: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change intersessionals on climate change in Bonn (29 March-8 April and 10-14 August); Bangkok 28 September-9 October); and Barcelona, Spain (2-6 November) :: Twenty-ninth session of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice in Bonn (1-12 June) :: Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, fifteenth session, Copenhagen (7-18 December) In 2010, representatives of the Federation attended the following meetings: :: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change intersessionals on climate change in Bonn (9-11 April and 2-6 August); and Tianjin, China (4-9 October) :: Thirtieth session of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice in Bonn (31 May-9 June) :: Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, sixteenth session, Cancun, Mexico (29 November-10 December) In 2007, representatives of the Federation hosted a side event with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at the thirteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention in Bali, Indonesia, on 12 December titled on the theme "Distribution of allowances in a United States cap and trade system". In 2008, representatives of the Federation hosted a side event with Conservation International, the Nature Conservancy, Oxfam, CARE and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at the fourteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention in Poznan, Poland, on 9 December on the theme "Voices of conservation and development on adaptation strategy -- drawing on experience to meet climate". In 2009, representatives of the Federation hosted a side event with the International Livestock Research Institute and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention in Copenhagen on 12 December on the theme "Livestock sector evolution: trade-offs with food, feed and biofuels and solutions to deforestation". In 2010, representatives of the Federation hosted a side event with the Union of Concerned Scientists and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change at the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention in Cancun, Mexico, on 9 December on the theme "Ending deforestation for cattle: challenges, opportunities and workable solutions" . At the fifteenth session of the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Copenhagen, the organization hosted several events focusing on greenhouse gas emissions, forestry and climate change between 10 and 17 December 2009; and hosted an event in Copenhagen on Agriculture Day at the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change on the theme "From source to sink: reducing commodity agriculture's impacts on natural lands". In 2010, at the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Cancun, Mexico, the organization hosted several events focusing on greenhouse gas emissions, deforestation, climate change and forest management. In Cancun, Mexico, the organization hosted an event on Agriculture Day at the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change on the theme "Reducing greenhouse gas emissions from cattle ranching in the Brazilian Amazon". During the reporting period, the organization advocated for the United States Government to take domestic action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Federation also advocated for the United States delegation to the United Nations to support the adoption of a binding climate treaty and to contribute to the climate change financial mechanism. It also focused on ensuring that policy takes account of social and equity issues in preparing and executing Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation solutions. 6. Network Women in Development Europe The Network promotes a human rights approach, and its work is based on international instruments such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action. In November 2006, the High-Level Panel on United Nations system-wide Coherence released a 52-page report to which the Network contributed in its consultation with the panel that was unanimously supported by women's organizations. In February 2007, the Network participated in an Eastern European regional meeting in Bratislava, preparing for a global meeting, held from 2 to 4 March 2007, in conjunction with the fifty-first session of the Commission on the Status of Women in New York. The global collaboration resulted in the Gender Equality Architecture Reform Campaign. The Network formed a working group for the Gender Equality Architecture Reform Campaign together with organizations in Europe actively lobbying their Governments and European Union institutions. :: Fifty-first session of the Commission on the Status of Women, New York (26 February-9 March 2007) :: Third High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development, New York (23-25 October 2007) :: Fifty-second session of the Commission on the Status of Women, New York (25 February-7 March 2008) :: Follow-up International Conference on Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, Doha (29 November-2 December 2008) :: The Network contributed to the United Nations expert panel on "Political responses to the crisis from a gender perspective" (March 2009) :: Beijing+15 Regional Review Meeting, Economic Commission for Europe, Geneva, 2009 :: Fifty-third session of the Commission on the Status of Women, New York (2-13 March 2009) :: The Network facilitated a workshop during the Civil Society Development Forum, held in Geneva from 28 to 30 June 2007, to prepare civil society input into the meeting of the United Nations Economic and Social Council with Member States, held the following week :: The Network as part of the CONCORD Gender Task Force, monitored the implementation of the European Commission/United Nations Partnership on Gender Equality for Development and Peace :: In 2008, the Network jointly organized an International Consultation on Women's Rights Organizations and Networks and Aid Effectiveness on 31 January and 1 February 2008, in Ottawa, with financial support from UNIFEM, Action Aid International and the Canadian International Development Agency. Outputs from this consultation were a set of recommendations on aid effectiveness and gender equality for the Accra Agenda for Action, agreed by the participants, and a report on the consultation entitled "Making Women's Rights and Gender Equality a Priority in the Aid Effectiveness Agenda", which serves as a reference document for advocacy actions. The Network contributed to the Women's Consultation on Policy Responses to Global Crisis, April 2009 :: In 2010, the Network focused part of its advocacy efforts on work around Beijing+15, and the Network secretariat and national platforms participated in several high-level meetings organized by the United Nations and the European Union, including: the Beijing+15 United Nations Economic Commission for Europe meeting in Geneva; European Parliament public hearing organized by the Committee on Women's Rights to discuss the European Union gender strategy and Beijing+15 (27 January 2010). :: The Network was actively involved during the High-Level Dialogue on Financing for Development, New York (23-24 October 2007) to raise awareness about the lack of progress towards Millennium Development Goal 3 :: In 2010, the Network launched its "Mobilizing for Gender Justice Beyond the Millennium Development Goals" campaign. You are invited to visit the Network United Nations Watch Blog for more information. In the framework of this campaign, the Network has published two special bulletins on this topic, which are available online from www.wide-network.org. Additional information :: In advance of different United Nations meetings, the Network concentrated on two types of actions, namely monitoring and influencing the European Union and Member States on policy positions and processes, especially on aid effectiveness and financing for development :: Building the capacities of the Network and its partners, aiming at a critical engagement of women's organizations and advocates in those processes, as well as organizing awareness-raising activities. 7. Nonviolent Peaceforce Nonviolent Peaceforce has provided information about its work and the practice of civilian protection and prevention of violence and how they can be utilized to a variety of United Nations entities. Such protection and safety are foundational to development work. United Nations bodies that Nonviolent Peaceforce has interacted with include: the Department of Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the Interagency Framework Team for Preventive Action, the Peacebuilding Commission Support Office, the United Nations Office for Partnerships, the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Prevention of Genocide, and the Office of the President of the General Assembly. Nonviolent Peaceforce did not formally participate in forums of the United Nations. In its field work, Nonviolent Peaceforce has cooperated with: :: Project in collaboration with UNICEF to strengthen community participation in child protection in the north and east of Sri Lanka (2007-2008) :: Project in collaboration with UNDP in Sri Lanka providing training to civilians on capacity-building and protection (2009-2010) :: Consultation sessions on civilian protection and prevention of violence with UNICEF, UNDP, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations Office for Partnerships in New York in February 2010 and Geneva in May 2010 :: Project in collaboration with UNICEF to provide protection of women and children in the state of Western Equatoria in South Sudan, begun in 2011. Safety, security and stability are required for the realization of all of the Millennium Development Goals. Nonviolent Peaceforce, in partnership with local civil society organizations, works to protect civilians and deter violence in Sri Lanka, the Philippines and southern Sudan so that the Millennium Development Goals can be better achieved. 8. Northern Ireland Women's European Platform Northern Ireland Women's European Platform is an umbrella organization for women's groups and organizations with commitment to gender equality and the vision for a Northern Ireland where equality exists between women and men in safety and physical integrity, participation in public life, quality of life and access to services, economic security and social protection. It aims to reflect the position of women in Northern Ireland in international standards and mechanisms and to hold government accountable for working towards equality through meeting international standards. A number of key external factors have had an impact on the focus of the work of the Northern Ireland Women's European Platform. International: the strengthening of the commitment to Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the need for it to be implemented in Northern Ireland. European: representing the groups in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland at the European Women's Lobby as the United Kingdom representative and elected to the Executive of the Local Political: the country emerging into post-conflict but without gender structures or National: devolved government for Northern Ireland and its impact on women across England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. A number of projects including: Women in Northern Ireland Connecting to Europe -- Advancing Women's Equality through European policy and international conventions (2008); Older Women in Northern Ireland and the 12 critical areas (2009); Preparing the Northern Ireland Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women shadow report (2008); established in the legislature for Northern Ireland an all-party working group on resolution 1325 (2000) and providing the secretariat (2010); regular information circulated through newsletters and website (ongoing); developed and delivered a training programme (accredited) on the work of the United Nations in gender equality (2009); shared outcome from attending Commission on the Status of Women (2008-2010) around Northern Ireland; contributed to the development and delivery of an international conference for women in Northern Ireland, including raising awareness of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) (2007/8); training on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women at the United Nations to two members of the Northern Ireland Women's European Platform who went on to lead NGOs at the reporting session on the Convention for the United Kingdom government Members of the Gender and Advisory Group on Peace and Security. 2010: attended sessions of the Commission on the Status of Women. 2010: attended the Economic Commission for Europe preparations for the fifty-fourth session of the Commission on the Status of Women on Beijing+15 in Geneva and the session itself; produced publications, trained eight people and had them deliver a workshop at the United Nations and 2009: provided a written statement on the equal sharing of responsibilities by women and men, including caregiving, in the context of HIV/AIDS; trained over 30 women and prepared them to deliver a workshop at an international conference in Belfast. The Northern Ireland Women's European Platform also prepared a written statement in 2008 on "Financing for gender equalities and employment of women", submitted a written statement in 2007 and prepared a written statement in 2008, and led NGOs of the United Kingdom at its reporting session on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 2007: visit from member of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to speak to women in Northern Ireland on the work of UNIFEM (UN-Women) to support the Convention in Northern Ireland. Raised awareness in ensuring that goal 3 is strengthened at the last Millennium Development Goals Summit meeting, as without addressing the lack of women in decision-making, none of the other goals will be achieved. This was done through a letter to United Kingdom Government and newsletter meetings with NGOs across the United Kingdom. 9. PanAmerican-PanAfrican Association Special, 1995 Founded in 1968, the PanAmerican-PanAfrican Association is a cultural, educational and economic exchange foundation that has: organized many United Nations programmes to encourage cultural understanding; promoted the rights of indigenous peoples and women; and supported the development of sustainable technologies to address climate change. The establishment and expansion of the Association's International Trade Consultants Group affiliate organizations in the United Republic of Tanzania, Japan and the Federated States of Micronesia confirms the belief of the Association's founder, Dr. Robert Pritchard, that cultural, economic and educational exchanges promoted by civil society can promote better understanding and goodwill between peoples of the United States and members of the international community. Since the late 1990s, the Association has expanded its work in the Far East and the Pacific Islands through private sector involvement in sustainable development to foster food security and adaptation to climate change as a means of economic empowerment and the preservation of cultural heritage. In January 2010, the organization joined the United Nations Conference of NGOs in consultative relationship with the United Nations (CONGO) to network with NGOs. The Association will devote a series of broadcasts of the "Emerald Planet" to the activities of CONGO members. The "Emerald Planet" is a permanent programme of the Association and works to identify at least 1,000 best practices for sustainable environmental and economic development. The Association's Executive Director and Associate Director were guests on the "Emerald Planet" to discuss the significance of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals in achieving environmental sustainability. The Association's NGO representative was interviewed on the "Emerald Planet" to discuss the United Nations Small Island Developing States Partnership and his work in coral reef restoration in small island developing States. In February 2010, the Association's Black History Month Founder's Commission issued Proclamations to United States Governors and 100 Big City Mayors encouraging them to support the United Nations Millennium Development Goal to eradicate poverty and to reflect on the need to address the devastation caused by the earthquake in Haiti and the global AIDS/HIV epidemic. :: The Association's United Nations representative attended the eighth session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (18-29 May 2009) :: The Association's representative attended the Commission on the Status of Women in New York, fifty-first session (26 February-9 March 2007); the fiftysecond session (25 February-7 March 2008); and the fifty-third session (213 March 2010) :: The Association's representative attended the fifteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD 15), networking with representatives of small island developing State countries and sustainable development technologists on 11 May 2007; attended the sixteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD 16) (5-16 May 2008); on 15 May 2008, hosted side event -- "New Technologies to combat Climate Change in Small Island Developing States"; launched SIDS Partnership for Implementation of New Sustainable Technologies; began compilation of the "Green Disc", a volume on little known but proven sustainable technologies; the Association's Executive Director attended the seventeenth session of the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (4-15 May 2009) and the Informal Interactive Hearings of the General Assembly with NonGovernmental organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector (14-15 June 2010). Assisted Indigenous NGOs from the Marshall Islands in developing a "Community Earth Box" Grant for the Nukuoro Residents Association; submitted to and selected by the World Bank Development Marketplace Competition for Innovative Ways to Combat Climate Change (selected as one of the top 100 candidates out of over 1,700 applicants); Association executives assisted in preparing for the presentation at the office of the World Bank in Washington, D.C. In 2010, established the Help People Protect, Propagate and Farm Integrated Sustainable Habitats (Help PPPFISH) as a permanent programme of the Association; worked with the people of Nukuoro to establish the Matalama Artists Cooperative, an indigenous organization aiming to empower the female community of Nukuoro to produce and market traditional handicrafts (July): donated $1,000 to Water Charity for Ferro-Cement Tanks for the Dominican Republic and Haiti Programme, in partnership with the United States Peace Corps in line with the Millennium Development Goal efforts to bring drinking water to rural households; yearly donation to Shina, Inc., a grass-roots African women's organization located in Maryland, United States of America, that improves educational and economic opportunities for women and young girls in the United Republic of Tanzania and Kenya. 10. Pax Christi International Special, 1979 Pax Christi International is a global Catholic peace movement and network working to help establish peace, respect for human rights, justice and reconciliation in areas of the world torn by conflict. Pax Christi International is a faith-based network seeking to transform a world shaken by violence, terrorism, deepening inequalities and global insecurity into a world where people can live in peace, without fear of violence in all its forms. On disarmament: :: In 2007, the Geneva Forum and the International Campaign to Ban Landmines, co-organized a forum on 9 October in Geneva on the theme "Addressing the humanitarian impact of cluster munitions"; Pax Christi International is a member of both the Cluster Munitions Coalition and the International Campaign to Ban Landmines. :: In 2008, delegates of Pax Christi International attended the "Third Biennial Meeting of States to consider the implementation of the Programme of Action to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects" at the United Nations in New York (14-18 July). :: In 2009, Pax Christi International secretariat published an Arms Trade Treaty Advocacy Package and distributed it to all Pax Christi International member organizations and partners worldwide. :: In 2010, a preparatory Committee on the Arms Trade Treaty was convened at the United Nations in New York (12-23 July), giving a chance to the Peace Movement to send a powerful, global message to the world's governments that called for a firm and effective international arms trade treaty. During the reporting period, at sessions of the Human Rights Council, Pax Christi International delivered oral and written statements on biological weapons and on Iraqi refugees, displaced persons and minorities. It also submitted a report highlighting the deteriorating political, economic and social conditions in Guinea, following the death of President Conte. In a written statement submitted to the Human Rights Council at its fifteenth session, it provided six recommendations to continue the process of democratization in the country. The organization co-signed an open letter in 2007 addressed to Luis Alfonso de Alba, President of the Human Rights Council, regarding transparency in the new mechanisms and on the participation of NGOs in the Universal Periodic Review. The following days/weeks have been selected during the period 2007-2010: 27 January -- International day of commemoration in memory of the victims of the Holocaust; first week of February-World Interfaith Harmony Week; 20 February -- World Day of Social Justice; 8 March -- International Day for Women's Rights and International Peace; 21 March -- International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and start of the Week of Solidarity with Peoples Struggling against Racism and Racial Discrimination. Pax Christi International had the opportunity to address the Meeting of Experts of the States Parties to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention in Geneva (2428 August 2009). The statement points out that building capacity to fight diseases should also contribute to the health issues addressed in the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, to which 189 countries have subscribed. The International Committee of the International Coalition for the Decade for the Promotion of a Culture of Peace and Non-violence for the Children of the World (2001-2010) met in Paris on 29 and 30 September 2008. 11. Paz y Cooperación Paz y Cooperación is a non-profit and non-governmental organization that has striven for peace and cooperation in the world since 1982. It was founded in Madrid by Joaquín Antuña and works under the motto "Create and Survive". Its main objective is to meet the needs of the most vulnerable people by enforcing peace and sustainable development, especially in Latin America, Africa and the Middle East. Moreover, since 1988, Paz y Cooperación organizes an international school award in close cooperation with the United Nations in order to encourage schools from all over the world to reflect on social and political topics. Paz y Cooperación focuses particularly on the key areas of peace, disarmament, development, human rights, solidarity action, medical care and global education. Paz y Cooperación was established with the purpose of serving the United Nations goals, and its work touches on all of the Millennium Development Goals in an effort to build a peaceful planet. In order to achieve its objectives, Paz y Cooperación participates in regular sessions of the main bodies of the Economic and Social Council, launching the annual Peace and Cooperation School Award, and in the work of the Human Rights Council and the Commission on the Status of Women, as well as cooperating with regional actors in the field in order to sustain practical projects related to sustainable development in general and the Millennium Development Goals in particular. In recent years, Paz y Cooperación has actively participated in regular meetings organized by the Council's subsidiary bodies, attending the forty-sixth and fortyseventh sessions of the Commission for Social Development, held in New York, and fifty-first to fifty-third sessions of the Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York. In the past years Paz y Cooperación has actively participated in other regular and special meetings organized by the United Nations and other organizations, such as: :: Session of the United Nations Department of Public Information Conference with NGOs in New York (5-7 September 2007); Paris (3-5 September 2008); Mexico City (9-11 September 2009); Melbourne, Australia (30 August-1 September 2010) :: The World Summit on the Information Society, Geneva (14-25 May 2007, 1323 May 2008, 18-22 May 2009, 10-14 May 2010) :: Foundation for Drug Free Europe, Brussels (26 June 2008) :: World Congress on Early Childhood Education for Peace, Albacete, Spain (2022 April 2007) Paz y Cooperación has been involved in several projects during this period, most of which were related to the Millennium Development Goals: :: Paz y Cooperación ensures food security in El Salvador by strengthening socio-economic development and by supporting local knowledge in the use of innovative technologies :: Paz y Cooperación supports the most vulnerable population in the Sudan by increasing sources of information about HIV/AIDS and introducing prevention programmes :: Paz y Cooperación helps to integrate women into the process of development through the creation and promotion of small business, especially in Colombia :: Paz y Cooperación improves maternal and child health by creating health-care and support centres in various communities suffering from extreme poverty in the Dominican Republic :: Paz y Cooperación improves the sanitary and social conditions of 300 people affected by HIV/AIDS by supporting the institutional programme to fight against HIV/AIDS and providing care to people affected by the virus in Uganda :: Paz y Cooperación improves living conditions and facilitates access to natural resources of the most marginalized populations in Mexico. Main school information campaigns related to the United Nations: Paz y Cooperación school award: :: My right to decide, Cairo, 2007 :: Water for all, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2008 :: Peace and the United Nations, Belgrade, 2009 :: Take care of your planet -- all against climate change, Dubai, 2010 12. Permanent Assembly for Human Rights The organization's name is Permanent Assembly for Human Rights. Its geographical coverage comprises 30 offices throughout Argentina and three permanent representations in Geneva, Berlin, Germany and New York. To promote the observation of Human Rights and information about them, in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as to the related international instruments and the constitution of Argentina; to play an active role in maintaining the democratic life of the country within a pluralistic society; to research, investigate and evaluate the data and information on the national and the international situations with regards to human rights; to actively cooperate with political authorities and other institutions for a real practice of human rights; to denounce all violations against human rights, whoever the agent of such violation may be. Registration and accreditation in the register of civil society organizations of the Organization of American States, on 4 December 2009; affiliation to the International Coalition against Enforced Disappearances on 30 March 2009; establishment of two new delegations in Argentina and of permanent representation in New York and Washington, D.C. Between 2007 and 2010, the Assembly commissions carried out a number of activities and produced various publications to advance the United Nations agenda as follows: awareness-raising and capacity development workshops for government officials, teachers, students, NGOs and other stakeholders on issues such as human rights; work in collective construction that maintains enforcement mechanisms; the consequences of the dictatorship period; the importance of memory; and the role of the State and its responsibility as guarantor of rights. Other activities include the implementation of a programme for promoting child nutrition in the context of poverty. Representatives attended the following sessions: ninth session of the Universal Periodic Review, Geneva (1-12 November 2010); commemoration event for the thirtieth anniversary of the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, Geneva (5 November 2010); first session of the Intergovernmental Working Group on the Review of the Work and Functioning of the Human Rights Council, Geneva (25-29 October 2010); fifth session of the Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, Geneva (2-6 August 2010). Representatives presented a written statement on the Committee's report on missing persons at that session. :: Addressed communications to the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council: to the Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers and to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances about the disappearance of the Colombian sociologist Miguel Angel Beltrán Villegas and to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances on the ongoing disappearance of Julio Lopez (updated), Geneva (20 February 2010). :: Contributions to the stakeholders' report for the Universal Periodic Review of Cuba, Geneva (5 February 2009) and for the Universal Periodic Review of Argentina, Geneva (19 November 2007) :: Fifteenth session of the Human Rights Council, Geneva (13 September-1 October 2010). Representatives attended the session and jointly presented with Coordinadura Nacionál de Mujeres Rurales e Indígenas (Paraguay) the following oral statements: right to development; toxic waste; situation of indigenous populations in Paraguay :: Fourteenth session of the Human Rights Council, Geneva (31 May-18 June 2010). Representatives attended the session and presented an oral statement on the Committee's report on missing persons. Not applicable. 13. Program for Appropriate Technology in Health The Program for Appropriate Technology in Health now works in more than 70 countries and has added offices in Abidjan; Kinshasa; Addis Ababa; Accra; Bhopal, India; Kakamega, Kenya; Lilongwe, Malawi; and Abuja. Since 2006, the Program has closed offices in Bangalore, Imphal and Chennai in India; and Jakarta. In 2006, the board amended a by-law to now state: "A majority of the board of directors shall be nationals from countries in Africa, Asia, Eastern Europe, and Latin America and the Caribbean." The Program contributes to the advancement of the development agenda of the United Nations by promoting higher standards of living for individuals around the world and by identifying and implementing innovative solutions to global health problems. 2010: Senior officers of the Program's Rotavirus Vaccine Programme presented an update on rotavirus vaccines at the World Health Organization (WHO) Global Immunization Meeting in Geneva (1-3 February). The Program: co-hosted a Global Health Council Panel, and the President and Chief Executive Officer spoke on achieving health goals in New York (19 September); co-sponsored Women Deliver Brunch in New York (19 September); representatives attended the Every Woman, Every Child event to launch the Global Strategy for Women's and Children's Health sponsored by the United Nations Foundation; and contributed to the working papers of the Innovation Working Group in New York (22 September). The Meningitis Vaccine Project, a partnership between the Program and WHO, developed a group A meningococcal conjugate vaccine, MenAfriVac(TM), for mass vaccination of people in the WHO Expanded Programme on Immunization African "meningitis belt" countries. By December 2010, the project had immunized 19.5 million people in Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger (2001 to the present). In partnership with WHO, the Program uses operational research methods to assess the feasibility, impact and costs of strategies for reaching adolescent girls with human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine in India, Peru, Uganda and Viet Nam (2003 to the present). The Program partners with WHO to provide long-term technical assistance to countries with high tuberculosis burdens under the Stop TB Strategy in the United Republic of Tanzania, India, Cambodia and Ukraine (2004 to the present). The Program served as the secretariat for the Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition, whose members include WHO and the United Nations Population Fund (2006-2009). Optimize, a collaboration between WHO and the Program, works to design vaccine supply chains and technologies that can support an increasingly large and costly vaccine portfolio and to create synergies with delivery of other health commodities in Albania, Guatemala, Senegal, Tunisia, Viet Nam, Thailand and South Africa (2007 to the present). In partnership with WHO and the United Nations Children's Fund, the Program works with the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations to advance the introduction of rotavirus and pneumococcal conjugate vaccines in more than 40 countries worldwide (2009 to the present). In order to combat malnutrition and bring fortification to vulnerable rice-consuming communities, the Program developed a nutrient-rich, manufactured "grain" called Ultra Rice to mix with large quantities of rice in India, Brazil and Colombia; Gender Equality Program for Appropriate Technology in Health is working to expand women's options in reproductive health through technologies that include an unobtrusive, affordable female condom, a one-size-fits-most diaphragm, and a gel and applicator to protect against HIV; as a part of the Enhanced Diarrheal Disease Control Initiative, the Program provides policymakers in developing countries with the tools and information on how to invest in the control of diarrhoeal disease in Cambodia, Kenya, Nicaragua and Georgia; the Rotavirus Vaccine Programme is a collaboration of the Program, WHO and the United States Centers for Disease Control, and is funded by the GAVI Alliance to demonstrate and replicate a successful model for introduction of the vaccine to children worldwide; to address post-partum haemorrhage, the Program is investigating the administration of oxytocin via the prefilled, autodisable Uniject(TM) injection system that can be utilized by community-based health workers with low levels of training; the Program's Malaria Control and Evaluation Partnership in Africa works to promote rapid scale-up of malaria prevention and control efforts for health and economic impact in sub-Saharan Africa; beginning in India, the Program's Safe Water Programme conducts research on existing technologies to treat and store water in homes as well as assessing the capacity of manufacturers and distributors within the market; the Program's President and Chief Executive Officer has been appointed Secretary and Co-chair of the Decade of Vaccines Collaboration Steering Committee, a global effort to develop a global action plan for increasing access to vaccines for the world's most vulnerable populations. 14. Ramola Bhar Charitable Trust Ramola Bhar Charitable Trust was established in the year 1990 by a group of academicians, professionals and grass-roots level activists to create a habitable society and ensure justice and equality for women and children. In 1997, a movement called STOP (Stop Trafficking and Oppression of Children and Women) was initiated under the trust. The organization has been working in slums in Delhi and at the village level in western Bengal while running a shelter home for vulnerable women, children and trafficked survivors. Some programmes on sexually transmitted infections/HIV/AIDS were executed in the Indo-Nepal border state of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and with Bedia and Prerna communities in Rajasthan and Delhi. The organization was accorded an associate membership of ECPAT International (End Child Prostitution, Child Pornography and Trafficking of Children for Sexual Purposes) in 2009; the president of the organization has been included as the only NGO member of the Regional Task Force on Trafficking to implement South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Conventions relating to Trafficking in Women and Children and Promotion of Child Welfare, Government of India, since 2007. The programmes of the organization have been designed and identified to cater to people belonging to high-risk communities, trafficked victims/survivors and women at risk of being trafficked, and tracking their journey from victims to survivors. An enormous part of the work of the organization includes the recovery and empowerment of survivors, including providing education, vocational skills and legal aid. An abstract entitled "HIV/AIDS: A threat to the Stability of Democratic Institutions and the Family" has been submitted for the tenth International Congress on AIDS in Asia and the Pacific held in Bussan, Republic of Korea (26-30 August); participated in a "First South Asia Anti-Trafficking Think Tank Core Group Meeting", New Delhi (3-4 December 2009) organized by UNIFEM, and presented a country paper on "Indian initiative for care and support, repatriation and rehabilitation for trafficked survivors"; participated as a delegate in World Congress III against Sexual Exploitation of Children and Adolescents, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2328 November 2008). The organization is a member of the working group formed by the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) (UN-Women), India, and the National Commission of Women, India, for developing strategies for policy advocacy to reduce all forms of violence against women in India, with special focus on trafficking of women. The Compendium of Best Practices on Anti-Trafficking by Non-Governmental Organizations published by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, New Delhi, in 2008, made many references to the work of the organization. Attended a number of regional meetings on the prevention of HIV/AIDS organized by the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Development Programme and the Olof Palme International Centre and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, Sweden, and presented a paper on "HIV/AIDS as a rights issue can be integrated into project activities". On the occasion of the World Day on Prevention of Child Abuse Day on 19 November 2007, organized a meeting with the participation of the children, young boys and girls, and adults of Bawana. 15. Romanian Independent Society of Human Rights The Romanian Independent Society of Human Rights, a non-governmental organization, was founded at the initiative of a group of volunteers at the beginning of 1990, was legally recognized by decision 1783/25.06.1990 issued by the Bucharest Court of Romania. The Society is a national NGO, and its activities and programmes are developed in Romania. The Society's Constitution by-law, reviewed in 1999, affirms, inter alia, the non-profit nature of the organization. The Society's statutory purpose is to protect and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms as they are reflected in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international and regional instruments to which Romania is a party. The Society's leading body is the General Assembly. The organization has a copresidential structure, who are elected by the vote of the General Assembly for a period of four years. The General Assembly also appoints the Executive Director. The General Assembly also certifies the members of the Leading Council, which is responsible for evaluating the Society's activities and the expenses at the end of each year and whenever necessary. The financial management of the projects usually includes an audit conducted by specialized independent audit companies. The Society's Constitution by-law was reviewed in 1999. The organization's general vision is in accordance with the judicial decision authorizing the establishment of the Society in 1990 and has not changed since the Society was granted consultative status with the Economic and Social Council. Over the past four years the contribution of the Society has been especially visible in specific activities to promote human rights in the Human Rights Council, in relation to United Nations Special Rapporteurs and, less directly, in the development agenda of the Economic and Social Council. Aspects related to promoting respect of human rights for all, in terms of civil, political, economic, social, cultural and systematic character of infringements on some categories of rights, were included in the document provided to the Universal Periodic Review process applicable to Romania. The document provided to the Human Rights Council gave an account of the experience acquired by the Society in the field of human rights, focused on guaranteeing human rights and the regime of international treaties in the constitutional system and Romania's obligations under the treaty bodies, such as the Human Rights Council, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the Committee against Torture, the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on Migrant Workers. Equally, the summary document considered other phenomena that affect human rights and are a challenge for Romania, such as general corruption, international terrorism, organized crime, commercial fraud, trafficking in humans and drugs. The representatives of the organization have participated: as an observer to the sixth session, second part, of the Human Rights Council, Geneva (10-14 December 2007); and as panellist at the First Alliance of Civilizations South East European Conference Sarajevo (14 December 2009). Starting in 1999, the Society has benefited from financing from the United Nations Voluntary Fund for the Victims of Torture, which also created our relationship with the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture. The financing is aimed at providing: direct legal assistance to the victims of torture and their families; information (decoded and adapted to specific situations) and education on the functionality of national and international institutions, especially regarding human rights issues reported in categories pertaining to arrest/detention (adults, minors, migrants, refugees, stateless persons); difficulties which the clients of programme are confronting with their peoples' attempts to ensure that their rights are acknowledged; and access to complaint mechanisms and special procedures of the United Nations system (on torture, degrading treatment, ethnic discrimination, discrimination against women and domestic violence). The Society monitored both concrete cases and the status of reform on: :: Decreasing the level of illiterate persons in prisons, including those belonging to the Roma population :: Ensuring that all prisoners who so need benefit from primary and secondary classes :: Preventing the contraction of HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis in detention. The programmes and activities of the Society have been developed in cooperation with departments from the Council of Europe, the European Court of Human Rights, and the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. 