%%%FINANCING|GENDER EQUALITY|EMPOWERMENT|

Commission on the Status of Women Fifty-sixth session 27 February-9 March 2012 Item 3 (a) of the provisional agenda* * E/CN.6/2012/1. Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and to the special session of the General Assembly entitled "Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century": implementation of strategic objectives and action in critical areas of concern and further actions and initiatives; priority theme: "the empowerment of rural women and their role in poverty and hunger eradication, development and current challenges" Statement submitted by African Action on AIDS, Associated Country Women of the World, European Union of Women, Hadassah: Women's Zionist Organization of America, International Alliance of Women, International Association of Democratic Lawyers, International Council of Women, International Federation for Home Economics, International Federation of Business and Professional Women, International Federation of University Women, National Council of German Women's Organizations, Salvation Army, Servas International, Socialist International Women, Soroptimist International, Women's Federation for World Peace International and Women's International Zionist Organization, non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. We, the undersigned international and national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, members of the Vienna NGO Committee on the Status of Women, present to the participants of the fifty-sixth session of the Commission on the Status of Women for information and consideration the following statement on financing for gender equality and the empowerment of women. In order to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of women at the national level, the necessary instruments and mechanisms have to be established, and adequate funding has to be provided. Sex-disaggregated qualitative and quantitative data are needed to identify target groups and tailor required support programmes. At the same time, women's NGOs committed to and working on the issue deserve public support and the necessary financial resources for their work. At the international level, gender equality and the empowerment of women are necessary prerequisites for the design and implementation of decent and proper financing for development. Gender equality is integral to all aspects of financing for development, especially as the structure of an economy and its resource flows can perpetuate inequities, including gender discrimination. The Doha Declaration of 2008 states that "... gender equality is a basic human right, a fundamental value and an issue of social justice; it is essential for economic growth, poverty reduction, environmental sustainability and development effectiveness". Member States therein pledge to promote women's rights, "including their economic empowerment, and effectively mainstream gender ... in economic programmes, and give women full and equal access to economic resources". Therefore, the undersigned NGOs consider it essential to: :: Adopt a gender perspective in all policies, programmes and budgets. Consistent budgets should be allocated to the promotion of women's rights and gender equality; :: Ensure that women participate in the drafting, preparation and adoption of budgets so as to move on from commitments to their effective implementation; :: Help meet the United Nations Millennium Development Goals and the objectives of the New Partnership for Africa's Development; :: Ensure that experts in both gender analysis and/or development planning are trained and employed in all development aid programmes; :: Encourage all Member States to increase their core contribution to the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWomen) in a predictable, stable and, where feasible, multi-year manner. 