%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|POLLUTION CONTROL|LAND USE|FORESTRY|ADMINISTRATIVE FEES|TREATIES (TEXT)|GUIDELINES|FOREST MANAGEMENT|ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENTS|CAPACITY BUILDING|

United Nations FCCC/KP/CMP/2010/12/Add.1 Framework Convention on Climate Change Distr.: General 15 March 2011 Original: English Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on its sixth session, held in Cancun from 29 November to 10 December 2010 Addendum Part Two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its sixth session Contents Decisions adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol Page Decision 1/CMP.6 The Cancun Agreements: Outcome of the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol at its fifteenth session The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, Recalling Article 3, paragraph 9, of the Kyoto Protocol, Also recalling Article 20, paragraph 2, and Article 21, paragraph 7, of the Kyoto Protocol, Further recalling decisions 1/CMP.1 and 1/CMP.5, Recognizing that Parties included in Annex I (Annex I Parties) should continue to take the lead in combating climate change, Also recognizing that the contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2007: Mitigation of Climate Change, indicates that achieving the lowest levels assessed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to date and its corresponding potential damage limitation would require Annex I Parties as a group to reduce emissions in a range of 25 - 40 per cent below 1990 levels by 2020, through means that may be available to these Parties to reach their emission reduction targets, Noting the reports of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol from its sessions to date and the oral report by the Chair to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its sixth session, Welcoming the progress achieved by the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol on its work pursuant to decisions 1/CMP.1 and 1/CMP.5, Cognizant of decision 1/CP.16 (Outcome of the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention), 1. Agrees that the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol shall aim to complete its work pursuant to decision 1/CMP.1 and have its results adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol as early as possible and in time to ensure that there is no gap between the first and second commitment periods; 2. Requests the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol to continue its work referred to in paragraph 1 above on the proposals contained in document FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/CRP.4/Rev.4; 3. Takes note of quantified economy-wide emission reduction targets to be implemented by Annex I Parties as communicated by them and contained in document FCCC/SB/2011/INF.1;, 4. Urges Annex I Parties to raise the level of ambition of the emission reductions to be achieved by them individually or jointly, with a view to reducing their aggregate level of emissions of greenhouse gases in accordance with the range indicated by Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2007: Mitigation of Climate Change, and taking into account the quantitative implications of the use of land use, land-use change and forestry activities, emissions trading and project-based mechanisms and the carry-over of units from the first to the second commitment period; 5. Agrees that further work is needed to convert emission reduction targets to quantified economy-wide limitation or reduction commitments; 6. Also agrees that: (a) In the second commitment period the base year shall be 1990, or the base year or period determined in accordance with Article 3, paragraph 5, of the Kyoto Protocol, for the purpose of calculating assigned amounts; in addition, a reference year may be used by a Party on an optional basis for its own purposes to express its quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives as a percentage of emissions of that year, that is not internationally binding under the Kyoto Protocol, in addition to the listing of its quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives in relation to the base year; (b) Emissions trading and the project-based mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol shall continue to be available to Annex I Parties as a means to meet their quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives in accordance with relevant decisions of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol as may be further improved through decisions to be adopted based on the draft text contained in chapter III of document FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/CRP.4/Rev.4; (c) Measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to enhance removals resulting from anthropogenic land use, land-use change and forestry activities shall continue to be available to Annex I Parties as a means to reach their quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives, in accordance with decision 2/CMP.6; (d) The global warming potentials used to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases listed in Annex A for the second commitment period shall be those provided by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and agreed upon by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol together with other methodological issues based on the draft text contained in chapter IV of document FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/CRP.4/Rev.4; (e) Further work on the consideration of information on potential environmental, economic and social consequences, including spillover effects, of tools, policies, measures and methodologies available to Annex I Parties shall continue on the basis of proposals contained in chapter V of document FCCC/KP/AWG/2010/CRP.4/Rev.4. 10th plenary meeting 10 - 11 December 2010 Decision 2/CMP.6 The Cancun Agreements: Land use, land-use change and forestry Affirming that the implementation of land use, land-use change and forestry activities included under the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol shall be consistent with the objectives and principles of, and any decisions taken under, the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol, 1. Affirms that the principles contained in paragraph 1 of decision 16/CMP.1 continue to govern the treatment of land use, land-use change and forestry activities; 2. Agrees that the definitions of forest, afforestation, reforestation, deforestation, revegetation, forest management, cropland management and grazing land management shall be the same as in the first commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol; 3. Requests the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol to consider, in time for possible inclusion in the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol, if appropriate, whether a cap should be applied to emissions and removals from forest management and how extraordinary occurrences (called force majeure) whose severity is beyond the control of, and not materially influenced by, a Party can be addressed; 4. Also requests each Annex I Party to submit to the secretariat, by 28 February 2011, information on the forest management reference level inscribed in appendix I to this decision, including any update to replace the value, in accordance with the guidelines outlined in part I of appendix II to this decision; 5. Decides that each submission referred to in paragraph 4 above shall be subject to a technical assessment by a review team in accordance with the guidelines outlined in part II of appendix II to this decision, and that outcomes of the technical assessment will be considered by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its next session; 6. Requests the secretariat, subject to the availability of funds, to organize the technical assessments referred to in paragraph 5 above; 7. Also requests the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol to continue its consideration of definitions, modalities, rules and guidelines relating to land use, land-use change and forestry activities under the Kyoto Protocol for application in the second commitment period. Reference levels submitted by Annex I Parties to the Kyoto Protocol Party Reference level (Mt CO2eq/year) Australia Austria Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Canada Croatia Cyprusa Czech Republic Denmark Estonia European Union (27) - 283.20a Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Japan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Maltaa Monaco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russian Federation Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine - 28.5b United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland The European Union total includes Cyprus and Malta. Cyprus and Malta are member States of the European Union but are not Parties to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol with a commitment inscribed in Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol. As per the submission from Ukraine received by the secretariat on 10 December 2010, this number is based on the assumption of a 50/50 per cent split between managed and unmanaged forests and will be updated as soon as possible on the basis of the most recent information. Note: Parties have made different assumptions in the construction of the reference levels proposed in the table above. These assumptions can be found in Parties' submissions at <http://unfccc.int/meetings/ad_hoc_working_groups/kp/items/4907.php>. Appendix II Guidelines for the submission and review of information on forest management reference levels/baselines 1. Each Party included in Annex I shall include in its submission transparent, complete, consistent, comparable and accurate information required under part I of these guidelines, for the purpose of allowing a technical assessment, as specified in part II, of the data, methodologies and procedures used in the construction of reference levels as specified in appendix I above to facilitate consideration of the forest management reference level. Part I: Guidelines for submissions of information on forest management reference levels Objectives 2. The objectives of the submission are: To provide information consistent with the general reporting principles set out by the Convention and elaborated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on how the elements contained in footnote 1 in paragraph 4 of this decision were taken into account by Parties in the construction of forest management reference levels, and to provide any additional relevant information; To document the information that was used by Parties in constructing forest management reference levels in a comprehensive and transparent way; To provide transparent, complete, consistent, comparable and accurate methodological information used at the time of the construction of forest management reference levels. 3. Parties shall provide submissions in accordance with the following guidelines: General description 4. Provide a general description of the construction of the forest management reference levels consistent with footnote 1 in paragraph 4 of this decision. 5. Provide a description on how each element contained in footnote 1 in paragraph 4 of this decision was taken into account in the construction of the forest management reference level. Pools and gases 6. Identify pools and gases which have been included in the reference level and explain the reasons for omitting a pool from the reference level construction. 7. Explain consistency between the pools included in the reference level. Approaches, methods and models used 8. Provide a description of approaches, methods and models, including assumptions, used in the construction of the forest management reference level, referring, where relevant, to the most recently submitted national inventory report. 9. Provide a description of how each of the following elements were considered or treated in the construction of the forest management reference level, taking into account the principles in decision 16/CMP.1: Area under forest management; Emissions and removals from forest management and the relationship between forest management and forest land remaining forest land as shown in greenhouse gas inventories and relevant historical data, including information provided under Article 3, paragraph 3, and, if applicable, Article 3, paragraph 4, on forest management of the Kyoto Protocol and under forest land remaining forest land under the Convention; Forest characteristics, including age-class structure, increments, rotation length and other relevant information, including information on forest management activities under `business as usual'; Historical and assumed harvesting rates; Harvested wood products; Disturbances in the context of force majeure; Factoring out in accordance with paragraph 1 (h) (i) and (ii) of decision 16/CMP.1. 10. Provide a description of any other relevant elements considered or treated in the construction of the forest management reference level, including any additional information related to footnote 1 in paragraph 4 of this decision. Policies included 11. Provide a description of the domestic policies adopted and implemented no later than December 2009 and considered in the construction of the forest management reference level and explain how these polices have been considered in the construction of the reference level. 12. Provide confirmation that the construction of the forest management reference level neither includes assumptions about changes to domestic policies adopted and implemented after December 2009 nor includes new domestic policies. Part II: Guidelines for review of submissions of information on forest management reference levels Objectives of review 13. The objectives of the review are: To assess whether Parties have provided transparent, complete, consistent, comparable and accurate information on how the elements contained in footnote 1 in paragraph 4 of this decision were taken into account in the construction of forest management reference levels; To ascertain whether the construction of the forest management reference level is consistent with the information and descriptions used by the Party; To provide, as appropriate, technical recommendations to the Annex I Party; To provide a technical assessment to support consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventh session of the forest management reference levels to be used during the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol; To assess whether Parties have provided transparent, complete, consistent, comparable and accurate methodological information to facilitate reviews of methodological consistency. Scope of the review 14. A technical assessment of the data, methodologies, assumptions and procedures used in the construction of the forest management reference levels of Annex I Parties to determine whether they are consistent with the guidelines in part I of this appendix. 15. The review team will assess the following issues: Whether the Party has identified pools and gases included in the forest management reference level and explained the reasons for omitting a pool or a gas from the forest management reference level and whether the coverage of pools in the forest management reference level is consistent; The description of approaches, methods and models used in the construction of reference levels; How each element in paragraphs 9 and 10 above is considered, including justification for why any particular element was not considered; Whether the forest management reference level value is consistent with the information and descriptions provided by the Party; Whether the information was provided by the Party in a transparent manner; Whether a description is provided of domestic policies included in accordance with the provisions contained in paragraph 11 above that were used in the construction of the reference level and how these policies were used in the construction of the reference level; Whether confirmation has been provided that the construction of the forest management reference level does not include assumptions about changes to domestic policies in accordance with paragraph 12 above. 16. As part of the technical assessment, the review process may provide technical recommendations to the Annex I Party on the construction of its forest management reference level. This may include a recommendation to make a technical revision to elements used in its construction. 17. Review teams shall refrain from making any judgment on domestic policies taken into account in the construction of the reference level. Review procedures General procedures 18. Review teams will meet in a single location to perform a centralized review of all forest management reference level submissions. 19. Each submission will be assigned to a review team responsible for performing the technical assessment in accordance with procedures and time frames established in these guidelines. 20. Each review team will provide a thorough and comprehensive assessment of the forest management reference level submission and will under its collective responsibility prepare a report. 22. Review teams will work under the same rules as those set out in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the annex to decision 22/CMP.1. Composition of the review teams 23. Review teams should be made up of at least three land use, land-use change and forestry experts. The secretariat shall ensure that in any review team one co-lead reviewer shall be from an Annex I Party and one co-lead reviewer shall be from a non-Annex I Party. The secretariat will select the members of the review team with a view to achieving a balance between experts from Annex I Parties and non-Annex I Parties. Timing 24. In order to facilitate the secretariat's work, each Party should confirm to the secretariat, by the end of February 2011, its active experts on the land use, land-use change and forestry roster of experts who will be able to participate in the review of forest management reference levels in 2011. 25. The secretariat should forward all relevant information to the review teams in good time before the start of the review. 26. Prior to the review, the review team should identify any preliminary questions requiring clarification by the Party, as appropriate. 27. The review should take place no later than by the end of May 2011 and be conducted according to the indicative timings set out in paragraphs 28 to 32 below. The Party being reviewed may interact with the review team during the review of its submission in order to respond to questions and to provide additional information as requested by the review team. 28. The review team may seek any additional clarification from the Party no later than one week following the review. This may include technical recommendations to the Party on the construction of its reference level. The Party is to provide any required clarifications to the review team no later than five weeks following the request and may also submit a revised reference level in response to the technical recommendations of the review team. 29. The review team will prepare a draft report and make it available to the Party no later than eight weeks following the review. The report should include a short summary. 30. The Party will have three weeks to respond to the draft report of the review team. 31. If the Party does not agree with the findings in the draft report, in responding to the Party's comments the review team will seek advice from a small group of experienced reviewers to be convened by the secretariat, which will consider comparability across Parties. 32. The review team will prepare a final report within three weeks following the Party's response and the report will be sent to the secretariat for publication on the UNFCCC website. The final report will contain the technical assessment, technical recommendations, if appropriate, the responses by the Party and, where provided, the advice of the small group of experienced reviewers convened by the secretariat. Decision 5/CMP.6 Report of the Adaptation Fund Board Recalling Article 12, paragraph 8, of the Kyoto Protocol, Also recalling decisions 3/CMP.1, 28/CMP.1, 5/CMP.2, 1/CMP.3, 1/CMP.4 and 4/CMP.5, Taking note of the report of the Adaptation Fund Board, 1. Adopts the amendments to the terms and conditions of services to be provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) as trustee for the Adaptation Fund, on an interim basis, in accordance with decision 1/CMP.4, as contained in the annex to this decision; 2. Requests the Chair of the Adaptation Fund Board to inform the Board of Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development of the amendments to the terms and conditions of services to be provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development as interim trustee for the Adaptation Fund; 3. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of Germany for conferring legal capacity on the Adaptation Fund Board, which will facilitate the implementation of the direct access modality to resources from the Adaptation Fund; 4. Welcomes the support from the Governments of Finland, France, Japan, Norway and Switzerland in transferring their pro rata share of the balance of the Administrative Trust Fund of the Adaptation Fund as a contribution to the Adaptation Fund Trust Fund; 5. Also welcomes the financial support provided by the Governments of Germany, Monaco, Spain and Sweden in accordance with decision 4/CMP.5, paragraph 9; 6. Continues to encourage Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Annex I Parties) and international organizations to provide funding to the Adaptation Fund, which will be additional to the share of proceeds from clean development mechanism project activities; 7. Takes note with appreciation of the work carried out by the Adaptation Fund Board concerning: (a) The inception of the process of accreditation of implementing entities, including the accreditation of national implementing entities that can access resources from the Adaptation Fund directly; (b) Progress on the monetization of certified emission reductions; (c) The approval of two full proposals and the endorsement of concept documents for six projects; 8. Requests the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources, in consultation with the Adaptation Fund Board, and making use of the Adaptation Fund Accreditation Toolkit, lessons learned and best practices, to conduct up to three regional or subregional, as appropriate, workshops, with the possibility of another, as circumstances permit and as warranted, in order to familiarize Parties with the process and the requirements of the accreditation of national implementing entities; 9. Also requests the secretariat to collaborate with the Adaptation Fund Board secretariat in the conduct of and dissemination of information on the workshops referred to in paragraph 8 above, taking into consideration the need to target workshops to potential national implementing entities; 10. Invites Annex I Parties and international organizations and other Parties in a position to do so to provide funding and support for the workshops referred to in paragraph 8 above; 11. Requests the secretariat to report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its eighth session on efforts to implement paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 above and the outcomes of the workshops, in order for Parties to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of the workshops at that session. Amendments to the terms and conditions of services to be provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development as trustee for the Adaptation Fund 1. Paragraph 34 of the appendix to annex III to decision 1/CMP.4 should be revised as follows: The Trustee's role as trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund under the Terms and Conditions shall be automatically terminated three months after the ninth session of the CMP, unless the CMP and the Trustee affirmatively agree in writing to extend beyond this date the term of the Trustee's services under the Terms and Conditions. 2. Paragraph 38 of the appendix to annex III to decision 1/CMP.4 should be revised as follows: The Terms and Conditions or any amendments to the same shall become effective and constitute an agreement between the CMP and the World Bank upon decisions by the CMP and the World Bank to adopt and accept the Terms and Conditions or any amendments to the same. Decision 6/CMP.6 Review of the Adaptation Fund Recalling decisions 5/CMP.2, 1/CMP.3, 1/CMP.4 and 5/CMP.5, Taking note of the conclusions of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its thirty-second session on the review of the Adaptation Fund, Also taking note of the views contained in submissions from Parties, 1. Decides to undertake the review of the Adaptation Fund at its seventh session and every three years thereafter; 2. Also decides that the review will be undertaken in accordance with the terms of reference contained in the annex to this decision; 3. Requests the Adaptation Fund Board to make available in its report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventh session the performance reviews of the interim secretariat and the interim trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund, in accordance with paragraph 33 of decision 1/CMP.3; 4. Invites Parties and interested international organizations and stakeholders to submit to the secretariat, by 19 September 2011, their views on the review of the Adaptation Fund based on the terms of reference annexed to this decision; 5. Requests the secretariat to compile into a miscellaneous document the views submitted by Parties and interested international organizations and stakeholders, for the consideration of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventh session. Annex Terms of reference for the initial review of the Adaptation Fund I. Introduction 1. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) decided to undertake, at its sixth session, a review of all matters relating to the Adaptation Fund, including its institutional arrangements, with a view to ensuring the effectiveness and adequacy of the Fund. The review shall take into account the outcome of the performance reviews of the interim secretariat and the interim trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund and submissions from Parties and interested intergovernmental organizations and stakeholders. The CMP further decided that the interim institutional arrangements with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) for the provision of secretariat services to the Adaptation Fund Board, as well as the interim institutional arrangements with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) for the provision of trustee services to the Adaptation Fund, shall be reviewed at the sixth session of the CMP. 2. The CMP, at its fifth session, requested the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to initiate the review of the Adaptation Fund at its thirty-second session and to agree on the terms of reference for the review and report back to the CMP at its sixth session so that the review can be undertaken by the CMP. At its sixth session the CMP decided to undertake the review of the Adaptation Fund at its seventh session. II. Objective 3. The objective of this initial review is to ensure the effectiveness and adequacy of the Adaptation Fund and its interim institutional arrangements, with a view to the CMP adopting an appropriate decision on this matter at its seventh session. III. Scope 4. The scope of the initial review of the Adaptation Fund is a review of all matters related to the Adaptation Fund, including institutional arrangements, taking stock of the progress made to date and lessons learned in the operationalization and implementation of the Fund. Given that the Adaptation Fund has only recently become fully operational, this initial review shall focus on, inter alia: (a) The interim institutional arrangements of the GEF acting as interim secretariat of the Adaptation Fund Board, as well as the interim institutional arrangements of the World Bank acting as the interim trustee for the Adaptation Fund and all matters related to the Adaptation Fund Board; (b) Performance reviews of the GEF acting as interim secretariat of the Adaptation Fund Board, as well as the interim institutional arrangements of the World Bank acting as the interim trustee for the Adaptation Fund; (c) A comparative assessment of the administrative costs of the services of the GEF as interim secretariat of the Adaptation Fund Board, the World Bank acting as an interim trustee for the Adaptation Fund and the Adaptation Fund Board. IV. Methodology 5. In conducting the initial review of the Adaptation Fund, Parties shall use the following inputs: (a) Submissions from Parties, interested intergovernmental organizations and stakeholders on, inter alia, the interim institutional arrangements of the GEF acting as interim secretariat of the Adaptation Fund Board, as well as the interim institutional arrangements of the World Bank acting as the interim trustee for the Adaptation Fund and the working arrangements of the Board, informed by the annual reports of the Adaptation Fund Board to the CMP; (b) Independent performance reviews of the interim secretariat and the interim trustee servicing the Adaptation Fund, to be undertaken by the Adaptation Fund Board or by an independent entity appointed for such purposes by the Adaptation Fund Board; (c) A comparative analysis of administrative costs of the services of the GEF as interim secretariat of the Adaptation Fund Board, the World Bank acting as an interim trustee for the Adaptation Fund and the Adaptation Fund Board; (d) Annual reports of the Adaptation Fund Board to the CMP. Decision 8/CMP.6 Proposal from Kazakhstan to amend Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol 1. Notes the proposal from Kazakhstan, communicated to the secretariat on 18 September 2009, to amend Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol to include the name of Kazakhstan, with a quantified greenhouse gas emission limitation or reduction commitment under Article 3 of the Kyoto Protocol of 100 per cent of the 1992 level in the commitment period 2008 to 2012 and a footnote indicating that the country is undergoing the process of transition to a market economy; 2. Also notes that Kazakhstan is willing to demonstrate a flexible approach as regards its base year and quantified greenhouse gas emission limitation or reduction commitment; 3. Agrees to include this item on the provisional agenda for its next session in order to continue its consideration of this proposal, with a view to reaching an agreed outcome and adopting a decision at its seventh session. Decision 9/CMP.6 Methodology for the collection of international transaction log fees in the biennium 2012 - 2013 Recalling Article 13, paragraph 5, of the Kyoto Protocol, Also recalling decision 11/CMP.3 and decision 10/CMP.5, in particular its paragraph 15, Recognizing the importance of sufficient and stable funding for the international transaction log, Acknowledging that the methodology contained in this decision is an interim measure applicable to the biennium 2012 - 2013, 1. Adopts the scale of fees, which takes into consideration the Kyoto Protocol adjusted scale, for the international transaction log for the biennium 2012 - 2013, as contained in the annex to this decision; 2. Decides that fees for the international transaction log paid by Parties for the biennium 2012 - 2013 shall be calculated by multiplying the scale of fees for that Party by the budget for the international transaction log for the biennium 2012 - 2013, with the fees for the first year of the biennium being equal to the fees for the second year of the biennium, for each Party; 3. Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to include, in its draft decision on the programme budget for the biennium 2012 - 2013 to be recommended for adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventh session, a table listing the level of fees for the international transaction log calculated in accordance with paragraph 2 above, for each Party; 4. Requests the Executive Secretary to notify Parties planning to use the international transaction log of the annual fees to cover the budget for the international transaction log for the biennium 2012 - 2013, subject to paragraph 7 below, as early as possible and at least four months in advance of the relevant calendar year; 5. Decides that, if a Party to the Kyoto Protocol with a quantified emission limitation or reduction commitment listed in Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol that is not listed in the annex to this decision decides to use the international transaction log in the biennium 2012 - 2013, the scale of fees for the Party shall be made equal to 130 per cent of its Kyoto Protocol adjusted scale for 2012 - 2013; 6. Decides that fees paid by a Party that has not previously used the international transaction log shall be made proportional to the period between the date of connection of its national registry and the end of the biennium and shall be deducted from the resource requirement of activities relating to the international transaction log in the next biennium; 7. Authorizes the international transaction log administrator to deny or suspend national registry operations with the international transaction log in the event of non-payment of the fee by the Party, although not earlier than four months after the beginning of the relevant calendar year, subject to at least two reminders having been given to the Party and consultation having taken place with the Party concerned prior to the final reminder; 8. Requests the international transaction log administrator to provide, in its annual reports for 2011 and 2012, information on transactions of Kyoto Protocol units; 9. Requests the international transaction log administrator to publish, in its annual reports, the scale of fees and status of payments of international transaction log fees for each Party to the Kyoto Protocol with a quantified emission limitation or reduction commitment listed in Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol; 10. Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, at its thirty-sixth session, to consider the submissions from Parties regarding the collection of international transaction log fees, the technical paper on options for methodologies for the collection of international transaction log fees, the information on transactions of Kyoto Protocol units provided by the international transaction log administrator in its annual reports for 2009 - 2012 and the impact on the volume of transactions of consolidated registries, and to propose to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol to consider for adoption, at its eighth session, a methodology for the collection of international transaction log fees for the following biennium that would ensure sufficient and reliable funding for the international transaction log. International transaction log scale of fees for the biennium 2012 - 2013 Scale of fees(per cent) European Union Total Decision 10/CMP.6 Supplementary information incorporated in national communications submitted in accordance with Article 7, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol Recalling the relevant provisions of the Kyoto Protocol, in particular Article 5, Article 7, paragraphs 2 and 3, and Articles 10 and 11, Also recalling decisions 14/CP.7, 15/CMP.1, 22/CMP.1 and 8/CMP.3, Emphasizing that the national communications and annual greenhouse gas inventories submitted by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol are the main source of information for reviewing the implementation of the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol by these Parties, and that the reports of the in-depth reviews of these national communications provide important additional information for this purpose, 1. Requests the secretariat to prepare the compilation and synthesis of supplementary information incorporated in fifth national communications submitted in accordance with Article 7, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol, for consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventh session; 2. Concludes that the review of supplementary information incorporated in national communications submitted in accordance with Article 7, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol and the consideration of the outcome of this review have proved useful and should continue in accordance with decision 22/CMP.1; 3. Requests the secretariat to organize centralized reviews of fifth national communications for Parties with total greenhouse gas emissions of less than 50 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (excluding land use, land-use change and forestry) in accordance with their most recent greenhouse gas inventory submission, with the exception of Parties included in Annex II to the Convention, for which the secretariat will organize in-country in-depth reviews; 4. Also requests the secretariat to conduct in-country in-depth reviews of fifth national communications for those Parties referred to in paragraph 3 above that request one; Further requests Parties included in Annex I to the Convention that are also Parties to the Kyoto Protocol to include, in their sixth national communications submitted in accordance with decision 9/CP.16, the necessary supplementary information required under the guidelines for the reporting of supplementary information under Article 7, paragraph 2, of the Kyoto Protocol. Decision 11/CMP.6 Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol for developing countries Recalling decision 7/CMP.5, 1. Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to continue its consideration of the second comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries at its thirty-fourth session on the basis of the draft text contained in the annex to this decision, with a view to preparing a draft decision on the outcome of this review for adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventh session; 2. Decides to complete the consideration of the second comprehensive review at its seventh session. Draft decision -/CMP.6 [Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol Recalling decisions 6/CMP.4 and 7/CMP.5, Acknowledging that capacity-building for developing countries is essential to enable them to participate in the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol, Noting that a range of the priority areas identified in decisions 29/CMP.1 and 2/CP.7 are being addressed by Parties, multilateral and bilateral agencies [and the private sector], especially building capacity to develop and implement clean development mechanism project activities, Also noting the [importance of the private sector] [role [that may be] [to be] played by the private sector] [additional role that may be played by the private sector] in building capacity to develop and implement clean development mechanism project activities, Acknowledging the work undertaken in the context of the Nairobi Framework to catalyse the clean development mechanism in Africa [and the need to move the process further,] Also noting that key needs remain to be addressed to enable developing countries, in particular the least developed countries, African countries and small island developing States [and other vulnerable regions and countries], to effectively participate in the clean development mechanism, Having considered the information in documents prepared by the secretariat in support of the second comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries, 1. Decides that the scope of capacity-building needs, as contained in the framework for capacity-building in developing countries, the key factors identified in decision 2/CP.10 and the priority areas for capacity-building relating to the participation of developing countries in the clean development mechanism contained in decision 29/CMP.1 are still relevant; 2. Encourages Parties to further improve the implementation of capacity-building activities relating to the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol and to report on the effectiveness and sustainability of related capacity-building programmes; 3. [Urges] [Invites] Parties that are in a position to do so, multilateral, bilateral and international agencies and the private sector to continue to provide technical and financial resources in a coordinated manner to support capacity-building activities in developing countries as they relates to the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol, addressing the following challenges, inter alia: (a) Geographical distribution of clean development mechanism project activities; (b) Lack of technical expertise to estimate changes in carbon stock in soil; (c) The need to train and retain experts to plan and implement project activities; 4. Invites Parties included in Annex II of the Convention in a position to do so to provide capacity-building support for the planning and implementation of clean development mechanism project activities at the national and regional levels, as appropriate; 5. Decides that further implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries should be improved at the systemic, institutional and individual level, as appropriate, by: (a) Ensuring consultations with stakeholders throughout the entire process, from the design of clean development mechanism project activities to their implementation; (b) Enhancing integration of capacity-building needs relating to participation in the Kyoto Protocol into national development strategies and plans; (c) Increased country-driven coordination of capacity-building activities; (d) Strengthened networking and information sharing among developing countries, especially through South-South and triangular cooperation; 6. Encourages cooperative efforts between developing country Parties and developed country Parties to conceptualize and implement capacity-building activities relating to participation in the clean development mechanism; 7. Encourages relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme, the World Bank Group, the African Development Bank and the secretariat of the UNFCCC, to continue enhancing and coordinating their capacity-building activities under the Nairobi Framework, including support for building skills; 8. Decides to initiate a third comprehensive review of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries at the fortieth session of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation, with a view to completing it at the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol; 9. Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to develop terms of reference for the third comprehensive review at its fortieth session.] Decision 12/CMP.6 Administrative, financial and institutional matters Recalling also decision 12/CP.15, in particular its paragraph 7, Recalling further paragraph 11 of the financial procedures of the Conference of the Parties, which also applies to the Kyoto Protocol, Taking note of decision -/CP.16, Having considered the information in the documents prepared by the secretariat on administrative, financial and institutional matters, I. Audited financial statements for the biennium 2008 - 2009 1. Takes note of the audited financial statements for the biennium 2008 - 2009, the audit report of the United Nations Board of Auditors, which includes recommendations, and the comments of the secretariat thereon; 2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations for arranging the audits of the accounts of the Convention and for the valuable observations and recommendations of the auditors; 3. Urges the Executive Secretary to implement the recommendations of the auditors, as appropriate; II. Budget performance for the biennium 2010 - 2011 4. Takes note of the reporting on budget performance for the biennium 2010 - 2011 as at 30 June 2010 and of the updated status of contributions as at 15 November 2010 to the trust funds administered by the secretariat; 5. Endorses decision -/CP.16 on budget performance for the biennium 2010 - 2011, as it applies to the Kyoto Protocol; 6. Expresses its appreciation to Parties that have paid their contributions to the core budget and to the international transaction log in a timely manner; 7. Calls upon Parties that have not paid their contributions to the core budget and to the international transaction log to do so without delay, bearing in mind that contributions are due on 1 January of each year in accordance with the financial procedures of the Conference of the Parties; 8. Expresses its appreciation for the contributions received from Parties to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities, especially for the generous contributions for the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol; 9. Urges Parties to further contribute to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process to ensure the widest possible participation in the negotiations in 2011, and to the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities; 10. Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of Germany for its annual voluntary contribution to the core budget of EUR 766,938 and its special contribution of EUR 1,789,522 as Host Government to the secretariat in Bonn; III. Programme budget for the biennium 2012 - 2013 11. Requests the Executive Secretary to submit, for consideration by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation at its thirty-fourth session, a proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012 - 2013; 12. Also requests the Executive Secretary, when preparing the programme budget for the biennium 2012 - 2013, also to prepare a contingency for funding conference services, should this prove necessary in the light of decisions taken by the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session; 13. Requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to recommend, at its thirty-fourth session, a programme budget for adoption by the Conference of the Parties at its seventeenth session, and by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol at its seventh session; 14. Also requests the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to authorize the Executive Secretary to notify Parties of their indicative contributions for 2012 on the basis of the recommended budget. Decision 13/CMP.6 Compliance Committee Recalling Article 18 of the Kyoto Protocol, Also recalling decisions 27/CMP.1, 4/CMP.2, 5/CMP.3, 4/CMP.4 and 6/CMP.5, Having considered the annual report of the Compliance Committee to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, Expressing its sincere thanks to Parties that have contributed to funding the work of the Compliance Committee, 1. Notes with appreciation the work carried out by the Compliance Committee during the reporting period; 2. Also notes the interest of the Compliance Committee in ensuring that any legal arrangements for privileges and immunities adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol would cover members and alternate members of the Committee, and in this regard looks forward to considering the outcomes of the work of the Subsidiary Body for Implementation on draft treaty arrangements for privileges and immunities for individuals serving on constituted bodies established under the Kyoto Protocol. Resolution 1/CMP.6 Expression of gratitude to the Government of the United Mexican States, the State of Quintana Roo and the people of the city of Cancun The Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, Having met in Cancun from 29 November to 10 December 2010 at the invitation of the Government of the United Mexican States, 1. Express their profound gratitude to the Government of the United Mexican States for having made it possible for the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties and the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol to be held in Cancun; 2. Request the Government of the United Mexican States to convey to the State of Quintana Roo and the people of Cancun the gratitude of the Conference of the Parties and the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol for the hospitality and warmth extended to the participants. 