%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER|POLLUTION CONTROL|GREENHOUSE GASES|ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING|

United Nations FCCC/SBSTA/2011/2 Framework Convention on Climate Change Distr.: General 3 August 2011 Original: English Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its thirty-fourth session, held in Bonn from 6 to 16 June 2011 Contents Paragraphs Page Annexes I. Potential activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change 23 II. General guidance for submissions and future work regarding: guidance on systems for providing information on how safeguards referred to in appendix I to decision 1/CP.16 are addressed and respected; modalities relating to forest reference emission levels and forest reference levels; and modalities for measuring, reporting and verifying, as referred to in appendix II to decision 1/CP.16 25 III. Draft text on materiality 26 IV. Documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its thirty-fourth session 28 I. Opening of the session (Agenda item 1) 1. The thirty-fourth session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) was held at the Maritim Hotel, Bonn, Germany, from 6 to 16 June 2011. 2. The Chair of the SBSTA, Mr. Mama Konaté (Mali), opened the session and welcomed all Parties and observers. He also welcomed Mr. Mihir Kanti Majumder (Bangladesh) as Vice-Chair and Mr. Purushottam Ghimire (Nepal) as Rapporteur. II. Organizational matters (Agenda item 2) A. Adoption of the agenda (Agenda item 2(a)) 3. At its 1st meeting, on 6 June, the SBSTA considered notes by the Executive Secretary containing the provisional agenda and annotations and a supplementary provisional agenda (FCCC/SBSTA/2011/1 and Add.1 and 2). 4. At its 2nd meeting, on 9 June, the SBSTA considered a proposal by the Chair containing a provisional agenda (FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.1). At the same meeting, the SBSTA adopted items 1 to 12 of the provisional agenda proposed by the Chair (FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.1). The Chair proposed, and the SBSTA agreed, that he would hold consultations with interested Parties on items 13, 14 and 15(a) and (b) of the provisional agenda contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.1, and report back to Parties on progress made. 5. At the 3rd meeting, on 10 June, the Chair invited Mr. Zitouni Ould-Dada (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) to report on the progress made in the consultations that Mr. Ould-Dada facilitated on his behalf. 6. At the 4th meeting, on 16 June, the Chair invited Mr. Ould-Dada to report on the outcomes of these consultations. As a result of these consultations and further deliberations among Parties, the SBSTA agreed to discuss the impacts of climate change on water resources and integrated water resource management under the agenda item on the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. The SBSTA concluded that item 13 of the provisional agenda contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.1 would not be included on the agenda of this session. 7. At the same meeting, Parties did not reach agreement on the arrangements for matters relating to items 14 and 15(a) and (b) of the provisional agenda contained in document FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.1. Therefore, the agenda of the SBSTA at its thirty-fourth session was adopted as follows: 1. Opening of the session. 2. Organizational matters: (a) Adoption of the agenda; (b) Organization of the work of the session; (c) Election of officers other than the Chair; (d) Election of replacement officers. 3. Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. 4. Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries. 5. Development and transfer of technologies. 6. Research and systematic observation. 7. Forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures at the thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth sessions of the subsidiary bodies, with the objective of developing a work programme under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to address these impacts, with a view to adopting, at the seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties, modalities for the operationalization of the work programme and a possible forum on response measures. 8. Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol. 9. Methodological issues under the Convention: (a) Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport; (b) Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention; (c) Greenhouse gas data interface. 10. Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol: (a) Implications of the establishment of new hydrochlorofluorocarbon-22 (HCFC-22) facilities seeking to obtain certified emission reductions for the destruction of hydrofluorocarbon-23 (HFC-23); (b) Materiality standard under the clean development mechanism; (c) Common metrics to calculate the CO2 equivalence of greenhouse gases; (d) Carbon dioxide capture and storage in geological formations as clean development mechanism project activities. 11. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change. 12. Cooperation with other international organizations. 13. Other matters. 14. Report on the session. 8. Statements were made by representatives of 34 Parties, including statements on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the Umbrella Group, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), the Environmental Integrity Group (EIG), the European Union and its member States, the least developed countries (LDCs), the African Group and the Coalition for Rainforest Nations. 9. During the adoption of the agenda, the representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia made the following statement: "Decision 1/CP.16 was adopted over the explicit and formal objection of one Party State, the Plurinational State of Bolivia". B. Organization of the work of the session (Agenda item 2(b)) 10. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 2nd meeting, on 9 June, at which the Chair drew attention to the proposed programme of work posted on the UNFCCC website. In addition, he encouraged Parties to consult the Daily Programme and CCTV regularly for any changes or updates of the work to be done under the SBSTA. The SBSTA agreed to proceed on this basis. The secretariat informed the SBSTA of the status of documentation and other relevant issues. Statements were made by representatives of seven Parties. C. Election of officers other than the Chair (Agenda item 2(c)) 11. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings, on 10 and 16 June, respectively. At the 3rd meeting, the Chair recalled rule 27 of the draft rules of procedure being applied, whereby the SBSTA is expected to elect its Vice-Chair and Rapporteur. Such an election was last held at the thirty-third session of the SBSTA. The Chair reminded Parties that no nominations for the post of Rapporteur had been received at that session, and that, in accordance with rule 22, paragraph 2, of the draft rules of procedure being applied, the existing Rapporteur would remain in office until his successor was elected. 12. At the 4th meeting, the Chair informed Parties that agreement had been reached among regional groups on the nomination for the Rapporteur of the SBSTA, and the Chair proposed the nominee for election. The SBSTA elected Mr. Collin Beck (Solomon Islands), representing small island developing States, as its Rapporteur. Mr. Beck will serve for an initial term of one year, which may be renewed for another year. D. Election of replacement officers (Agenda item 2(d)) 13. The elected Rapporteur represents a Party to both the Convention and its Kyoto Protocol. Consequently, no election of replacement officers was necessary. III. Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (Agenda item 3) 1. Proceedings 14. The SBSTA considered this item at its 2nd and 4th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.2 and FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.3. 15. At its 2nd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group, co-chaired by Mr. Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago) and Mr. Don Lemmen (Canada). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Lemmen reported on the contact group's consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 2. Conclusions 16. The SBSTA welcomed the following documents prepared for the session: (a) A report on the progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change; (b) A compilation of further views and information on the effectiveness of the Nairobi work programme in fulfilling its objective, expected outcome, scope of work and modalities. 17. The SBSTA also welcomed the direct engagement of, and the contributions provided by, Parties and a wide range of organizations in the implementation of the Nairobi work programme. 18. The SBSTA encouraged further efforts, including through action pledges by organizations and the provision of information to the SBSTA on the implementation of these pledges, to assist Parties in improving their understanding and assessment of the impacts of, and their vulnerability to, climate change and in making informed decisions on practical adaptation actions and measures. 19. The SBSTA noted the development of new outputs and products, including those facilitated by the secretariat and those contributed by partner organizations. 20. In line with decision 2/CP.11, paragraph 6(e), the SBSTA undertook a review of the Nairobi work programme. The review took into account the outcome of the informal meeting of representatives of Parties and organizations and experts to consider the outcomes of completed activities under the Nairobi work programme, the summary report on the implementation of the second phase of the work programme and the views of Parties and relevant organizations. 21. The SBSTA recognized the need for the Nairobi work programme to further support work carried out under the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) and, as appropriate, possible future work of the Adaptation Committee through the provision of scientific and technical information on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. It recalled the relevant information and advice that was provided to the SBI by the SBSTA at its twenty-ninth session. 22. The SBSTA recalled that it may provide information and advice on the scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change arising from the implementation of the Nairobi work programme for consideration by the SBI, following consideration by the SBSTA of outputs from preceding activities. This consideration would be undertaken at the joint SBSTA/SBI workshop to be held at its thirty-fifth session, referred to in paragraph 23(d) below. 23. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to undertake the following interim activities under the Nairobi work programme, subject to the availability of resources, until SBSTA 35: (a) Conduct a survey of national focal points to identify priority needs for the dissemination of products related to impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change under the Nairobi work programme; (b) Compile information on ecosystem-based approaches to adaptation; (c) Prepare a technical paper on water and climate change impacts and adaptation strategies; (d) Organize a joint SBSTA/SBI in-session workshop to consider the outcomes of the Nairobi work programme, to highlight the scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change most relevant to the SBI. 24. The SBSTA agreed to consider, at its thirty-fifth session, possible areas of further work on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change under the Nairobi work programme, including, inter alia, consideration of potential activities as outlined in annex I to this document, with a view to defining the duration and activities for its next phase. 25. The SBSTA invited Parties and relevant organizations to submit to the secretariat, by 19 September 2011, their proposals for upcoming activities under the Nairobi work programme, taking into consideration the information included in annex I to this document. It requested the secretariat to compile these submissions into a miscellaneous document for consideration by the SBSTA at its thirty-fifth session. IV. Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries (Agenda item 4) 26. The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. Statements were made by representatives of 13 Parties, including one on behalf of the European Union and its member States. 27. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a contact group, co-chaired by Mr. Peter Graham (Canada) and Ms. Victoria Tauli-Corpuz (Philippines). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Graham reported on the contact group's consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 28. The SBSTA considered views on methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries, taking into account issues identified in appendix II to decision 1/CP.16 and relevant issues. 29. In considering methodological issues referred to in paragraph 28 above, Parties identified a range of issues, including guidance on systems for providing information on how safeguards referred to in appendix I to decision 1/CP.16 are addressed and respected, modalities relating to forest reference emission levels and forest reference levels, and modalities for measuring, reporting and verifying, as referred to in appendix II to decision 1/CP.16. 30. The SBSTA decided to continue its consideration of the methodological guidance referred to in paragraph 28 above, taking into account the elements referred to in annex II to this document, with the aim of completing its work on these matters at its thirty-fifth session and reporting to the Conference of the Parties (COP) at its seventeenth session on progress made, including any recommendations for draft decisions on this matter. 31. The SBSTA invited Parties and accredited observers to submit to the secretariat, by 19 September 2011, their views on the issues identified in paragraphs 28 - 30 above. It requested the secretariat to compile the submissions from Parties into a miscellaneous document for consideration by the SBSTA at its thirty-fifth session. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat to organize, subject to the availability of supplementary funds, meetings of technical experts on the matters referred to in paragraphs 28 and 29 above, including a meeting before its thirty-fifth session. 32. The SBSTA requested its Chair to continue exploring ways of facilitating the coordination of the activities relating to decisions 2/CP.13, 4/CP.15 and 1/CP.16, and to report back to the SBSTA at its future sessions. 33. The SBSTA took note of the progress report by the secretariat on the implementation of the activities identified in document FCCC/SBSTA/2010/6, paragraph 40, in particular the establishment of an interactive discussion forum on the web platform. The SBSTA encouraged all Parties and their relevant experts, relevant organizations and stakeholders to participate actively in the interactive discussion forum. 34. The SBSTA also encouraged Parties to support the other activities identified in its conclusions of its thirty-second session and those identified in decisions 2/CP.13, 4/CP.15 and 1/CP.16. It reminded Parties, relevant organizations and stakeholders to continue sharing information and experiences on these activities via the web platform on the UNFCCC website. V. Development and transfer of technologies (Agenda item 5) 35. The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. 36. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations, co-facilitated by Mr. Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Mr. Ould-Dada. At the 4th meeting, Mr. Fuller reported on these consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 37. The SBSTA took note of the organization of the workshop on technology needs assessments (TNAs) organized by the secretariat, in collaboration with the Global Environment Facility, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme and the Climate Technology Initiative, which took place on 1 and 2 June 2011 in Bonn, Germany. 38. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the active participation of experts and practitioners from the public and private sectors. The SBSTA also noted that the written report on the outcomes of this workshop will be made available for consideration by the SBSTA at its thirty-fifth session. 39. The SBSTA noted that, in order to enhance the near-term prospect that projects identified through the TNA process will be implemented, projects should be presented as broadly as possible, through existing and enhanced means, to potential sources of financing from the public and private sectors and international cooperation. Among the sources of public and private funding, project facilitation tools and related organizations that were discussed during the TNA workshop referred to in paragraph 37 above were the Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund, the Asian Development Bank, the KfW Reconstruction Credit Institute, the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership, the World Business Council on Sustainable Development, and the Climate Technology Initiative - Private Financing Advisory Network, which facilitates access to financing to implement projects in developing countries. The SBSTA further noted that TNAs could provide useful information to Parties for activities under the Technology Mechanism, established by decision 1/CP.16, to be fully operational in 2012 in accordance with decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 128. 40. The SBSTA welcomed the UNFCCC training package on preparing technology transfer projects for financing, which resulted from the training programme on project preparation implemented by the secretariat in collaboration with international organizations and initiatives in response to a request made by the COP at its thirteenth session. 41. The SBSTA recalled the conclusions of its thirty-third session requesting the secretariat to organize, subject to the availability of resources, two training workshops, in French and Spanish, respectively, on preparing technology transfer projects for financing for Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties) and to report on progress in the implementation of a pilot online training course on the same matter to the SBSTA at its thirty-fifth session. It invited Parties and relevant organizations in a position to do so to provide financial support to ensure the timely and effective organization of these activities, which could assist non-Annex I Parties in implementing the results of their TNAs. VI. Research and systematic observation (Agenda item 6) 42. The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.1, FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.6, FCCC/SBSTA/2010/MISC.12, FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.1 and FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.4. A statement was made by a representative of a Party speaking on behalf of the European Union and its member States. In addition, a statement was made by a representative of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 43. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations, co-facilitated by Mr. Sergio Castellari (Italy) and Mr. David Lesolle (Botswana). At the 4th meeting, Ms. Dorcas Masisi (Botswana) reported, on behalf of the co-facilitators, on these consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 44. The SBSTA noted the information provided prior to its thirty-fourth session in preparation for the meeting under the SBSTA dialogue on developments in research activities relevant to the needs of the Convention being held in the context of decision 9/CP.11 (hereinafter referred to as the research dialogue) and for the related workshop (FCCC/SBSTA/2010/MISC.12, FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.1, FCCC/SBSTA/2011/ MISC.4 and FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.1) on recent climate change research findings and uncertainty management, communicating climate change science and building capacity for research in developing countries. 45. The SBSTA noted the progress made in the implementation of decision 9/CP.11 through the establishment and maintenance of the research dialogue under the SBSTA, as initiated at its twenty-sixth session. 46. The SBSTA welcomed the continuation of the research dialogue held during the thirty-fourth session of the SBSTA and the related workshop on research referred to in paragraph 44 above, which was organized by the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chair of the SBSTA, from 2 to 3 June 2011 in Bonn, Germany, and expressed its appreciation to the governments that provided financial support for the workshop. 47. The SBSTA conveyed its appreciation to the regional and international programmes and organizations engaged in climate change research (hereinafter referred to as research programmes and organizations), the IPCC, United Nations agencies and organizations, and scientific experts for their active participation and contributions during the workshop and the research dialogue, and for sharing their knowledge and results emerging from their research activities. The SBSTA also expressed its appreciation to Parties for sharing their views on their research needs and priorities for policy-relevant scientific information, as well as on communication and research-related capacity-building needs. 48. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the broadened participation of other organizations, programmes and agencies active in climate change research. It also noted that the workshop strengthened the research dialogue between Parties and research programmes and organizations. It further noted with appreciation that both events, especially the workshop, contributed to an enhanced communication between the science and policy communities, and to an enhanced consideration and understanding by Parties of emerging scientific findings and related issues on communication and research-related capacity-building in developing countries and other issues addressed under the research dialogue. 49. The SBSTA welcomed the report on the workshop, which included information on research findings, research needs and ongoing activities in international and regional climate change research. The SBSTA noted that this information included significant emerging research outcomes, since the publication of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, of relevance to the UNFCCC, including on ocean acidification, changes to the cryosphere, sea level rise and emissions scenarios. 50. The SBSTA noted that the workshop report: (a) Included information from some Parties on policy-relevant research needs, including for interdisciplinary research, as well as on the need for improved and sustained observations to support further research, especially in areas where data are scarce, as well as for enhanced and sustained ground-based observation networks for the validation of satellite data; (b) Considered good practices, challenges and needs, and lessons learned in communicating climate change science, including linkages with local knowledge and the use of local languages, to the user community, the general public, stakeholders, including the most vulnerable groups, and policymakers; (c) Highlighted lessons learned and future needs in building capacity for research and related activities in developing countries and the need to enhance developing country participation in climate change research. 51. The SBSTA emphasized the need for improved communication and interaction between the scientific community and users of climate information in order to support adaptation and mitigation planning and activities. 52. The SBSTA also emphasized the need to further enhance the relevance of the research dialogue and linkages with other activities under the UNFCCC process. In this regard, the SBSTA invited the research programmes and organizations to continue to provide information on developments in research activities relevant to the needs of the Convention. 53. The SBSTA further emphasized the value of promoting the outputs of research through activities undertaken under Article 6 of the Convention, particularly in developing countries. 54. The SBSTA stressed the need to enhance the availability of research findings from developing countries. It encouraged the research programmes and organizations to include information on the participation of scientists from developing countries in climate change research when reporting information in the context of the research dialogue. 55. The SBSTA requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources, to continue to support the research dialogue, including: (a) Organizing further workshops, as appropriate, in periodic consultation with the research programmes and organizations, and to be agreed by the SBSTA; (b) Enhancing the visibility of scientific information of relevance to the Convention on its website, including the provision of a calendar of key science-policy meetings in collaboration with research programmes and organizations and the IPCC. 56. The SBSTA invited Parties to provide, by 19 September 2011, their views on the research dialogue, including ongoing activities, associated modalities and ways to enhance the dialogue. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to compile these submissions into a miscellaneous document for consideration by the SBSTA at its thirty-fifth session. The SBSTA agreed to defer its consideration of matters related to systematic observation, including issues related to the timing of the contributions of the Global Climate Observing System to the SBSTA, to its thirty-sixth session. VII. Forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures at the thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth sessions of the subsidiary bodies, with the objective of developing a work programme under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to address these impacts, with a view to adopting, at the seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties, modalities for the operationalization of the work programme and a possible forum on response measures (Agenda item 7) 57. The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SB/2011/MISC.2. A statement was made by a representative of one Party. 58. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in a joint SBSTA/SBI forum, co-chaired by Mr. Konaté and Mr. Robert Owen-Jones (Australia), Chair of the SBI. At the 4th meeting, Mr. Konaté reported on the forum proceedings, including on a special event organized in the context of the forum. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 59. The SBSTA and the SBI took note of the submissions from Parties and relevant intergovernmental organizations on the elements for the development of a work programme with a view to adopting modalities for the operationalization of the work programme, and on a possible forum on response measures. 60. The SBSTA and the SBI invited Parties and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to submit further views on the matter referred to in paragraph 59 above by 19 September 2011. They requested the secretariat to compile these views into a miscellaneous document for consideration by the SBSTA and the SBI at their thirty-fifth sessions. 61. The SBSTA and the SBI welcomed the special event in the context of the forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures held during their thirty-fourth sessions, which was organized by the Chairs of the SBSTA and the SBI. The SBSTA and the SBI requested the secretariat, under the guidance of the Chairs of the SBSTA and the SBI, to prepare a report on this special event and make it available at the thirty-fifth sessions of the SBSTA and the SBI. 62. In accordance with paragraph 93 of decision 1/CP.16, the SBSTA and the SBI held, during their thirty-fourth sessions, a forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures, with the objective of developing a work programme under the SBSTA and the SBI to address these impacts, with a view to adopting, at COP 17, modalities for the operationalization of the work programme and a possible forum on response measures. The forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures will continue at the thirty-fifth sessions of the SBSTA and the SBI, to carry out the work as agreed in paragraph 93 of decision 1/CP.16. VIII. Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 8) 63. The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SB/2011/1 and FCCC/SB/2011/MISC.1. 64. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item together with SBI 34 agenda item 10, "Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol", in a joint contact group, co-chaired by Mr. Eduardo Calvo Buendia (Peru) and Ms. Anastasia Theodorou (Hungary). At the 4th meeting, Ms. Theodorou reported on the contact group's consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 65. The SBSTA and the SBI considered the synthesis of information and views on issues that will be addressed at the joint workshop on matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol. 66. The SBSTA and the SBI recalled their request to the secretariat to organize the joint workshop and encouraged Parties in a position to do so to provide support to the secretariat in organizing the workshop, with a view to maximizing participation, before their thirty-fifth sessions. 67. The SBSTA and the SBI identified issues that will be addressed at their joint workshop on matters referred to in paragraph 65 above, including, inter alia: (a) Sharing information to enhance understanding of adverse effects, including the adverse effects of climate change, effects on international trade, and social, environmental and economic impacts; (b) Minimizing the adverse effects through a process to implement Article 2, paragraph 3, and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol: (i) Further implementation of decision 31/CMP.1; (ii) Research and assessment; (iii) Enhancing support to developing country Parties, particularly those identified in Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention; (iv) Enhancing reporting and verification. 68. The SBSTA and the SBI agreed to continue to discuss matters related to Article 2, paragraph 3, and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol, including consideration of the report on the workshop referred in to paragraph 65 above, in a joint contact group to be established by them at their thirty-fifth sessions. IX. Methodological issues under the Convention (Agenda item 9) A. Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport (Agenda item 9(a)) 69. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.5. Statements were made by representatives of 16 Parties, including one on behalf of the European Union and its member States and one on behalf of 13 Parties. Statements were also made by representatives of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the International Maritime Organization (IMO). 70. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would consult with Parties on this issue and present draft conclusions to the SBSTA at its 4th meeting. 71. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 72. The SBSTA took note of the information received from and progress reported by the secretariats of ICAO and IMO on their ongoing work on addressing emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport, and noted the views expressed by Parties on this information. 73. The SBSTA invited the secretariats of ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on relevant work on this issue. B. Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention (Agenda item 9(b)) 74. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.4 and FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.5. 75. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations, co-facilitated by Ms. Riitta Pipatti (Finland) and Mr. Nagmeldin Goutbi Elhassan (Sudan). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Elhassan reported on these consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 76. The SBSTA welcomed the report on the third workshop of the work programme on revising the "Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, Part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories" (hereinafter referred to as the UNFCCC Annex I reporting guidelines), held in Bonn, Germany, from 24 to 25 March 2011, which was organized by the secretariat following a request made by the SBSTA at its thirty-third session. 77. The SBSTA acknowledged with appreciation that the IPCC had responded to the invitation from the SBSTA at its thirty-third session to develop supplementary methodological guidance on wetlands. 78. The SBSTA initiated its consideration of the annotated draft of the revised UNFCCC Annex I reporting guidelines, but was unable to finalize its consideration. The SBSTA reiterated its request made at its thirty-third session that the secretariat organize, subject to the availability of resources, a fourth workshop under the work programme, to be held in the second half of 2011, to address the annotated draft of the revised UNFCCC Annex I reporting guidelines. The SBSTA recommended that the fourth workshop address the text of the revised guidelines and all common reporting format tables, with a focus on agriculture, forestry and other land-use issues. 79. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to prepare a new version of the annotated draft of the revised UNFCCC Annex I reporting guidelines, based on the outcomes of its thirty-fourth session, and make it available in due time for the fourth workshop. It further requested the secretariat to prepare, after the fourth workshop and based on its outcomes, the new version of these guidelines, to be made available to the SBSTA at its thirty-fifth session. 80. The SBSTA agreed to consider the report on the workshop referred to in paragraph 78 above and to continue its consideration of the annotated draft of the revised UNFCCC Annex I reporting guidelines at its thirty-fifth session, with a view to preparing a draft decision on this matter for adoption by the COP at its seventeenth session, in line with the work programme agreed to by the SBSTA at its thirty-second session. C. Greenhouse gas data interface (Agenda item 9(c)) 81. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. 82. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations, facilitated by Ms. Erasmia Kitou (European Union). At the 4th meeting, Ms. Kitou reported on these consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 83. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the improvements made by the secretariat to the greenhouse gas (GHG) data interface in recent years. It welcomed the progress made in developing the facility to calculate user-defined indicators, as requested by the SBSTA at its twenty-seventh session, and in providing access to information from the compilation and accounting database, as requested by the SBSTA at its thirtieth session. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to complete the development of these functions and make them available on the UNFCCC website through the data interface by its thirty-fifth session. 84. The SBSTA also requested the secretariat, subject to the availability of resources, to include in the modules of the data interface, where applicable, the possibility of presenting GHG emissions/removals in physical units, in addition to carbon dioxide equivalent. 85. The SBSTA agreed to consider, at its thirty-sixth session, matters relating to the interface and its linkages to other UNFCCC data systems, with a view to evaluating the progress made and determining the next steps, as appropriate. X. Methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol (Agenda item 10) A. Implications of the establishment of new hydrochlorofluorocarbon-22 (HCFC-22) facilities seeking to obtain certified emission reductions for the destruction of hydrofluorocarbon-23 (HFC-23) (Agenda item 10(a)) 86. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/TP/2011/2. 87. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations, facilitated by Mr. Samuel Adejuwon (Nigeria). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Adejuwon reported on these consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 88. The SBSTA took note of the technical paper prepared by the secretariat, its previous conclusions under this agenda sub-item and the views expressed by Parties during this session. 89. The SBSTA agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at its thirty-fifth session. B. Materiality standard under the clean development mechanism (Agenda item 10(b)) 90. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. It had before it documents FCCC/TP/2011/4 and FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.2 and Add.1. 91. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations, facilitated by Mr. Peer Stiansen (Norway). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Stiansen reported on these consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 92. The SBSTA took note of the views submitted by Parties and relevant organizations, the technical paper prepared by the secretariat and the views expressed by Parties during the session on a materiality standard under the clean development mechanism (CDM). 93. The SBSTA agreed to continue to consider the draft text contained in annex III to this document at its thirty-fifth session, with a view to recommending draft decision elements to be incorporated into a draft decision on further guidance relating to the CDM, for consideration and adoption by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) at its seventh session. 94. The SBSTA invited Parties, intergovernmental organizations, admitted observer organizations and designated operational entities to submit to the secretariat, by 19 September 2011, their views on: (a) Whether the concept of materiality could be applied in the context of the CDM; (b) If appropriate: (i) How materiality should be defined in the context of the CDM; (ii) The appropriate thresholds used to define the conditions under which a piece of information should be regarded as material; (iii) The areas to which the concept of materiality should be applied; (c) The relationship, as well as the differences, between uncertainty and materiality. 95. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to compile the submissions referred to in paragraph 94 above into a miscellaneous document for consideration by the SBSTA at its thirty-fifth session. C. Common metrics to calculate the CO2 equivalence of greenhouse gases (Agenda item 10(c)) 96. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. A statement was made a representative of one Party. 97. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations, facilitated by Mr. Michael Gytarsky (Russian Federation). At the 4th meeting, Mr. Gytarsky reported on these consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 98. The SBSTA continued its consideration of common metrics to calculate the carbon dioxide equivalence of anthropogenic GHG emissions by sources and removals by sinks (hereinafter referred to as common metrics), which was initiated at its thirtieth session. 99. The SBSTA expressed its appreciation to the IPCC for holding an expert meeting on the science of alternative metrics, following an invitation to the IPCC made by the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol at its sixth session. The expert meeting was held in Oslo, Norway, from 18 to 20 March 2009. The SBSTA welcomed the report on the meeting and its conclusions and recommendations relating to the UNFCCC and to the scientific community regarding research needs and the scoping phase of the Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC. 100. The SBSTA acknowledged: (a) That alternative common metrics and shortcomings in the use of global warming potentials (GWPs) are still being assessed by the IPCC in the context of its work on its Fifth Assessment Report; (b) That GWPs are a well-defined metric based on radiative forcing that continues to be useful in a multigas approach. However, GWPs were not designed with a particular policy goal in mind and, depending on the specific policy goals, alternative metrics may be preferable; (c) The limitations in the use of GWPs based on the 100-year time horizon in evaluating the contribution to climate change of emissions of GHGs with short lifetimes. 101. The SBSTA requested the secretariat to organize, subject to the availability of resources, a workshop on common metrics, to be held in the first half of 2012, with a focus on uncertainties, new and refined areas or metrics, policy goals, and the relationship between policy frameworks and metrics. 102. The SBSTA agreed to continue, at its thirty-sixth session, its consideration of common metrics under the methodological issues under the Convention, taking into account the report on the workshop referred to in paragraph 101 above. (Agenda item 10(d)) 103. The SBSTA considered this sub-item at its 3rd meeting. 104. The SBSTA took note of the oral report by the secretariat on the progress made in carrying out mandated activities leading towards the adoption of a draft decision on this matter at CMP 7 and agreed to continue its consideration of this matter at its thirty-fifth session. XI. Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change (Agenda item 11) 105. The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. A statement was made by a representative of the IPCC. 106. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed to consider this item in informal consultations, co-facilitated by Mr. Francis McGovern (Ireland) and Mr. Andres Flores Montalvo (Mexico). At the 4th meeting, Mr. McGovern reported on these consultations. Also at its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 107. The SBSTA welcomed the synthesis report prepared by the secretariat on the work already undertaken under this agenda item, noting that the report contains a wealth of information that could inform Parties in their deliberations on possible areas of future work on scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change. 108. The SBSTA also welcomed with appreciation the IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation. The SBSTA noted that the report highlights the significant technical potential of renewable energy and its large potential to mitigate climate change and provide wider benefits. It considered the information provided in the report to be of value to all Parties, including in the consideration of their mitigation activities. 109. The SBSTA agreed to consider this issue, taking into account the best available scientific information on mitigation, in particular information from the IPCC, at its thirty-sixth session, at which the Chair of the SBSTA will consult with Parties on the extent to which the matter should be further considered at that session. XII. Cooperation with other international organizations (Agenda item 12) 110. The SBSTA considered this item at its 3rd and 4th meetings. It had before it document FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.3. Statements were made by representatives of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). 111. At its 3rd meeting, the SBSTA agreed that the Chair would draft conclusions and present them to the SBSTA at its 4th meeting. 112. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted conclusions proposed by the Chair. 113. The SBSTA noted with appreciation the information paper prepared by the secretariat to summarize cooperative activities and efforts by United Nations entities and other intergovernmental organizations to contribute to the work of the Convention. 114. The SBSTA took note of the focus of the cooperative activities and initiatives currently being undertaken by the secretariat with the support of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations to ensure effective implementation of the Convention. 115. The SBSTA also took note of the statements made by the secretariats of CBD and UNCCD on their activities and efforts to address climate change and on their contribution to the work of the Convention. XIII. Other matters (Agenda item 13) 116. No other matters were raised. XIV. Report on the session (Agenda item 14) 117. At its 4th meeting, the SBSTA considered and adopted the draft report on its thirty-fourth session, as amended. At the same meeting, on a proposal by the Chair, the SBSTA authorized the Rapporteur to complete the report on the session, with the assistance of the secretariat and under the guidance of the Chair. 118. At the 4th meeting, a representative of the Executive Secretary provided a preliminary evaluation of the administrative and budgetary implications of conclusions adopted during the session. This follows decision 16/CP.9, paragraph 20, which requests the Executive Secretary to provide an indication of the administrative and budgetary implications of decisions if these cannot be met from existing resources within the core budget. 119. During the session, the SBSTA requested the secretariat to carry out a number of activities that have administrative and budgetary implications. Most of this work has been anticipated and is already covered in the programme budget for 2010 - 2011 or the proposal for 2012 - 2013. However, the following new activities require additional financial resources: (a) Under agenda item 3, "Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change", the secretariat has been requested to carry out a number of activities, one of which is the preparation of a technical paper on water and climate change, which will require additional resources of around EUR 20,000; (b) Under agenda item 4, "Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries", the SBSTA has requested the secretariat to organize meetings of technical experts, including a meeting before its thirty-fifth session. Estimated costs will need to be determined after this session; (c) Under agenda item 6, "Research and systematic observation", the secretariat has been asked to organize further workshops in periodic consultation with research programmes and organizations. The number and scheduling of these workshops is not yet known; (d) Under agenda item 8, "Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol", the SBSTA has recalled its request to the secretariat to organize a joint workshop on this issue with SBI agenda item 10, "Matters relating to Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol", which will cost in the region of EUR 100,000; (e) Under agenda sub-item 9(c), "Greenhouse gas data interface", Parties requested the secretariat to enhance the presentation of data in the modules of the interface, which will require around EUR 20,000 to carry out; (f) Under agenda sub-item 10(c), "Common metrics to calculate the CO2 equivalence of greenhouse gases", the secretariat has been asked to organize a workshop on common metrics in the first half of 2012. Estimated costs are not yet known but will be communicated to interested Parties after this session. 120. At the same meeting, closing statements were made by nine Parties, including statements on behalf of the Umbrella Group, the European Union and its member States, the Group of 77 and China, EIG, the African Group, the LDCs and AOSIS. Statements were also made on behalf of business and industry non-governmental organizations (NGOs), indigenous peoples organizations, trade union NGOs, women and gender NGOs and youth NGOs, and by representatives of environmental NGOs. 121. Before closing the session, the Chair thanked delegates, the chairs of contact groups and convenors of informal consultations for their contributions. He also thanked the observers for their interest and strong support, as well as the secretariat and the interpreters for their continuous hard work. Annex I Potential activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change 1. Taking into account the objective of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, as contained in decision 2/CP.11, and outputs of activities undertaken to date under the Nairobi work programme, and noting decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 12, which affirms that enhanced action on adaptation should be undertaken in accordance with the Convention, should follow a country-driven, gender-sensitive, participatory and fully transparent approach, taking into consideration vulnerable groups, communities and ecosystems, and should be based on and guided by the best available science and, as appropriate, traditional and indigenous knowledge, with a view to integrating adaptation into relevant social, economic and environmental policies and actions, where appropriate, the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) discussed the following potential activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change: (a) Enhancing the use of indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices for adaptation and the application of gender-sensitive approaches and tools for understanding and assessing impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change; (b) Improving the dissemination of information and knowledge products developed under the Nairobi work programme through, inter alia: translation of these products into other official United Nations languages, and calls for action on the training of national focal points in communication skills and strategies; (c) Strengthening sector-specific and cross-sectoral activities to address impacts, vulnerability and adaptation issues relating to, inter alia: (i) Water (including drought, floods and glacial melt); (ii) Food security (including agriculture and subsistence livelihoods); (iii) Ecosystems (including mountain ecosystems and coastal and marine ecosystems); (iv) Infrastructure and human settlements; (d) Facilitating the development of, and access to, climate data and scenarios appropriate for adaptation planning, through, inter alia, catalysing actions by partner organizations and regional centres; (e) Further developing targeted knowledge products to engage stakeholders and decision makers, including, inter alia, lessons learned with respect to adaptation at different governance levels and in different sectors, based on knowledge generated under the Nairobi work programme, and syntheses of information generated under the Nairobi work programme into knowledge products targeted at users in specific sectors or other thematic areas; (f) Enhancing knowledge on the economic aspects of adaptation through, inter alia, pilot projects on applying different methods and tools for assessing the costs and benefits of adaptation (and the documentation and sharing of lessons learned from these projects), calls for action and further activities on reducing reliance on vulnerable economic sectors, including through economic diversification; (g) Building capacity through, inter alia, the provision of `train the trainer' activities, for example on the use of methods and tools, calls for action and collaboration with, inter alia, the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention, the Least Developed Countries Expert Group and partner organizations. 2. Activities under the Nairobi work programme should be consistent with the mandate of the SBSTA. General guidance for submissions and future work regarding: guidance on systems for providing information on how safeguards referred to in appendix I to decision 1/CP.16 are addressed and respected; modalities relating to forest reference emission levels and forest reference levels; and modalities for measuring, reporting and verifying, as referred to in appendix II to decision 1/CP.16 1. Guidance on systems for providing information on how safeguards are addressed and respected: (a) Characteristics; (b) Design; (c) Provision of information; (d) Potential barriers, including barriers, if any, to providing information, on addressing and respecting safeguards; (e) Other relevant issues. 2. Guidance on modalities relating to forest reference levels and forest reference emission levels: (a) Scope and/or purpose; (b) Characteristics, including elements listed in paragraph 1 of appendix I to decision 1/CP.16; (c) Guidance for the construction; (d) Process for communication; 3. Guidance on modalities for measuring, reporting and verifying, as referred to in appendix II to decision 1/CP.16: (a) Characteristics, including elements listed in paragraph 1 of appendix I to decision 1/CP.16; (b) Elements; (c) Process for reporting; (d) Other relevant issues. [English only] Draft text on materiality [The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, Recalling the provisions of Articles 3 and 12 of the Kyoto Protocol, Recalling decision 3/CMP.6, Recognizing that applying the concept of materiality could simplify processes but should not adversely affect environmental integrity, Noting that the concept of materiality is already applied to some extent in approved baseline and monitoring methodologies and in the assessment of projects, 1. Decides that the concept of materiality should be applied in a consistent manner under the clean development mechanism; 2. Defines material information as a piece of information whose omission or misstatement, or erroneous reporting, could change a decision by the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism [on the registration of a project activity or the issuance of certified emission reductions]; [3. Decides that the scope of materiality [only] covers [data] [the stage[s] of [validation,]] verification, [for emission reduction project activities] [including the assessment] by designated operational entities, the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism and its support structure, [non-prescriptive [and prescriptive] requirements, and quantitative [as well as qualitative] information;]] [with a view to possibly broadening the scope at a later date;] Option 1: 4. Also decides that information related to a clean development mechanism project shall be considered material if its omission [or] misstatement or [the non-compliance with a requirement] [erroneous reporting] might lead, at an aggregated level, to an overestimation of the total emission reductions [or removals] achieved by a clean development mechanism project activity equal to or higher than: [X1] [0.5] per cent of the emission reductions [or removals] for project activities achieving a total emission reduction [or removal] of more than [Y] [500,000] tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per year; [X2] [2] per cent of the emission reductions [or removals] for large-scale project activities achieving a total emission reduction [or removal] of [Y] [500,000] tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per year or less; [X3] [5] per cent of the emission reductions [or removals] for small-scale project activities other than projects covered under paragraph 4(d) below; [X4] [10] per cent of the emission reductions [or removals] for the type of project activities that are referred to in decision 3/CMP.6, paragraph 38. Option 2: 4. Requests the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism to adopt appropriate quantitative thresholds to define when the omission or misstatement of information or the non-compliance with a requirement related to a clean development mechanism project shall be considered material, taking into account the total amount of emission reductions [or removals] achieved by the project activity; 5. [Also decides that the emission reduction thresholds and the materiality thresholds shall be reviewed [by the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism] based on data reported [by designated operational entities] no later than one year after their implementation;] 6. Decides that the designated operational entity conducting the [validation or] verification shall use a reasonable level of assurance in considering whether or not the information is material; 7. Requests the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism: To implement the concept of materiality, adhering to the principles established in paragraphs 1 - 5 above, and to report to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, at its eighth session, on the experiences gained with the implementation of the concept; To increase its interaction with designated operational entities in order to facilitate a uniform interpretation and application of the concept of materiality by developing guidance, inter alia, on how to calculate the thresholds and on what should be done if the materiality thresholds are surpassed, with the overall view of increasing transparency and efficiency and reducing costs; To address the issue of uncertainties of measurements in baseline and monitoring methodologies, so that these types of uncertainties do not need to be considered in addressing materiality. [8. Also invites the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism to develop guidance on de minimis sources, which are defined as sources of emissions that do not require monitoring and verification.]] Documents before the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice at its thirty-fourth session Documents prepared for the session FCCC/SBSTA/2011/1 and Add.1 and 2 Provisional agenda and annotations. Note by the Executive Secretary FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.1 Summary of proposed themes for the research dialogue meeting and the related workshop to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 34. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.2 Progress made in implementing activities under the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.3 Summary of cooperative activities with United Nations entities and intergovernmental organizations to contribute to the work under the Convention. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.4 Draft annotated revised UNFCCC Annex I reporting guidelines. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.5 Report on the workshop on issues relating to the revision of the UNFCCC Annex I reporting guidelines. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2011/INF.6 Report on the workshop on the research dialogue. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2010/MISC.12 and FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.1 Views on issues related to the research dialogue, including possible ways to enhance its effectiveness and the workshop to be held in conjunction with SBSTA 34. Submissions from Parties FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.2 and Add.1 Views on the issue of materiality under the clean development mechanism. Submissions from Parties and relevant organizations FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.3 Further views and information on the effectiveness of the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change in fulfilling its objective, expected outcome, scope of work and modalities. Submissions from Parties and relevant organizations FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.4 Update on developments in research activities relevant to the needs of the Convention. Submissions from regional and international climate change research programmes and organizations FCCC/SBSTA/2011/MISC.5 Information relevant to emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport. Submissions from international organizations FCCC/SB/2011/1 Synthesis of information and views on issues that could be addressed at the joint workshop on matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SB/2011/MISC.1 Information and views on issues that could be addressed at the joint workshop on matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, and Article 3, paragraph 14, of the Kyoto Protocol. Submissions from Parties and relevant organizations FCCC/SB/2011/MISC.2 Views on the modalities for the operationalization of the work programme and on a possible forum on response measures. Submissions from Parties and relevant intergovernmental organizations FCCC/TP/2011/2 Implications of the establishment of new hydrochlorofluorocarbon-22 (HCFC-22) facilities seeking to obtain certified emission reductions for the destruction of hydrofluorocarbon-23 (HFC-23). Technical paper FCCC/TP/2011/4 Materiality standard under the clean development mechanism. Technical paper FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.1 Provisional agenda. Proposal by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.2 Emissions from fuel used for international aviation and maritime transport. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.3 Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.4 Research and systematic observation. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.5 Cooperation with other international organizations. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.6 Implications of the establishment of new hydrochlorofluorocarbon-22 (HCFC-22) facilities seeking to obtain certified emission reductions for the destruction of hydrofluorocarbon-23 (HFC-23). Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.7 Greenhouse gas data interface. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.8 Common metrics to calculate the CO2 equivalence of greenhouse gases. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.9 Scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation of climate change. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.10 Development and transfer of technologies. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.11 Materiality standard under the clean development mechanism. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.12 Matters relating to Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Kyoto Protocol. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.13 Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.14 Methodological guidance for activities relating to reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.15 Draft report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its thirty-fourth session FCCC/SBSTA/2011/L.16 - FCCC/SBI/2011/L.18 Forum on the impact of the implementation of response measures at the thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth sessions of the subsidiary bodies, with the objective of developing a work programme under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation to address these impacts, with a view to adopting, at the seventeenth session of the Conference of the Parties, modalities for the operationalization of the work programme and a possible forum on response measures. Draft conclusions proposed by the Chair Other documents before the session FCCC/SBSTA/2010/6 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its thirty-second session, held in Bonn from 31 May to 10 June 2010 FCCC/SBSTA/2010/11 Synthesis report on the work already undertaken under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice agenda item on scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of mitigation. Note by the secretariat FCCC/SBSTA/2010/13 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its thirty-third session, held in Cancun from 30 November to 4 December 2010 FCCC/SBSTA/2009/3 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its thirtieth session, held in Bonn from 1 to 10 June 2009 FCCC/SBSTA/2008/6 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-eighth session, held in Bonn from 4 to 13 June 2008 FCCC/SBSTA/2007/4 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-sixth session, held at Bonn from 7 to 18 May 2007 FCCC/SBSTA/2007/16 Report of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice on its twenty-seventh session, held in Bali from 3 to 11 December 2007 FCCC/SB/2010/INF.1 and Corr.1 Report of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer. Note by the Chair of the Expert Group on Technology Transfer FCCC/CP/2010/7 and Add.1 and 2 and Corr.1 Report of the Conference of the Parties on its sixteenth session, held in Cancun from 29 November to 10 December 2010 FCCC/KP/CMP/2010/12 and Add.1 and 2 Report of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol on its sixth session, held in Cancun from 29 November to 10 December 2010 