%%%PROGRAMME PLANNING|DESERTIFICATION|

United Nations ICCD/CRIC(10)/5 Convention to Combat Desertification Distr.: General 18 July 2011 Original: English Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention Tenth session Changwon, Republic of Korea, 11 - 20 October 2011 Item 2 (b) of the provisional agenda Review of the implementation of the Convention and the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008 - 2018) Multi-year workplans of the Convention's institutions and subsidiary bodies Draft multi-year workplan for the Global Mechanism (2012 - 2015) Note by the secretariat* Summary This proposed four year workplan for the Global Mechanism (GM) has consolidated the former biennium plan in order to focus on the core business of the GM. This workplan, in particular the targets and the outputs, form the basis for the GM's proposed budget for the period 2012 - 2013. This document and the budget document need to be read together to obtain a realistic overview of the scope and scale of the GM's activities in the short and medium term. They summarize the proposed revised four-year workplan of the GM for the period 2012 - 2015 as well as the outputs to be generated for the period 2012 - 2013.The workplan focuses on operational objective 5 of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008 - 2018) and includes targets for expected accomplishments related to operational objectives 1 and 2 as well as the GM's executive direction and management. This document makes recommendations for consideration by Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention and decision by the Conference of the parties. These include a recommendation to adopt a multi-year programme for the GM, with a set of options on the strategic direction of the GM for the next four years. Paragraphs Page I. Introduction 1 - 4 3 II. The results-based management framework 5 - 11 3 A. Basic principles 5 - 6 3 B. Priorities 7 4 C. Assumptions and risks 8 - 11 4 III. The contribution of the Global Mechanism to the operational objectives of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008 - 2018) (The Strategy) 12 - 33 5 A. Operational objective 5: Financing and technology transfer 12 - 24 5 B. Operational objective 1: Advocacy, awareness-raising and education 25 - 27 10 C. Operational objective 2: Policy framework 28 - 32 12 D. Executive direction and management 33 14 IV. Recommendations 34 - 35 16 1. The first four-year workplan of the Global Mechanism (GM) using the new result-based management (RBM) framework of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) was approved by the ninth session of Conference of the Parties (COP 9) in 2009 for the period 2010 - 2013. According to Decision 3/COP8, the GM is requested to regularly submit an updated workplan for approval by country Parties. The present document covers the period 2012 - 2015 for consideration at the tenth session of the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC 10) and approval by the tenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 10). 2. The 2012 - 2015 workplan is based on the experience of the GM over the past two years and draws on lessons learned from the use of the RBM system and its related monitoring and reporting systems. Like in the past biennium, the logframe has been developed within the framework of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008 - 2018) (The Strategy). This allows an easy overview of the comprehensive multi-year workplan for the Convention, as requested by COP 9, which can be found in document ICCD/CRIC(10)/2. 3. It should be noted that the GM and the secretariat have also developed a Joint Work Programme (JWP) for the period 2012 - 2013, the work packages of which are contained in document ICCD/CRIC(10)/4. In the present document, the outputs that have any work packages related to the JWP or the RCM associated to it are marked with a "J" or an "R". They are part of the budget proposals tabled by the secretariat and the GM for approval by COP 10. 4. The secretariat and the GM decided to present their proposals for the four-year workplan and the two-year costed work programme in a single document. Thus, the outputs and targets refer to the two-year costed work programme and form the basis for the programme budget proposal presented in document ICCD/COP(10)/9. II. The results-based management framework A. Basic principles 5. The Strategy has four strategic objectives, the fourth of which deals with finance and means of implementation "to mobilize resources to support implementation of the Convention through building effective partnerships between national and international actors". At the operational level, The Strategy has five objectives, with a varied number of outcome areas under each of them. Operational objective 5 deals with "Financing and technology transfer". While The Strategy is primarily addressed to country Parties, the GM has been assigned "a central responsibility in contributing to operational objective 5 . . . [and] a support role for operational objectives 1 and 2". The GM's workplan therefore addresses these three operational objectives, with a strong focus on operational objective 5. The GM sees its role as assisting country parties in achieving the outcomes and objectives in its assigned areas. 6. The chapter below describes the expected accomplishments and performance indicators for the period 2012 - 2015, as well as the expected outputs for the period 2012 - 2013. The following definitions have been used, according to the RBM framework: · Expected accomplishments are defined as the results the GM expects to achieve together with its partners (country governments, donors, investors, technical partners, etc.), if the operational finance, both core and voluntary budget, is available. A total of 18 expected accomplishments have been defined for the GM (five fewer than in the workplan 2010 - 2013) for the period 2012 - 2015, of which 45 per cent focus on operational objective 5. Between 75 per cent and 80 percent of the budget focuses on this objective. · Performance indicators enumerate the expected accomplishments and should be a measurable proxy for the results achieved. At least one performance indicator has been elaborated for each expected accomplishment. The targets for each performance indicator form the basis of the proposed budget for the biennium 2012 - 2013. · Outputs are considered to be products delivered by the GM, for which the attribution is closer but which are often undertaken in cooperation with country Parties, the UNCCD secretariat and/or other stakeholders. A total of 37 outputs are proposed for the period 2012 - 2013 (27 fewer than in the previous workplan), of which 45 per cent focus on operational objective 5. B. Priorities 7. As in the past biennium, in broad terms the priorities of the GM for the next biennium include: · Assistance to country Parties to facilitate the establishment of Integrated Investment Frameworks (IIFs), as called for in The Strategy, mainly through the development of financing strategies; · Assistance to country Parties to facilitate the alignment of their national action programmes (NAPs) with The Strategy as regards operational objective 5 and the integration of NAP priorities into overall national development and sectoral plans; · Assistance to country Parties with broadening access to financing from non-traditional and innovative sources and mechanisms; · Assistance to country Parties through knowledge products and exchange as well as South-South cooperation on finance for UNCCD/DLDD-related concerns; and · Contributions to the performance review and assessment of implementation system (PRAIS) for national reporting, as regards the analysis of financial flows, and the analytical and conceptual framework for measuring impact and results on strategic objective 4 and operational objective 5. C. Assumptions and risks 8. The workplan for 2012 - 2015, presented in the current report, as well as its associated budget for 2012 - 2013, presented in document ICCD/COP(10)/9, were developed under some significant uncertainties. 9. RBM and budgeting normally entail some certainty about the resources available for implementation, which is not the case with this workplan in which the targets are only indicative and almost exclusively dependent on the availability of voluntary contributions. As with many other organizations dependent on voluntary contributions, funding is increasingly unpredictable and decreasing following the impact of the global financial crisis and decreased budgets for many donor countries and organizations. 10. A further uncertainty arises from the evaluations of which the GM has been the focus in the past which, among other things, have questioned the GM's business model and the suitability of its institutional setting. With a firm consensus on the GM's business model and institutional setting yet to be reached, uncertainties over the GM's substantive and strategic direction continue, which has inevitably impacted on the GM's relationships with its partners, countries, donors and institutional host. 11. It should therefore be noted that this workplan is prepared with some caution based on the GM's current business model. Given positive feedback on the GM's services and products, the COP could debate the substantive content and direction of the GM to arrive at a common understanding of the GM's programme of work and budget for 2012 - 2013. III. The contribution of the Global Mechanism to the operational objectives of the 10-year strategic plan and framework to enhance the implementation of the Convention (2008 - 2018) (The Strategy) A. Operational objective 5: Financing and technology transfer "To mobilize and improve the targeting and coordination of national, bilateral and multilateral financial and technological resources in order to increase their impact and effectiveness" 12. Taking account of the central responsibility given by The Strategy to the GM to support country Parties in their efforts to mobilize substantial finance for sustainable land management (SLM) and the implementation of the Convention, the GM has formulated most of its expected accomplishments and outputs for the next two years under this fifth operational objective. Outcome 5.1: "Affected country Parties develop integrated investment frameworks for leveraging national, bilateral and multilateral resources with a view to increasing the effectiveness and impact of interventions" 13. This outcome is the overarching outcome for almost all GM country-level interventions, towards which its integrated financing strategies (IFS) - a major instrument for structuring its approach to assist countries in developing IIFs - are geared. Similarly, many of the other outcome areas and associated outputs are part and parcel of the activities related to facilitating the establishment of IIFs. Expected accomplishment 5.1.01: Regional and subregional platforms relevant to SLM financing are functioning and supported by the GM 14. This accomplishment seeks to illustrate the importance in the GM's work of regional and subregional platforms related to land and finance. This has proved an effective way of interacting with countries and other partners, such as TerrAfrica and CAADP in Africa; CACILM in Central Asia; PIMAST in Meso America; and other GM-supported South-South cooperation platforms. The GM's work with the secretariat in support of the Regional Coordination Mechanisms (RCMs) of the Convention also falls under this accomplishment. Regional and subregional platforms relevant to SLM financing functioning and supported by the GM Performance indicators Outputs The number of regional and subregional platforms relevant to SLM financing functioning and supported by the GM through partnerships Target 2012 - 2013: 26 5.1.01.01 Regional and subregional partnerships relevant to SLM finance supported 5.1.01.02 Regional coordination mechanisms supported based on regional work programmes J, R 5.1.01.03 Knowledge exchange activities on financing and investments at the regional and subregional levels carried out and facilitated R Expected accomplishment 5.1.02: Affected country Parties increasingly establish Integrated Investment Frameworks for SLM 15. This expected accomplishment illustrates the work the GM undertakes at the country level in developing and implementing integrated financing strategies (IFS) and IIFs for SLM. The outputs broadly capture the process followed in many countries leading to the establishment of an IIF, as called for in The Strategy. A key milestone within this process is the IFS, which outlines opportunities, constraints and priority activities leading to resource mobilization for SLM and strengthened implementation of NAPs. The document is usually elaborated with the support of the GM and other partners and is expected to be endorsed by country Parties, for example, the UNCCD national focal point institution. The GM also supports the establishment of IIFs under other frameworks under this expected accomplishment, such as country strategic investment frameworks under TerrAfrica. Expected accomplishment 5.1.02 Affected country Parties increasingly establish Integrated Investment Frameworks for SLM The number of SLM Integrated Financing Strategies and IIFs supported by the GM endorsed by affected country Parties Target 2012 - 2013: 25 5.1.02.01 National Development of Integrated Financing Strategy (DIFS) workshops carried out 5.1.02.02 Support provided for IFS/IIF development to affected country Parties 5.1.02.03 Support for IFS/IIF implementation provided to affected country Parties J 5.1.02.04 Support provided for the establishment and implementation of IIFs 5.1.02.05 National partnerships on SLM financing supported J Expected accomplishment 5.1.03: Economic arguments in support of SLM investments are generated 16. This expected accomplishment captures what was, in the previous biennium, two separate accomplishments with associated outputs. It includes the GM's work with institutions on developing methodologies for assessment of the value of drylands in order to generate the evidence to underpin investments and increased resource allocation in these areas. Such evidence is required to successfully mainstream the NAPs and the Convention into national policy frameworks and related budgetary processes, convincing investors of the positive return on investment in concerns related to SLM and desertification, land degradation and drought (DLDD), and moving UNCCD -related issues up the international agenda, where further funds may be generated, also through additional bilateral funding. It also includes the GM's national level work on undertaking these studies in partnership with national institutions as part of the IIF process. Expected accomplishment 5.1.03 Economic arguments in support of SLM investments are generated The number of country Parties that have assessed the economic value of land Target 2012 - 2013: 21 5.1.03.01 Assessments of economic value of land supported Outcome 5.2: "Developed country Parties provide substantial, adequate, timely and predictable financial resources to support domestic initiatives to reverse and prevent desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought" Outcome 5.3: "Parties increase their efforts to mobilize financial resources from international financial institutions, facilities and funds, including the Global Environment Facility (GEF), by promoting the UNCCD/sustainable land management agenda within the governing bodies of these institutions" 17. This is an instance where the GM has gathered a set of accomplishments related to interactions with development partners and international financing institutions under two outcome areas in The Strategy. The reason for grouping the expected accomplishments in this manner is that GM activities with development partners and/or investors at the country level do not necessarily differentiate by type. Expected accomplishment 5.2.01: Developed countries and IFIs, including the GEF, increasingly finance the SLM integrated investment frameworks 18. A key element of the GM's work is to engage development partners and investors at the country level to enhance their contributions to SLM-related finance and the IIF. Such stakeholders are part of the financing platforms and/or other consultation and coordination forums supported by the GM. The Financial Information Engine on Land Degradation (FIELD) carries data and information on financing agents and mechanisms and their modalities, and PRAIS carries financial data gathered through national reporting. 19. When requested, the GM contributes to the development of the GEF land degradation focal area, usually through consultations with the UNCCD and GEF secretariats. This takes place at the technical level as the GM's contribution to increasing the importance of SLM and DLDD-related issues to GEF finance. Expected accomplishment 5.2.01 Developed countries and IFIs, including the GEF, increasingly finance the SLM integrated investment frameworks Rate of increase in financing volume of developed countries', IFIs and the GEF's contributions to support SLM IIFs (as per FIELD and PRAIS) Target 2012 - 2013: 5 % 5.2.01.01 FIELD database updated, and financial data gathering through PRAIS supported and analyses undertaken J 5.2.01.02 Consultations carried out with developed country Parties and IFIs on funding opportunities for SLM-related IIFs 5.2.01.03 Support country Parties in leveraging baseline financing for GEF interventions J 5.2.01.04 Consultations and substantive inputs to the GEF and UNCCD secretariats for increased GEF allocations to the land degradation focal area J Outcome 5.4: Innovative sources of finance and financing mechanisms are identified to combat desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought, including from the private sector, market-based mechanisms, trade, foundations and civil society organizations, and other financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity conservation and sustainable use and for hunger and poverty reduction 20. Looking at innovative ways to increase investments and financial flows into land rehabilitation and SLM is a cornerstone of the GM's work at the country level. In some instances this takes the form of a stand-alone activity, if the country is not undertaking a fully fledged IFS process to achieve its investment framework. As per The Strategy, the GM supports studies and the development of methodologies to assess the suitability of innovative sources and mechanisms in specific contexts. Much of this information is accessible through the GM's website and other information dissemination vehicles. Expected accomplishment 5.4.01: Country Parties are enabled to identify innovative resources and potential entry points for innovative sources of finance and financing mechanisms related to SLM 21. Prominent in The Strategy, as well as the operational directions for the GM, is the work on innovative sources of finance. To assist county Parties, in addition to and as a foundation for country-level work (see expected accomplishment 5.4.02), the GM engages in global and thematic partnerships with specialized organizations with specific experience in this area, as well as in developing methodologies for the assessment of sources and mechanisms not traditionally associated with DLDD. Expected accomplishment 5.4.01 Country Parties are enabled to identify innovative resources and potential entry points for innovative sources of finance and financing mechanisms related to SLM The number of modules and approaches on innovative finance developed Target 2012 - 2013: 17 5.4.11.01 Analytical and methodological tools developed to identify and tap innovative sources of finance, and identify and apply innovative financing mechanisms to SLM The number of organizations involved in partnerships with the GM related to innovative finance Target 2012 - 2013: 5.4.12.01 Partnerships developed with international and regional institutions to facilitate the mobilization of innovative sources of finance and financing mechanisms R Expected accomplishment 5.4.02: Resources mobilized for SLM through the application of innovative sources of finance and financing mechanisms 22. This accomplishment is meant to capture the national level work the GM conducts in partnership with country Parties on the identification of innovative finance for SLM. Expected accomplishment 5.4.20 Resources mobilized for SLM through the application of innovative sources of finance and financing mechanisms The number of countries and subregions assisted by the GM with mobilizing innovative finance Target 2012 - 2013: 39 5.4.20.01 Technical assistance and advisory services provided to countries by the GM on innovative sources of finance and mechanisms for SLM Outcome 5.5: Access to technology by affected country Parties is facilitated through adequate financing, effective economic and policy incentives and technical support, notably within the framework of South-South and North-South cooperation. 23. Technology transfer is an important means of implementation of the Convention. Financial flows and investments into the sector often aim, at least in part, to increase access to technology. As such, the financing strategies and related activities that can be found under many other outcomes in this framework would in a majority of cases contribute to enabling access to technology. The GM has also created opportunities to explore technology transfer challenges and opportunities through the creation of subregional and regional cooperation platforms, often within the framework of South-South cooperation. Expected accomplishment 5.5.01: South-South and North-South partnerships allow affected country Parties to access knowledge on technology transfer 24. The GM is not involved in the direct transfer of technology. However, the GM's work on increasing finance at least partly includes finance for technology transfer. South-South cooperation has proved a particularly efficient way to promote the transfer of appropriate technologies. Expected accomplishment 5.5.01 South-South and North-South partnerships allow affected country Parties to access knowledge on technology transfer Technology transfer in the context of DLDD/SLM increasingly understood through a number of initiatives Target 2012 - 2013: 7 5.5.01.01 Technology transfer addressed through financing-related e-forums, workshops, partnership platforms or other means, organized in the context of GM induced South-South cooperation initiatives or GM organized workshops J, R B. Operational objective 1: Advocacy, awareness-raising and education "To actively influence relevant international, national and local processes and actors in adequately addressing desertification/land degradation and drought-related issues." 25. For this operational objective, the GM was assigned a supporting role in The Strategy. Most of the expected accomplishments and related outputs listed below target the international and/or the regional level. Outcome 1.2: Desertification/land degradation and drought issues are addressed in relevant international forums, including those pertaining to agricultural trade, climate change adaptation, biodiversity conservation and sustainable use, rural development, sustainable development and poverty reduction 26. This outcome area is particularly important for international forums that address the means of implementation for issues with an impact on land degradation. The GM mostly works at the technical level with the aim of sharing experiences related to finance with those stakeholders directly involved in the different forums. The GM's contributions are provided through consultations and the provision of information and advice. Finance for SLM is addressed in relevant international forums The number of relevant international forums to which the GM contributes that address financial issues related to SLM Target 2012 - 2013: 6 1.2.01.01 Contributions provided on issues relevant to SLM financing in relevant international forums J Outcome 1.3: Civil society organizations and the scientific community in the North and the South are increasingly engaged as stakeholders in the Convention processes and desertification/land degradation and drought are addressed in their advocacy, awareness-raising and education initiatives 27. Under this outcome area the GM captures its expected accomplishments through its work with civil society organizations and the scientific community. The GM aims to involve civil society organizations in the development of the IFS at the country level to encourage them to become agents for advocating investment and participants in the integrated investment frameworks for SLM. The GM's work with the scientific community aims to promote specialized research and analytical work to generate arguments in support of resource mobilization for SLM. This work is carried out mainly in collaboration with international multidisciplinary consortia. Expected accomplishment 1.3.01 CSOs engaged in IFSs and integrated investment frameworks The number of civil society organizations engaged in IFS and IFF processes supported by the GM Target 2012 - 2013: 23 1.3.01.01 Facilitate the engagement of civil society organizations in IFS/IIF processes supported by the GM J Expected accomplishment 1.3.02 The scientific community is engaged to collect economic evidence for increasing investments in SLM The number of scientific institutions engaged in SLM-related processes supported by the GM 1.3.02.01 Cooperation with scientific institutions on SLM financing R C. Operational objective 2: Policy framework "To support the creation of enabling environments for promoting solutions to combat desertification/land degradation and mitigate the effects of drought." 28. While the GM is only assigned a supporting role in this operational objective, the aims of this objective are crucial to increasing investments and financial flows for SLM. It is the foundation of any work at the national level. The scoping of the challenges, problems, linkages and processes that need to be influenced to achieve investments and positive change lies at the heart of implementation of a Convention such as the UNCCD and requires strong cooperation among all the Convention institutions. Outcome 2.1: Policy, institutional, financial and socio-economic drivers of desertification/land degradation and barriers to sustainable land management are assessed and appropriate measures to remove these barriers are recommended Outcome 2.2: Affected country Parties revise their NAPs into strategic documents supported by biophysical and socio-economic baseline information and include them in integrated investment frameworks 29. This is another instance where the GM has decided to aggregate two related outcome areas. The GM's work on the IFS as part of an alignment of the NAPs to The Strategy has led to the identification of barriers and drivers for SLM finance and the development of a conducive policy framework for resource mobilization for the implementation of the Convention. The aligned NAPs, including an IFS to facilitate the establishment of an IIF, are considered excellent vehicles for this. Expected accomplishment 2.1.01 The development of SLM IFSs contribute to the alignment of the NAPs to The Strategy The number of IFS-related processes contributing to NAP revision and alignment Target 2012 - 2013: 12 2.1.01.01 Technical assistance provided in the context of IFS-related processes to NAP elaboration/revision in line with The Strategy J, R Outcome 2.3: Affected country Parties integrate their NAPs and sustainable land management and land degradation issues into development planning and relevant sectoral and investment plans and policies 30. The inclusion of NAP-related issues into country level processes and plans, where priorities are articulated and on which resource allocation decisions are based, is crucial for increased flows and investments. These efforts have become increasingly important as the donor community aligns itself to country priority-setting for investment decision-making, including direct budget support and sector-wide approaches. Expected accomplishment 2.3.01 IFSs identify investment opportunities for NAP priorities in national development processes such as Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers and relevant sectoral and investment plans and policies The number of affected country Parties supported by the GM to focus strategically on the interlinkages between development, poverty reduction and DLDD/SLM finance 2.3.01.01 GM support provided for the integration of NAPs and land degradation into development planning through mainstreaming and related activities J Outcome 2.4: Developed country Parties mainstream the objectives of the Convention and SLM interventions into their development cooperation programmes/projects in line with their support to national, sectoral and investment plans 31. The expected accomplishment under this outcome area aims to capture the work the GM undertakes with development partners in trying to raise the priority of SLM in their intervention programmes. Such work includes engaging in discussions and consultations in donor platforms, both informal and formal. Expected accomplishment 2.4.01 SLM is mainstreamed into developed country Parties development policies The number of donor platforms and individual donors that consider SLM issues in their development policies 2.4.01.01 Consultation and awareness-raising with the Global Donor Platform for Rural Development (GDPRD), multi-donor platforms and selected individual donors to enhance the consideration of SLM in development policies J Outcome 2.5: Mutually reinforcing measures among desertification/land degradation action programmes and biodiversity and climate change mitigation and adaptation are introduced or strengthened to enhance the impact of interventions 32. It is increasingly clear that when it comes to implementation at the national level, measures to address the concerns of the three, legally separate Rio conventions are very similar, in particular when it comes to land-related action. Thus, for the GM the respective financing strategies need to be coherent, mutually reinforcing and possibly integrated in order to fully capitalize on the intrinsic synergies. This outcome area focuses on the GM's work at the global and regional levels to promote the synergistic implementation of the three conventions through actions leading to combined resource mobilization efforts to address common objectives. Expected accomplishment 2.5.01 Increased SLM financing through synergistic implementation of the Rio conventions The number of relevant global and regional events related to the UNFCCCa and CBDb to which the GM contributes Target 2012 - 2013: 11 2.5.01.01 Promote the integration of SLM in NAPAsc, NBSAPd and UNFCCCa-, CBDb- and UNFFe- related policies at the global and regional levels J, R a United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. b Convention on Biological Diversity. c National adaptation programme of action. d National biodiversity strategy and action plan.. e United Nations Forum on Forests. D. Executive direction and management 33. The expected accomplishments below summarize the main activities of the GM's management in order to ensure the timely and effective delivery of services as requested by the COP, in accordance with the administrative procedures of the GM's hosting institution, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). They aim to: (i) position the GM as an effective partner for servicing the Convention and its Parties; (ii) ensure sound financial management of core budget and voluntary contributions; and (iii) provide up-to-date information on SLM finance to all stakeholders using sound communication tools and mechanisms. Expected accomplishment X.1.01 The GM is an effective partner on financing for the Convention in international dialogues, partnerships and strategy development for servicing the Convention and its Parties JWP completed and implemented Target 2012 - 2013: Yes X.1.01.01 GM input provided for the implementation of the JWP in cooperation with the UNCCD secretariat J The proportion of the core budget adopted by the COP received for GM operations Target 2012 - 2013: 25 % X.1.01.02 Services provided to GM-relevant agenda items for the COP and the CRIC as decided by the COP J Clearance by the President of IFAD on GM inputs X.1.01.03 Service provided to the relevant parts of IFAD's Governing Council and Executive Board Sessions The number of meetings held among Facilitation Committee (FC) members Target 2012 - 2013: 2 X.1.01.04 FC meetings organized Expected accomplishment X.2.01 Effective and transparent management of the work programme and financial resources Quality and RBM performance enforced X.1.21.01 Monitoring and evaluation of the GM's activities Level of satisfaction of country parties with the support provided by the GM (survey) Target 2012 - 2013: 60 % X.1.22.01 Client survey carried out IFAD audit results on the GM are satisfactory X.1.23.01 Financial reports submitted to IFAD Amount of voluntary contributions raised from donors Target 2012 - 2013: EUR 7 000 000 X.1.24.01 Adequate and predictable financial and human resources are raised from voluntary contributions requested for the implementation of the work programme of the GM The number of staff development and team-building initiatives undertaken Target 2012 - 2013: 15 X.1.25.01 Staff development provided to equip the GM team with comprehensive skills on finance and team-building to implement the GM's work programme Expected accomplishment X.3.01 Communication to a wide audience of the services provided by the GM to the Convention Unique visitors per day to the website Target 2012 - 2013: 306 X.1.31.01 Contributions provided to the UNCCD secretariat for the overall communication strategy of the Convention J X.1.32.01 GM website maintained and updated X.1.33.01 Outreach material developed and disseminated (newsletters, quarterly news, publications and side events at various forums at the regional and international levels) X.1.34.01 Support to country Parties provided to communicate best practices and barriers to the implementation of the Convention J X.1.35.01 e-forums developed and facilitated IV. Recommendations 34. The CRIC is invited to consider this proposal and forward recommendations as a basis for COP guidance and decision-making on programmatic and budgetary issues for the GM. 35. The COP may wish to: Approve the strategic orientation of the GM as contained in the present workplan; Request the GM to focus mainly on activities leading to the achievement of strategic objective 4 of The Strategy, mainly by promoting actions leading to a broadened funding base for Convention implementation through effective partnerships; Request the GM to focus on promoting actions leading to increased financial flows and investments for the implementation of the Convention; Urge the GM to continue to facilitate the establishment of integrated investment frameworks by country Parties, corresponding to the needs expressed in the national action programmes of these countries; Request the GM to actively promote, forge or join financing partnerships with bilateral and multilateral donors, international financial institutions, and global and regional development banks, including member organizations of the Facilitation Committee, to scale up investments for the SLM agenda into sustainable socio-economic development; Request the GM to continue to provide specialized financial advisory services to country Parties, aiming at supporting domestic approaches to SLM financing by assisting in the development and implementation of integrated financing strategies leading to integrated investment frameworks for SLM; Request the GM to strengthen its capacity to explore new and innovative sources of finance, financing instruments and mechanisms that can be applied to address the concerns of the Convention; Request the GM to promote the integration and mainstreaming of SLM priorities into the resource mobilization strategies developed under the Rio conventions, and encourage synergistic approaches to multilateral environment agreement implementation; Urge that the Managing Director of the GM strengthen collaboration with the organizations that are members of the Facilitation Committee and participate as an observer in the GEF Council and in the governing bodies of other member institutions, as appropriate; Request the GM to support and substantiate the resource mobilization efforts made by country Parties by collecting, generating and disseminating specialized knowledge that is instrumental to resource mobilization, including: (i) Information on the sources of domestic finance, development finance and private sector finance available for activities targeted at the objectives of the Convention; (ii) Analyses of relevant financial flows for the implementation of the Convention and The Strategy, in particular through national reporting on financial flows by country Parties; (iii) Country-level assessments of the potential to increase SLM investments through the economic valuation of land and ecosystem services; and (iv) Studies of innovative financing options, mechanisms and opportunities for SLM, including incentive- and market-based financial mechanisms, microfinance, and so on. 