%%%POLYMETALLIC SULPHIDES|SEABED MINING|MARINE RESOURCES|RESOURCES EXPLORATION|

Seventeenth session Kingston, Jamaica * Reissued for technical reasons on 19 July 2011. 11-22 July 2011 Report and recommendations to the Council of the International Seabed Authority relating to an application for approval of a plan of work for exploration for polymetallic sulphides by the China Ocean Mineral Resources Research and Development Association Submitted by the Legal and Technical Commission I. Introduction 1. On 7 May 2010, the Secretary-General of the International Seabed Authority received an application for approval of a plan of work for exploration for polymetallic sulphides in the Area. The application was submitted pursuant to the Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Sulphides in the Area ("the Regulations") by the China Ocean Mineral Resources Research and Development Association (COMRA). The area under application covers approximately 10,000 km2 and consists of 100 blocks measuring approximately 10 kilometres by 10 kilometres each, which are grouped into 12 clusters, each containing from 5 to 19 blocks. The clusters are not contiguous but are proximate and confined within a rectangular area not exceeding 300,000 km2 in size where the longest side does not exceed 1,000 kilometres in length. 2. In accordance with regulation 22, paragraph (c) of the Regulations, on 14 May 2010, the Secretary-General notified all members of the Authority of the receipt of the application and circulated information of a general nature concerning the application. The Secretary-General also placed consideration of the application as an item on the agenda of the Legal and Technical Commission at its meeting, held from 4 to 13 July 2011. II. Methodology and consideration of the application by the Legal and Technical Commission A. General methodology applied by the Commission in consideration of the application 3. In its consideration of the application, the Commission noted that, in keeping with the scheme established in annex III, article 6, of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ("the Convention"), it is first required to make an objective determination as to whether the applicant has fulfilled the requirements contained in the Regulations, particularly with respect to the form of applications; whether the applicant has provided the necessary undertakings and assurances specified in regulation 15 of the Regulations; and whether it has the necessary financial and technical capability to carry out the proposed plan of work for exploration and (as appropriate) has satisfactorily discharged its obligations under any previous contract with the Authority. The Commission is then required to determine, in accordance with regulation 23 (4) of the Regulations and its procedures, whether the proposed plan of work will provide for effective protection of human health and safety and effective protection and preservation of the marine environment and will ensure that installations are not established where interference may be caused to the use of recognized sea lanes essential to international navigation or in areas of intense fishing activity. Regulation 23 (5) of the Regulations goes on to provide that: If the Commission makes the determinations specified in paragraph 3 and determines that the proposed plan of work for exploration meets the requirements of paragraph 4, the Commission shall recommend approval of the plan of work for exploration to the Council. 4. In considering the proposed plan of work for exploration for polymetallic sulphides, the Commission had regard to the principles, policies and objectives relating to activities in the Area as provided for in part XI and annex III of the Convention and in the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1994 ("the Agreement"), in accordance with regulation 23, paragraph 9 of the Regulations. B. Consideration of the application 5. The Commission considered the application in closed meetings on 5, 6 and 8 July 2011. 6. Prior to commencing a detailed examination of the application, the Commission invited the applicant's representative, Mr. Jin Jiancai, Secretary-General of COMRA, accompanied by Mr. Li Jiabiao, Deputy Director of the Second Institute of Oceanography of the State Oceanic Administration and Mr. Tao Chunhui, Senior researcher at the Second Institute of Oceanography of the State Oceanic Administration, to make a presentation of the application. Members of the Commission then asked questions to clarify certain aspects of the application before convening in closed session to examine the application in detail. On 6 July 2011, the Commission decided to request the Chairman of the Commission to transmit a list of questions to the applicant through the Secretary-General. A formal response to these questions was provided by the applicant on 8 July 2011. III. Summary of basic information regarding the application A. Identification of the applicant 7. Name of applicant: China Ocean Mineral Resources Research and Development Association. 8. Address of applicant: (a) Street address: 1 Fuxingmenwai Avenue, Beijing, China, 100860; (b) Postal address: as above; (c) Telephone number: 86-10-68022117; (d) Facsimile number: 86-10-68033318; (e) Electronic mail address: comra@comra.org. 9. Applicant's designated representative: (a) Name: Mr. Jin Jiancai; (b) Street address of applicant's designated representative: as above; (c) Postal address: as above; (d) Telephone number: 86-10-68030504; (e) Facsimile number: 86-10-68030504; (f) Electronic mail address: jin@comra.org. 10. Applicant's place of registration and principal place of business/domicile: Beijing, China. 11. The applicant indicated that COMRA is registered as a State entity in the sponsoring State and is under the effective control of the sponsoring State. B. Sponsorship 12. Sponsoring State: China. 13. Date of deposit of instrument of ratification by China of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea: 7 June 1996; date of the consent to be bound by the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982: 7 June 1996. 14. Date of certificate of sponsorship: 6 May 2010. 15. The Commission noted that the application was sponsored by China and that a certificate of sponsorship, in due and proper form, had been submitted. In that certificate, the State Oceanic Administration, acting on behalf of China, and as authorized by the State Council of China, stated that COMRA is under the effective control of China; in that certificate, the sponsoring State declared that it assumed responsibility in accordance with article 139, article 153, paragraph 4, and annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention. C. Area of application 16. The application area of COMRA is located in the Southwest Indian Ridge. It includes 100 blocks measuring approximately 10 kilometres by 10 kilometres each, but not exceeding 100 km2. The total area covered by the application is approximately 10,000 km2 and does not exceed 10,000 km2. The blocks under application are grouped into 12 clusters, each containing from 5 to 19 blocks. The clusters of blocks of polymetallic sulphides are not contiguous, but are proximate and confined within a rectangular area not exceeding 300,000 km2 in size where the longest side does not exceed 1,000 kilometres in length. The coordinates and general location of the areas under application are shown in the annex to the present document. D. Other information 17. Date of receipt of application: 7 May 2010. 18. Previous contracts with the Authority: (a) Date of the previous contract: COMRA and the Authority signed a contract for exploration for polymetallic nodules in the Area on 22 May 2001 in Beijing, China; (b) Reports submitted to the Authority in connection with the contract for exploration for polymetallic nodules: :: Annual report for 2001, submitted in March 2002 :: Annual report for 2002, submitted in March 2003 :: Annual report for 2003, submitted in March 2004 :: Annual report for 2004, submitted in March 2005 :: Annual report for 2005, submitted in March 2006 :: Five-year period report for the period 2001-2005, submitted in March 2006 :: Annual report for 2006, submitted in March 2007 :: Annual report for 2007, submitted in March 2008 :: Annual report for 2008, submitted in March 2009 :: Annual report for 2009, submitted in March 2010 :: Annual report for 2010, submitted in March 2011 :: Five-year report for the period 2006-2010, submitted in March 2011 (c) The date of expiration of the contract: 21 May 2016. 19. Undertakings: the applicant submitted a written undertaking dated 6 May 2010 signed by Mr. Jin Jiancai, the designated representative of COMRA, stating that it will comply with regulation 15 of the Regulations. 20. The applicant has elected to offer an equity interest in a joint venture arrangement in accordance with regulation 19 of the Regulations. 21. The applicant has paid the fixed fee of $50,000 for its application, to be followed by an annual fee, pursuant to regulation 21, paragraph 1 (b) of the Regulations. IV. Examination of information and technical data submitted by the applicant 22. The following technical documents were submitted in the application: (a) Copy of the applicant's certificate of registration as a State entity of China; (b) Certificate of sponsorship issued by the sponsoring State, China; (c) Information relating to the area under application: (i) Chart of the location of the blocks; (ii) A list of the coordinates of the corners of blocks under application; (d) Information to enable the Council to determine whether the applicant is financially capable of carrying out the proposed plan of work for exploration; (e) Information to enable the Council to determine whether the applicant is technically capable of carrying out the proposed plan of work for exploration; (f) Indicative plan of work for exploration; (g) Written undertakings by the applicant. V. Consideration of financial and technical qualifications of the applicant A. Financial capacity 23. In evaluating the financial capacity of the applicant, the Commission noted that COMRA had declared its financial capacity to carry out the proposed plan of work for exploration and fulfil its financial obligations to the Authority. The Commission was provided with a statement dated 6 May 2010 and signed by Mr. Xie Xuren, Minister of Finance of China, certifying that the applicant would have the necessary funds to meet the estimated minimum expenditures under the proposed plan of work and fulfil its financial obligations to the Authority. B. Technical capacity 24. The Commission was provided with technical information in relation to COMRA's previous experience and skills in the field of exploration for polymetallic nodules and scientific research on polymetallic sulphides deposits. The Commission noted that the applicant recalled its experience as a pioneer investor and current contractor with the Authority for exploration for polymetallic nodules to demonstrate its capability to carry out the investigation and development of seabed mineral resources, environmental assessment and scientific research. The applicant further stated that it had been accumulating data and experience concerning the distribution of and methods for exploration for polymetallic sulphides and their environment for the past 10 years. 25. The Commission was provided with information related to the prevention, reduction and control of hazards and possible impacts to the marine environment. This included the description of a plan for a programme for oceanographic and environmental baseline studies to ensure that the exploration activities cause minimal impact on the marine environment. It enclosed a plan of action to take necessary measures to prevent, reduce and control pollution and other hazards to the marine environment arising from the exploration activities. A description of a monitoring programme and proposed measures for the prevention, reduction and control of pollution and other hazards, as well as possible impacts, to the marine environment was also provided. In its response to the Commission, COMRA indicated that it will employ the most appropriate equipment available for the survey and research of active hydrothermal vents to improve scientific understanding of the ecosystems and facilitate scientific assessment of the ecological environment, for the purpose of providing the scientific basis for the protection of the active hydrothermal vent ecosystem. 26. In response to oral and written questions from the Commission with respect to whether exploration activities will take place in active vents and with respect to the strategic measures that the applicant will adopt to mitigate the effects of such activities, the applicant stated that COMRA was of the view that exploitation of polymetallic sulphides should not be conducted on active hydrothermal vents on the seabed. Given the limited scientific knowledge available and existing uncertainties, COMRA believes that the precautionary approach should be applied and the equipment testing related to the exploitation should also be located away from the active hydrothermal vents so as to avoid possible harm to the biological community living near the active vents. VI. Consideration of data and information submitted for approval of the plan of work for exploration 27. In accordance with regulation 20 of the Regulations, the application included the following information for approval of the plan of work for exploration: (a) A general description and a schedule of the proposed exploration programme of activities for the first five-year period, such as studies to be undertaken in respect of the environmental, technical, economic and other appropriate factors that must be taken into account in exploration; (b) A description of the programme for oceanographic and environmental baseline studies in accordance with the Regulations and environmental rules, regulations and procedures established by the Authority. Such studies would enable an assessment of the potential environmental impact including, but not restricted to, the impact on biodiversity, of the proposed exploration activities, taking into account any recommendations by the Legal and Technical Commission; (c) A preliminary assessment of the possible impact of the proposed exploration activities on the marine environment; (d) A description of proposed measures for the prevention, reduction and control of pollution and other hazards, as well as possible impacts, to the marine environment; (e) Data necessary for the Council to make the determination it is required to make in accordance with regulation 13, paragraph 1 of the Regulations (financial obligations to the Authority); and (f) A schedule of anticipated yearly expenditures in respect of the programme of activities for the first five-year period. 28. The Commission was satisfied that the information presented met the requirements of the Regulations and noted that it looked forward to the submission of reports, including relevant data, by the applicant, as required by the Regulations and any recommendations for guidance to be issued by the Commission in due course. 29. The Commission also took note of the fact that some of COMRA's proposed exploration blocks were located in close proximity to an area that is the subject of a voluntary closure to deep-sea bottom fishing. In this regard, the Commission welcomed the communication from COMRA in which it recalled article 147 of the Convention and emphasized its commitment to protecting benthic ecosystems and that it would respect all the relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and relevant fisheries organizations. The Commission also noted that COMRA had declared its intention to strictly abide by the relevant rules, regulations and decisions of the Authority. VII. Training programme 30. The applicant indicated that, in accordance with regulation 29 and section 8 of annex 4 to the Regulations, the contractor will draw up training programmes in cooperation with the Authority and the sponsoring State and will submit these programmes to the Authority for approval. VIII. Conclusion and recommendations 31. Having examined the particulars submitted by the applicant, which are summarized in sections III to VII above, the Commission is satisfied that the application has been duly submitted in accordance with the Regulations and that the applicant is a qualified applicant within the meaning of annex III, article 4, of the Convention. The Commission is further satisfied that the applicant: (a) Has complied with the provisions of the Regulations; (b) Has given the undertakings and assurances specified in regulation 15 of the Regulations; (c) Possesses the financial and technical capability to carry out the proposed plan of work for exploration. 32. The Commission is satisfied that none of the conditions in regulation 23 (6) of the Regulations apply. 33. With respect to the proposed plan of work for exploration, the Commission is satisfied that the proposed plan of work for exploration will: (a) Provide for effective protection of human health and safety; (b) Provide for effective protection and preservation of the marine environment; (c) Ensure that installations are not established where interference may be caused to the use of recognized sea lanes essential to international navigation or in areas of intense fishing activity. 34. Accordingly, pursuant to regulation 23 (5), of the Regulations, the Commission recommends to the Council approval of the plan of work for exploration for polymetallic sulphides submitted by COMRA. A. List of coordinates Block number Longitude E Latitude S Longitude Latitude Area size sq kma Degrees Minutes Seconds Decimal a The geographic coordinates provided by COMRA were converted to Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates (the recommended International Seabed Authority (ISA) standard) in order to compute the area sizes. As a result, there are minor variations in block sizes. 