%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|ISRAEL|LEBANON|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|

Identical letters dated 16 May 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council I write with regard to a very troubling incident that took place yesterday on the Blue Line between Israel and Lebanon, which threatens peace and stability in our region. Yesterday, at approximately 11.40 a.m. local time, a group of hundreds of individuals near the village of Maroun al-Ras in Lebanon sought to breach the Blue Line and infiltrate into Israel using violence, including by throwing large objects and through other dangerous means. In the days leading up to yesterday's incident, Israel warned the international community and the United Nations about the explosive potential of possible provocations on the occasion of the so-called "Nakba Day" near the Blue Line. Moreover, we asked the international community to convey a clear message to the Government of Lebanon about the seriousness of this threat and the need to take the appropriate measures to prevent this dangerous provocation. Despite these warnings from Israel and certain attempts on the ground to prevent these provocations, violent demonstrators sought to cross the Blue Line. The Israel Defense Forces acted according to its instructions to operate with maximum restraint in confronting the significant threat of violence facing it. Any harm caused to the individuals involved in these violent demonstrations lies clearly with the Government of Lebanon, which is responsible for preventing any infiltration of the Blue Line or provocations in its vicinity. Such actions constitute a clear violation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). We expect the Government of Lebanon to take the appropriate measures to prevent such dangerous incidents and provocations from reoccurring in the future. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, as the force on the ground, should take appropriate measures in this regard. We also expect the international community to take action to prevent further provocations, delivering clear messages to countries from where provocations against Israel are launched -- whether through land or sea -- that such actions carry with them the serious potential for escalation. Israel is fully committed to the principle of freedom of speech, including the rights of individuals to protest. However, we are determined to protect our borders, civilians and soldiers from provocations such as the one that took place yesterday near Maroun al-Ras. It is obvious that those behind these incidents are seeking to advance a radical and destructive agenda. Like many in our region, the leaders of these violent demonstrations have stated clearly and repeatedly that they do not accept Israel's right to exist -- and their goal is to destroy it. Yesterday's events are part of a disturbing pattern of action taken by extremist forces that seek to spark provocation with Israel. Israel will continue to take great efforts to maintain regional peace and security -- and hopes that our neighbours will act in the same way. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter distributed as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Meron Reuben Ambassador Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations 