%%%PEACEBUILDING|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|POLITICAL CONDITIONS|INTERNAL SECURITY|GUINEA-BISSAU|SECURITY SECTOR REFORM|RULE OF LAW|DRUG TRAFFIC|ORGANIZED CRIME|ECONOMIC CONDITIONS|SOCIAL CONDITIONS|HUMAN RIGHTS|PUBLIC INFORMATI﻿ON|

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1876 (2009), by which the Council established the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and resolution 1949 (2010), by which it renewed the mandate of UNIOGBIS and requested me to report every four months on the situation in Guinea-Bissau and progress made in the implementation of the mandate. The report covers major developments since my report of 15 February 2011 (S/2011/73). II. Major developments in Guinea-Bissau A. Political and security/military developments 2. The reporting period was marked by positive developments contributing to overall political stability in the country. The deployment of an Angolan technical Security Sector Reform mission and the adoption of the Security Sector Reform road map developed by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) contributed to advancing the Security Sector Reform process. At the same time, the formulation of a common position on the process by the Presidency, the Government and the military leadership, as well as civil society organizations, allowed them to present to Guinea-Bissau's international partners a united front in addressing the challenges ahead of the consultations with the European Union under article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement. 3. In February and March, President Malam Bacai Sanha and the Government of Guinea-Bissau undertook intensive diplomatic efforts to advocate for greater understanding by the international community of the challenges facing the country. Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Júnior led a delegation to Senegal from 14 to 16 February, while the Minister for Foreign Affairs headed a separate one to Lisbon, Paris, Berlin, London and Brussels, from 13 to 25 February. The Minister for Foreign Affairs delivered a message from the President to his counterparts in Europe, suggesting that the suspension of cooperation with Guinea-Bissau and the application of individual sanctions would be counter-productive to the country's stability. At the same time, my Special Representative impressed upon the national authorities the need to take advantage of these consultations to address in earnest the issues that had prompted partial suspension of international support to the country. 4. The Prime Minister led a high-level delegation to the opening meeting of Guinea-Bissau's consultations with the European Union in Brussels, on 29 March. He presented to the Council of the European Union his country's response to the various concerns raised by the European Union, including on governance and the status of the investigations into the 2009 political assassinations. The Prime Minister emphasized the commitment of national authorities to consolidate stability through strengthening the rule of law and prioritizing Security Sector Reform. He called for support from the European Union, the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS and CPLP to help overcome the challenges ahead in reforming the defence, security and justice sectors, to enhance the fight against drug trafficking and organized crime, and to reduce the level of poverty. 5. In a communiqué released after the meeting, the European Union asserted that the events of 1 April 2010 were a serious breach of the Cotonou Agreement, while noting the swift response and positive spirit demonstrated by the Government and welcoming the information provided at the meeting. The communiqué listed what the European Union saw as the Government's obligations before full cooperation could resume, including: (a) the provision of a detailed timetable on the effective implementation of Security Sector Reform based on the national strategy adopted by the National Assembly and the subsequent legislative package drawn up with the support of the European Union; (b) the renewal of the military hierarchy in keeping with the recommendations of the ECOWAS/CPLP road map for Security Sector Reform; and (c) the conclusion of independent judicial investigations into the 2009 assassinations and the military events of 1 April 2010. 6. During an extraordinary meeting held on 15 March, the Council of Ministers agreed to implement the ECOWAS/CPLP road map. The Council prioritized the implementation of key activities in the road map, such as technical assistance, training for national protection units, and the preparation of a battalion for peacekeeping operations. However, it expressed reservations regarding the deployment of external police units expected to assist Guinea-Bissau with protection capacity. 7. The ECOWAS Summit of Heads of State and Government was held in Abuja from 23 to 24 March, and was attended by the President of Guinea-Bissau. The Summit adopted the ECOWAS/CPLP road map and decided to allocate $63 million to Guinea-Bissau, as part of the ECOWAS contribution to the implementation of Security Sector Reform. In that context, the Summit also approved the deployment of a technical assistance team to Guinea-Bissau to train and strengthen national units in charge of protecting national institutions and key national figures, and to contribute to protecting the national commission of inquiry into the 2009 assassinations and the setting up of a witness protection programme. The regional leaders urged Member States to provide, on a bilateral basis, further assistance to the armed forces of Guinea-Bissau, including training on peace support operations. 8. Meanwhile, the President chaired the launching ceremony of the Angolan security sector reform technical military cooperation mission in Bissau on 21 March in the presence of the Angolan Minister of Defence, the Angolan Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, the Executive Secretary of CPLP, my Special Representative and key national officials. During a subsequent meeting with my Special Representative, the Angolan Secretary of State pointed out the benefits of other international partners supporting Guinea-Bissau's Security Sector Reform plans and joining his country's efforts. He also stressed the crucial role of the United Nations in assisting national authorities with coordination, as well as the importance of operationalizing the pension fund for members of the armed forces and the police to facilitate the implementation of key Security Sector Reform strategies. 9. On 4 April, in a briefing session with political parties not represented in the Parliament, the Prime Minister explained that the presence of the Angolan security sector reform technical military cooperation mission was based on bilateral military cooperation agreements already endorsed by the National Assembly. That meeting was held in response to criticisms from those parties that felt that the Government had withheld information on the mandate and structure of the mission. On 13 April, the Prime Minister met with the four political parties represented in the Parliament to brief them on Guinea-Bissau's consultations with the European Union in Brussels and updated them on the presence of the mission, as well as on the prospects for the swift implementation of the ECOWAS/CPLP road map. 10. On 14 March, the parliamentary special commission on internal administration, local government and defence presented a report to the National Assembly on the outcome of its visits to the Ministries of Interior and Defence, undertaken from 15 to 23 February, and its meetings with the two Ministers and the Chief of General Staff of the Armed Forces. The report highlighted the operational constraints facing the security and defence forces, and the urgent need to implement the organic laws passed by Parliament in 2010. On 20 May, the President returned the draft of the Organic Law on the Basic Organization of the Armed Forces to the Parliament and requested the inclusion of the post of Deputy Chief of General Staff in the structure of the armed forces. The revised draft is under consideration by the Parliament. 11. During the reporting period, the Voz di Paz (Voice of Peace) grass-roots participatory dialogue initiative launched the second phase of its research into the root causes of conflict in the regions of Biombo and Cachéu. This phase, which is scheduled to be completed in December 2011, will involve an in-depth analysis of the causes of conflict and recommend solutions to be implemented at local and institutional levels, in the areas of insecurity, poverty, access to justice, and the political dimension of tribalism. B. Economic and social developments 12. Despite a context of continuing economic fragility, the Government is pursuing the implementation of public administration and public finance reforms, including efforts to improve fiscal discipline. A moderate growth rate of 4 per cent is forecast in 2011, owing in part to positive prospects for cashew nut exports and public infrastructure works. However, inflation could reach 4 per cent, above the target of 2 per cent set by the West African Economic and Monetary Union, owing to international price increases in oil and basic commodities. The impact of rising oil and food prices in international markets gave rise to concerns over possible socio-economic tensions in the country. The Government reduced import taxes on oil products at the beginning of March to mitigate the impact on the cost of living. However, following its consultations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Government decided to reverse this policy, and acknowledged that it would not be able to buffer international commodity price increases indefinitely. 13. Despite a substantial increase in cereal and rice production in 2010 and multiple initiatives by international partners to stabilize the level of national food production, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the World Food Programme (WFP), the overall food security situation remained fragile owing to a combination of low income of producers and high food prices. The results of the vulnerability assessment mapping conducted by WFP to assess food security, in close collaboration with the National Institute of Statistics, were released in March 2011 and showed that an average of 20 per cent of rural households were affected by food insecurity, among which 8 per cent by severe food insecurity. The regions of Quínara, Bolama, Oio, Cachéu and Biombo were most affected. 14. A mission from IMF visited Bissau from 11 to 23 March to assess progress under the Extended Credit Facility programme for the period June to December 2010. It noted that performance had been satisfactory and that the prospects for compliance with benchmarks in the Extended Credit Facility programme for January to December 2011 were promising. On 10 May, the Paris Club creditors announced a $283 million debt relief initiative after Guinea-Bissau reached the completion point in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative in December 2010. Meanwhile, the IMF and the World Bank upgraded their presence in the country with the appointment of Resident Representatives. 15. The Government is finalizing its Second Generation Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. On 7 and 8 April, the Government, with the support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), organized consultations with national and international stakeholders to discuss the 10 principles for international commitment in fragile States, and to validate the findings of the surveys on the Paris Declaration and the Principles for Good International Engagement in Fragile States and Situations conducted in January 2011. The findings will be presented at the HighLevel Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, Republic of Korea in December 2011. 16. The African Development Bank dispatched three missions to Guinea-Bissau, from 27 February to 12 March, to monitor its education and administration capacity-building projects, from 21 to 30 March to discuss budget support with the Government, and from 27 March to 1 April to evaluate a health development project. 17. Within the framework of the UNDP/International Labour Organization (ILO) joint task force for job creation in post-conflict settings, a joint mission comprising UNDP/Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery and ILO experts from Dakar, Geneva, New York and Bissau, conducted a needs assessment in Bissau from 4 to 9 May. The mission identified entry points for the elaboration of a national employment strategy and a joint UNDP/ILO programme on job creation as a peace dividend to be supported by the Peacebuilding Fund. 18. An estimated 290,740 children were vaccinated during the first 2011 national polio vaccination campaign targeting children under the age of five. The campaign was conducted from 22 to 25 March by the Ministry of Health, with the support of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the World Health Organization (WHO). The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNICEF and WHO have also supported the Ministry of Health in revising the national action plan for accelerating the reduction of child and maternal mortality to meet Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5, which are related to child and maternal health. III. Implementation of the mandate of UNIOGBIS A. Strengthening the capacities of national institutions and support to inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation 19. UNIOGBIS and UNDP continued to provide technical support to the organizing committee of the national conference, which launched the preparatory regional conferences in May, with funding from Japan. From 22 to 25 February, UNIOGBIS, in partnership with Swisspeace, organized a workshop to enhance the capacity of 15 facilitators responsible for leading the consultations. On 19 April, a UNDP-funded retreat brought together members of a technical working group established to finalize the criteria for selecting the participants in the regional conferences in order to ensure an inclusive process. The retreat recommended, inter alia, that the number of participants in the regions should be increased and that gender and age balance be ensured. Finally, consultations with the diaspora living in Africa were held in Dakar, from 20 to 22 May, with UNDP support. The consultations with the diaspora living in Europe were organized in Lisbon on 26 and 27 May, with support from the Government of Portugal, and in the presence of the Prime Minister. 20. UNIOGBIS, in collaboration with the Faculty of Law of Bissau, completed eight training workshops for members of the ad hoc Parliamentary Commission for the Review of the Constitution, on 18 February. The mission will continue to support the constitutional review process, in particular by holding political dialogue at local and regional levels between parliamentarians and other national stakeholders on the best principles and political options, as well as grass-roots consultations to enhance the inclusiveness of the process. 21. From 30 March to 7 April, UNDP supported the creation of three civil conflict prevention brigades in Oio, Biombo and Cachéu regions, which are the most affected by chronic local conflicts. The brigades aim to bring together, inter alia, traditional authorities, youth, women, farmer organizations and representatives from the justice sector and the police, to facilitate conflict analysis exercises and support the implementation of action plans focused on capacity-building, awareness-raising and mediation through regular meetings among the various ethnic groups and between traditional leaders and the national authorities. 22. Furthermore, UNIOGBIS, in partnership with the office of the Prosecutor General and in cooperation with the United States Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, held a workshop on the protection of witnesses and special persons, on 13 and 14 April. The workshop enabled senior representatives of the criminal justice and law enforcement community, as well as representatives from civil society, to collectively revise the draft legislation on the protection of witnesses and special persons in Guinea-Bissau, into which they integrated a victims' protection component, consistent with international human rights standards and the national human rights context. The revised draft will be submitted to the National Assembly after its review and approval by the Minister of Justice and the Council of Ministers. B. Support to the police, internal security and criminal justice systems of holistic Security Sector Reform 23. Since the launch by national authorities of the vetting and certification process for policing and internal security agencies in February, the National Mixed Technical Independent Commission, with technical and financial assistance from UNIOGBIS, has completed the registration of 1,954 police officers from the Public Order Police, Immigration, Border Guard and security information systems. The registration process is expected to be finalized by 30 June 2011. 24. Meanwhile, progress continued on building the first model police station in Bissau, which is now close to completion. UNIOGBIS has initiated planning to expand the project to other areas with support from the Peacebuilding Fund. 25. On 22 March, the Minister of Public Administration, on behalf of the Minister of Justice, launched the implementation process of the recommendations adopted by a series of workshops and seminars, organized by the Ministry of Justice in 2010 with support from UNIOGBIS, on enhancing cooperation and information exchange between the Public Prosecution services, magistrates and police investigators. This process will assist in the implementation of the national policy on justice, which was developed and adopted by the Government in January 2011, with the assistance of UNDP. C. Security sector reform coordination and the rule of law 26. During the reporting period, progress was made in the coordination of international assistance on holistic Security Sector Reform, at both technical and operational levels. On 7 April, the Permanent Secretariat of the National Security Sector Reform Steering Committee, with support from UNIOGBIS, convened the first of a series of bimonthly meetings with international partners, including Angola, Brazil, Portugal, the European Union, UNDP and UNIOGBIS, to exchange technical and operational information on current Security Sector Reform efforts and facilitate coordination of activities among partners. 27. An interministerial national validation commission was established by the Government of Guinea-Bissau to oversee the bidding process for the selection of the banking institution to host the pension fund, with the participation of international observers, including ECOWAS, the European Union and UNIOGBIS. On 29 April, the commission formally announced the selection of the Banco da Africa Ocidental to host and manage the pension fund, as recommended by independent experts commissioned by the Government with the support of the European Union. 28. As part of its support to the National Security Sector Reform Steering Committee, UNDP funded four regional awareness-raising and information workshops on Security Sector Reform, with the technical support of UNIOGBIS, in March, April and May. The workshops targeted 200 participants from the defence and security forces, the judiciary, traditional authorities and civil society organizations. 29. On 11 May, UNDP and the Ministry of Justice convened a seminar on access to justice in Bissau, and the regions of Oio and Cachéu, to endorse the conclusions and recommendations of a study carried out between November 2010 and March 2011. The study highlighted that regional differences, in terms of crimes and use of formal, traditional or private dispute resolution mechanisms, depended on the capacity of formal justice service providers to meet the needs of the most vulnerable, in particular women and children. It also revealed frequent situations of private justice with community involvement that often escalated into serious conflict in the area. On 18 April, UNDP signed an agreement with the Ministry of Justice for the establishment of the Office of Information and Legal Consultation, as well as four centres referred to as "Access to Justice Centres", including two in Bissau, one in Cachéu and one in Oio, with a view to bringing justice closer to the people, in particular the most vulnerable groups. Two regional courts will be rehabilitated in the regions of Cachéu and Oio with the support of the Peacebuilding Fund. The centres will operate as legal aid offices, providing information on rights and the functioning of the justice system, as well as legal counselling and judicial representation to the most vulnerable groups. From 16 to 23 May, UNIOGBIS contributed to the training of legal aid officers on human rights international standards and human rights approaches to justice administration. 30. Following a request for assistance from the Government, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) conducted a technical assessment mission from 13 to 19 February, with the direct involvement of the armed forces and in consultation with UNDP. The mission reviewed ammunition storage areas and stockpile management mechanisms, and inspected ammunition storage sites in Bissau and the regions of Buba, Quebo, Bafata and Gabú. The mission provided technical support for the identification and the destruction of more than four tons of unserviceable and dangerous munitions posing the most immediate threat to local populations. In addition, the technical assessment mission noted that there were 14 known ammunition storage areas that pose a significant risk, which could result in injury and death, including in the immediate vicinity of the Osvaldo Vieira International Airport in Bissau and the city of Gabú. 31. UNDP continued to provide technical assistance to the national humanitarian mine action programme through the National Mine Action Coordination Centre and the demining non-governmental organization, Lutamos Todos Contra as Minas (LUTCAM). During the first quarter of 2011, 171,000 square metres of inhabited land and farmland were demined, targeting a total of 14,600 direct beneficiaries, mainly in the north and south of the country. Fifty-five landmines, one anti-tank mine and 1,860 explosive remnants from the war were destroyed by Humanitarian Aid, LUTCAM and Cleared Ground Demining, an international explosive ordnance disposal non-governmental organization. Guinea-Bissau is on track to fulfilling its obligations in accordance with the Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. D. Human rights and gender monitoring, protection, promotion, capacity-building and mainstreaming 32. On 22 and 23 February, UNIOGBIS held a regional human rights and gender workshop for military officers to raise their awareness of human rights and gender issues, and assisted the Ministry of Defence with the formulation of training modules and the drafting of a manual for a training-of-trainers programme. UNIOGBIS continued to monitor the human rights situation in the country. During the reporting period, the Office dispatched a field mission to the southern regions of Quinara and Timbali to assess the human rights and gender situation, with special attention to the economic, social and cultural rights. UNIOGBIS also monitored conditions in prisons, advocating for the separation of detainees according to gender and age, and for the release or prosecution of those arbitrarily detained. In keeping with the recommendations of the 2010 universal periodic review, the Government ratified the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. The Government also invited the Special Procedures mechanism of the Human Rights Council to assess judicial bodies in Guinea-Bissau. 33. On the second anniversary of the March 2009 assassinations of the late President João Bernardo Vieira and the Chief of General Staff, General Tagme Na Waie, the Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League, lawyers and family representatives of the victims condemned the lack of progress in the investigations. On 25 March, my Special Representative facilitated a meeting in Dakar between members of the diplomatic corps accredited to Guinea-Bissau and the Prosecutor General for an update of the criminal investigations, in line with Security Council resolution 1949 (2010). On that occasion, the Prosecutor General disclosed that the judicial process faced political, financial and administrative obstacles, as well as security constraints. In his briefing to the European Union on 29 March, the Prime Minister confirmed that the investigations into the assassinations were ongoing, but remained inconclusive owing to a lack of evidence, the inability to hear key witnesses and little international assistance. 34. On 9 April, the United States Department of State released its 2010 Human Rights Report on Guinea-Bissau, which noted the lack of judicial independence and due process of law, as well as the lack of progress in the investigations into political assassinations and other politically motivated killings and violence that occurred in 2009. The report repeated references contained in the 2009 United States Department of State report regarding the involvement of military officers under the command of the current Chief of General Staff in the assassination of President Vieira. A Government communiqué, issued on 11 April, expressed solidarity with and praised the military leadership for contributing to stability. At the same time, it warned that the United States report was creating tension that could generate instability in the country. The United States Embassy in Dakar, in a press statement on 14 April, said that its Government stood by the report. 35. On International Women's Day, on 8 March, the Institute of Women and Children launched consultations for the formulation of a national policy on gender equality and equity, with support from the United Nations. Representatives of the Government and civil society organizations have developed a first draft, while consultations with leading ministries are under way. The Specialized Parliamentary Committee on Women and Children is currently revising draft legislation on domestic violence to align it with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. On 15 March, the Gender Thematic Working Group held a retreat to assess its performance and ensure better coordination of gender activities. On 14 April, the Council of Ministers submitted draft laws to the National Assembly criminalizing human trafficking, including of children, and female excision. By a vast majority, the National Assembly adopted the two laws on 2 and 6 June, respectively. 36. The national steering committee on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) continued to prepare its national action plan, while the Women's Political Platform initiated actions to enhance the political participation of women in local elections. UNIOGBIS has also pursued initiatives to mainstream a gender perspective within policing and military institutions. As a result of the advocacy role of UNIOGBIS, the Public Order Police approved, on 2 March, the creation of a sub-directorate for gender and the protection of vulnerable people, as well as a police gender training task force. Furthermore, on 25 March, the Military Women's Commission, with UNIOGBIS support, organized a gender sensitization workshop for senior officers in the defence sector. E. Support to national efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and human trafficking 37. Following the signing on 3 December 2010 of a memorandum of understanding establishing a Transnational Crime Unit within the framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative, a Transnational Crime Unit Management Board was appointed in February and the Director of the Judiciary Police was nominated as the first Chair. UNIOGBIS extended support to the newly appointed staff in charge of building up the capacity of the Transnational Crime Unit, which is expected to move into its new premises by the end of June. 38. On 15 February, the Office of the Prosecutor General issued specific instructions to all police institutions on procedures to be followed in case of drug seizures or drug trafficking, namely the exclusive competence of the Judiciary Police in the fight against drug trafficking, which marks an important step in the improvement of cooperation among law enforcement authorities. 39. Consistent with a request from the Prime Minister, UNODC initiated consultations with the Government on the operational plan to combat drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, for the period 2011-2014. A task force, comprising representatives of the Government, UNODC and UNIOGBIS, has been set up to revise the operational plan, expected to focus on criminal justice, law enforcement and drug demand reduction. 40. On 1 March, UNICEF and ILO supported training by the International Organization for Migration for the National Committee on Human Trafficking, on child protection and child labour. On 1 April, UNICEF and UNIOGBIS provided support to the Ministry of the Interior to conduct a "training of trainers" course for 20 police and border guards on combating child trafficking, including protection and assistance to children who are victims of sexual violence and children in conflict with the law. 41. Within the framework of the implementation of a Central Authority for International Judicial Cooperation and Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters in Guinea-Bissau, UNODC organized from 2 to 6 May, a study visit to the European Union's Judicial Cooperation Unit (EUROJUST) and the European Judicial Network at The Hague and to the Portuguese Central Authority in Lisbon. A delegation of 12 national officials, including the Minister of Justice and the Prosecutor General, took part in the mission, aimed at exploring options for mutual legal assistance. 42. On 13 May, João Biaguê, a Prosecutor and staff member of the Bissau Faculty of Law, was appointed Director-General of the Judiciary Police, following the resignation of Lucinda Barbosa Ahukarié, who was allegedly subjected to death threats and undue pressure in the fulfilment of her tasks. Mr. Biaguê was officially sworn in on 30 May. F. Support to the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund 43. On 24 February, the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission held a meeting in New York, attended by a high-level delegation from Guinea-Bissau, headed by the Prime Minister. The authorities of Guinea-Bissau and my Special Representative briefed the configuration on recent developments and the efforts undertaken by the Government to stabilize the country and to re-engage with key international partners. The Prime Minister reiterated his Government's commitment to the peacebuilding process and to the implementation of critical reforms, including Security Sector Reform. Since that meeting, the Chair of the configuration, Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, has sought to maintain and enhance the engagement of international partners in providing political support and financial resources for the efforts of the Government in peacebuilding, economic recovery and development. 44. Following my recommendation to allocate $16.8 million of the Peacebuilding Fund for the implementation of the Peacebuilding Priority Plan for Guinea-Bissau, UNIOGBIS, the United Nations country team and national authorities have been working together to revise the Priority Plan, in line with comments and recommendations made by the Peacebuilding Support Office. Technical working groups were set up to further develop strategies in the priority areas to be supported by the Peacebuilding Fund. The Peacebuilding Priority Plan is expected to be approved during the next meeting of the Joint Steering Committee in June. 45. The projects funded under the first Peacebuilding Fund allocation are at a final stage. On 2 June, the Minister of Justice declared the regional prisons in Mansoa and Bafata as operational during a launching ceremony held at both sites. The new directors, who are both women, and the new penitentiary guards reported for duty in the newly equipped and furnished prisons. The rehabilitation of Gabú and Quebo military barracks is near completion, while the delivery of equipment for the Amura fortress barracks in Bissau is under way. The vocational training and youth employment project was also completed at the end of March. UNDP, in close partnership with the Secretariat of State for Youth, Culture and Sports, will continue to monitor the release of microcredit by the banks responsible for managing the credit lines. By 31 March, 240 business plans prepared by young beneficiaries were submitted to the banks; and 125 young people had already received grants to launch their income-generating activities. G. Regional cooperation, partnerships and resource mobilization 46. As part of his good offices, my Special Representative has impressed upon international partners the benefits of remaining committed to support Guinea-Bissau's efforts to consolidate stability. In this regard, he has maintained regular contacts with Guinea-Bissau's main international partners in Abuja, Dakar and New York, in particular ECOWAS and CPLP member States. UNIOGBIS also held regular exchanges with Angola, which is also the CPLP Chair, focusing on political developments and Security Sector Reform, including the work being carried out by the Angolan security sector reform technical military cooperation mission. 47. From 29 to 31 March, my Special Representative held consultations in Brazil with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence, as well as with other senior officials, including the Director of the Brazilian Cooperation Agency. The Brazilian authorities gave assurances of continued support for reforms in Guinea-Bissau, in particular Security Sector Reform, under the aegis of South-South cooperation. In Lisbon, my Special Representative met with representatives of CPLP member States on 1 April to review recent developments in Guinea-Bissau and discuss the ECOWAS/CPLP road map. He also encouraged them to maintain their engagement with Guinea-Bissau and to join Angolan bilateral initiatives in supporting national efforts. IV. Support to the implementation of the ECOWAS/CPLP road map for Security Sector Reform 48. On 24 March, the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS adopted the road map for support to Security Sector Reform and stabilization in Guinea-Bissau. Consistent with the request by the Security Council to engage with ECOWAS and CPLP to jointly assess the requirements to support the rapid implementation of the road map, I deployed a technical assessment mission to Bissau and Abuja from 11 to 18 April. Led by my Deputy Special Representative in Guinea-Bissau, the mission included representatives from the Departments of Political Affairs and Peacekeeping Operations, the Peacebuilding Support Office, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team, and was undertaken in close consultation with the national authorities, the African Union, CPLP, ECOWAS, the European Union and relevant bilateral partners. 49. The mission recommended the prompt establishment by ECOWAS of a joint task force/coordination mechanism, with CPLP, the African Union, the European Union and the United Nations, to finalize preparations for the implementation of the road map to guide and monitor the implementation process. The mission also made several recommendations to improve the functioning of existing coordination mechanisms and to mobilize resources for the immediate launching and effective functioning of the pension fund system, as well as related initiatives such as reinsertion and reintegration. Specific recommendations were also addressed to national authorities, the African Union, ECOWAS, CPLP member States and other bilateral partners, UNIOGBIS, the United Nations as a whole, and the Security Council. 50. On 4 May, my Special Representative shared the final report of the technical assessment mission with the President of the ECOWAS Commission and the Executive Secretary of CPLP. The report was subsequently endorsed by the two organizations. In the meantime, from 28 April to 2 May, the Ministry of Defence hosted a meeting with representatives of ECOWAS and CPLP to discuss mechanisms for the coordination of efforts of the two Organizations in the implementation of Security Sector Reform, in line with the recommendations put forward by the technical assessment mission. Discussions also focused on the need for a timely establishment of the pension fund. V. Cross-cutting issues A. Integration of the United Nations system/joint strategic workplan 51. At their joint retreat held on 17 March, the United Nations country team and UNIOGBIS endorsed a joint strategic workplan with appropriate benchmarks to measure and track progress on the implementation of the United Nations joint vision for Guinea-Bissau. Key elements related to the mandate of UNIOGBIS are set out in the annex to the present report. The joint strategic workplan is aligned with the other key strategic documents, including the United Nations Framework for Peace and Development in Guinea-Bissau (UNDAF+), the Second Generation Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. 52. The joint strategic workplan was built on a situation analysis that identified the main challenges in the country, such as fragile State institutions and poor governance, high levels of poverty and unemployment, and poor social conditions. The workplan aims to address these challenges through a number of tangible benchmarks in four areas, as outlined below. The indicators of progress, drawn from UNDAF+ and Security Council resolution 1949 (2009), reflect both the mandate of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team's focus on development, thus ensuring that development programmes contribute to peace consolidation. A key assumption is that the current policy environment will continue to be stable and that the priorities of both the Government and international partners will not change. It is expected that by the end of 2016, the United Nations, in cooperation with the Government and the international community, would have contributed to a stable political, security and socio-economic environment conducive to peace, development and respect for human rights. 53. In the area of governance, the United Nations system aims to support national authorities in: (a) organizing the national conference for dialogue and reconciliation and setting up follow-up mechanisms; (b) reviewing the Constitution and the legal framework for institutional reforms; (c) advocating for the continued engagement of development partners in national stabilization and development efforts; and (d) formulating a technical assistance programme for the preparation of the 2012 legislative elections. 54. With regard to economic growth and poverty reduction, the focus will be on: (a) assistance in organizing a donor round table, following the adoption of the Second Generation Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper; (b) promotion of employment, in particular for youth and women; (c) support to the Government in the implementation of its economic programme in partnership with IMF and the World Bank; and (d) improvement of the food security situation in the country. 55. On social protection and human development, priority activities will include: (a) support for the implementation of the high-level operational plan for the reduction of child and maternal mortality in Guinea-Bissau, as well as the national three-year plan for educational development 2011-2013, which includes strategies for primary and vocational education, and literacy; (b) advocacy for increased resource allocation and budget execution for all basic social services, including through the Fast Track Initiative; and (c) advocacy for the reduction of inequitable distribution of resources and human development outcomes. 56. Regarding Security Sector Reform and the rule of law, the focus will be on: (a) the implementation of a national holistic Security Sector Reform strategy, including support through the ECOWAS/CPLP road map; (b) demobilization in the defence and security sectors and progress in the vetting and certification process for policing and internal security personnel, in accordance with gender and human rights standards; (c) increasing access to justice for the most vulnerable and strengthening the justice sector, including penitentiary reform, to address impunity and combat drug trafficking and transnational crime; and (d) coordination and resource mobilization activities for the pension fund and related initiatives, including reinsertion and reintegration arrangements, through a high-level Security Sector Reform event. B. Public information 57. In mid-February, the United Nations launched a radio programme to disseminate information on its activities in Guinea-Bissau with a focus on Security Sector Reform and the preparatory process leading to the national conference. UNIOGBIS and UNDP continued to provide technical assistance to the national coordination team in charge of the Security Sector Reform awareness campaign, implemented by Movimento Nacional da Sociedade Civil para Paz, Democracia e Desenvolvimiento (Civil Society National Movement for Peace, Democracy and Development) through a $30,000 grant sponsored by UNDP. On 23 March, the Governments of Guinea-Bissau and Angola signed a cooperation agreement for capacity-building and refurbishment of State media in the country. The Government of Japan also disbursed $60,000 to enhance the technical capacity of Guinea-Bissau national television. 58. On 14 April, the Council of Ministers decided to suspend the private newspaper Última Hora, whose coverage of the United States Department of State comments on the assassination of President Vieira was deemed excessive by the national authorities. The Guinea-Bissau Human Rights League, the Journalists' Union and Reporters Without Borders condemned the decision as a violation of freedom of expression. On 20 April, the Minister for Social Communication announced that the decision had been withdrawn. C. Staff safety and security 59. During the reporting period, there were no direct threats against United Nations staff in Guinea-Bissau. The crime rate remained at controlled levels. All security measures applicable to United Nations staff continued to be strictly enforced. VI. Observations 60. Since my last report, the national authorities of Guinea-Bissau and the country's international partners have taken commendable steps towards enhancing political stability in the country. I welcome the Government's constructive response to concerns raised by the international community, in particular the European Union, with regard to the rule of law, impunity and the role of the military in the political stability in the country. Continuous dialogue between national authorities and international partners is vital for enhancing peacebuilding and stability. In this regard, I was encouraged to note the unity of purpose shown by the State institutions in preparing for the important consultations in March with the European Union under article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement, and the inclusion of civil society and the military leadership in that process. I believe that this united approach, along with the open attitude to discussing contentious issues, contributed to a productive dialogue with the European Union. I hope that the issues will be successfully resolved, enabling the full resumption of European Union cooperation with Guinea-Bissau. 61. The efforts towards promoting a broad-based dialogue involving all stakeholders through the forthcoming national conference are encouraging. Preparations for this event are progressing well, although at a slower pace than planned owing to resource constraints. This is a cause of concern as the national conference will mark the first attempt since 1999 to engage all stakeholders, including at the grass-roots level, in national dialogue on the root causes of conflict and on possible solutions. In addition, the conference could put in place permanent and inclusive mechanisms of dialogue, which would strengthen democratic processes, promote reconciliation and help prevent conflict. I urge the main political stakeholders in the country to use the event as a legitimate forum in which to address key issues for the future stability and progress of the country. I appeal to Guinea-Bissau's international partners to continue to extend assistance to enable the holding of the national conference. 62. The approval of a political declaration and a plan of action on transatlantic drug trafficking by the Group of Eight (G-8) and Group of Twenty (G-20) Summit held in Deauville, France, following the G8+ ministerial conference held on this issue on 10 May, is encouraging. These documents will contribute to increased international cooperation in the fight against drug trafficking by involving countries of origin, transit and destination. I remain particularly concerned about drug-trafficking activities in Guinea-Bissau. The country's very limited resources and means to curb this threat to peacebuilding and to combat the illegal trafficking is worrisome, as is the absence of reliable information. I encourage Guinea-Bissau's partners to step up assistance to monitor these illegal activities and to contribute to the strengthening of national capacities to address the scourge in an effective and coordinated manner, within the framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative. I take note of the appointment of the new Director General of the Judiciary Police, and encourage him to build on the reform programme initiated under his predecessor for enhancing the fight against drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, and to fulfil the obligations subscribed by the Government of Guinea-Bissau, especially within the framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI) Freetown Commitment on Combating Illicit Trafficking of Drugs and Transnational Organized Crime in West Africa, signed in February 2010. 63. Among the key reforms pursued by the Government is an overarching administration reform that includes the defence, security and justice sectors. Holistic Security Sector Reform continues to be pivotal, not only for these structural reforms, but also to contribute to stability and consolidate democratic governance and the establishment of sound civil-military relations under civilian rule. The construction of model police stations with the provision of equipment and the selection and training of police officers to staff the stations is an essential step in national efforts to restore State authority and re-establish public security conditions for the population, as well as to create a professional community-based police service. This will help break with past practice of frequent disregard for the rule of law and human rights. I encourage national authorities to speed up efforts towards the construction of the first model police station in Bissau, which would pave the way for the establishment of additional model police stations throughout the country. 64. I commend ECOWAS Heads of State and Government for their commitment to allocate $63 million for the implementation of the ECOWAS/CPLP Security Sector Reform road map. This constitutes a critical catalytic measure towards the full implementation of Security Sector Reform in the country, as international and regional partners now have allocated substantial funds to support the implementation of the comprehensive national SSR framework approved by national authorities in 2006. I also commend the Government of Angola for its generous concrete package of assistance, including the deployment of robust material and human resources to Guinea-Bissau, and the allocation of substantial financial assistance, capacity-building services and other support for the rehabilitation of military and police infrastructure. Additional commitments of support for the Security Sector Reform effort will be necessary to further harmonize and maximize external assistance to national authorities to help make these reforms succeed. 65. The priorities set out in the national Security Sector Reform plans and in the ECOWAS/CPLP road map constitute key building blocks to foster the reforms in the defence and security institutions, firstly through the retirement, reinsertion and reintegration initiatives, and a redeployment programme aimed at rejuvenating and professionalizing the military and security structures. I therefore welcome progress towards finalizing the process of establishing the pension fund, and appeal to international partners and national authorities to commit resources to help make the pension fund operational in the coming months. This fund will depend on international contributions for the first five years, after which the burden for supporting it will be transferred to the Government to be funded through national contributions envisaged as part of the public finance and public administration reforms. As the question of sustainability is a matter of concern for the international community, I urge the Government to initiate the process for planning the future transfer of responsibility for funding the pension fund from international partners to the Government. We also look forward to the Government's announcement of its proposals regarding the long-awaited rejuvenation and professionalization of the armed forces, which would function under civilian authority and respect for the rule of law. 66. I call on national authorities, the African Union, ECOWAS, CPLP, relevant United Nations entities and bilateral partners to implement the recommendations of the joint assessment conducted by the United Nations, ECOWAS and CPLP, on the Security Sector Reform road map. The establishment of a joint task force or a coordination mechanism comprising representatives of ECOWAS, CPLP, the African Union, the European Union and the United Nations, to work with the Government in implementing the road map, is a matter of priority. I therefore exhort all partners to join forces and provide adequate technical and financial support for the effective functioning of the proposed mechanism. 67. I commend the deployment of two forensic experts by the Government of Brazil in support of ongoing investigations into the 2009 political assassinations in Guinea-Bissau. I also welcome Brazil's support for the rehabilitation of key police infrastructure. The assistance provided by the United States for the establishment of a programme to protect witnesses and special persons is also significant, as well as timely to speed up the process of finding justice for the 2009 assassinations. It is critical for national authorities to address in earnest the priorities set in Security Council resolution 1949 (2010) and to conclude independent and transparent investigations into the 2009 assassinations. 68. I urge the Government to remain focused on its public finance and public administration reforms, both of which will pave the way for increased national financial resources needed for investment in development and improved social services. The satisfactory performance of the Government in meeting benchmarks agreed with international financial institutions attests to its continuing commitment to public finance reforms. The finalization of Guinea-Bissau's Second Generation Poverty Reduction Strategy, which includes holistic security sector reform as a priority axis, will also clear the way for the Government to start a resource mobilization drive to finance the new strategy. I encourage the Government to engage with its development partners with a view to ensuring the implementation of this strategy, and I call upon international partners to assist national authorities in organizing the planned donor round table to secure appropriate funding. 69. I would like to conclude by commending the staff of UNIOGBIS, under the leadership of my Special Representative, Joseph Mutaboba, and the United Nations country team led by my Deputy Special Representative, as well as national and international non-governmental organizations and other partners, for their contribution to sustainable peace in Guinea-Bissau. Excerpt from the UNIOGBIS strategic workplan and benchmarks In December 2010, the Strategic Planning Group recommended that the outcome groups prepare a new format for a joint strategic workplan that should, in compliance with Security Council resolution 1949 (2010), define relevant benchmarks and indicators of progress. Afterwards, during the United Nations annual retreat held on 17 March 2011, the proposed benchmarks were endorsed by the United Nations family in Guinea-Bissau. It was also underlined that for the United Nations family to meet the expected results, it would be necessary to focus on Guinea-Bissau's main challenges, namely: (i) governance, democracy and political dialogue; (ii) economic growth and poverty reduction; (iii) social protection and human development; and (iv) security sector reform and the rule of law. The United Nations joint vision or objective for Guinea-Bissau is a stable political, security, social and economic environment, conducive to peace consolidation and the full realization of human rights. The following key benchmarks and indicators of progress will be achieved through joint efforts by UNIOGBIS, the United Nations country team, national stakeholders and other international partners. Security Council mandate Key benchmarks Indicators of progress Timeline Supporting an inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation process Assisting the Peacebuilding Commission in its work in addressing critical peacebuilding needs in Guinea-Bissau (1) State institutions maintain institutional and political stability and promote inclusive dialogue and national reconciliation An inclusive national conference is held and follow-up mechanisms are established and functional Strengthening the capacities of national institutions in order to maintain constitutional order, public security and full respect for the rule of law Providing strategic and technical support and assistance to the Government of Guinea-Bissau in developing and coordinating the implementation of security sector reform (2) National institutions, including policing, internal security and criminal justice institutions, maintain constitutional order, good governance, public security and full respect for the rule of law and human rights throughout the country Number of national stakeholders, including parliamentarians, whose capacities to undertake the constitutional review process are enhanced The investigations into the 2009 political assassinations are concluded by the Office of the Prosecutor General Number of national stakeholders with enhanced leadership capacities and competences to develop and implement a long-term vision for the country Witness protection programme is launched and operational Peaceful and credible legislative, local and presidential elections are held Reorganization process for police and internal security systems is launched and progresses Perception by the population that there is increased public security and protection and respect for human rights, especially for vulnerable groups, through increased Model Police Stations throughout the country Number of vetted/certified members of policing and internal security institutions Identified number of vetted/certified members of police and security institutions are demobilized and socially reinserted Supporting the national efforts to curb the proliferation of small arms and light weapons Obsolete small arms and light weapons are collected and destroyed, and ammunition safely stored The National Commission on small arms and light weapons is functional The National Mine Action Programme is implemented (3) Strengthened rule of law, defence, justice, police and law enforcement systems in Guinea-Bissau, in accordance with national holistic security sector reform, and enhanced national human rights capacity for the protection and promotion of respect for human rights Improved capacities for policymaking, strategic planning and accountability in the criminal justice system Improved judicial service delivery (courts and prosecution services) with decentralized legal aid and counselling, and a functioning national judicial training centre Alternative dispute resolution mechanisms at community level are strengthened with an improved interface between traditional mechanisms and the formal justice sector Improved cooperation among the various parts of the criminal justice system and due process specific laws are revised and implemented Penitentiary services are strengthened and a corrections approach is launched Continued support from international partners for the implementation of ongoing holistic security sector reform plans Certification process for active personnel of the Armed Forces is launched Increased number of resource mobilization activities to activate the Pension Fund and reintegration strategies Demobilization and reinsertion process for national freedom fighters is launched and increased number of demobilized and reinserted former freedom fighters Improved capacities of the Parliamentary Commission on Defence and Security to oversee the implementation of security sector reform Increased public awareness on security sector reform (4) Enhanced cooperation and coordination on security sector reform matters with regional and international partners towards stabilization of Guinea-Bissau Number of meetings of the National Security Sector Reform Steering Committee Improved management capacity of the Security Sector Reform Permanent Secretariat Portfolio of security sector reform projects produced and disseminated to partners National security sector reform strategies and plans are updated and harmonized Assisting national authorities to combat drug trafficking and organized crime, as well as human trafficking, especially child trafficking (5) National authorities combat drug and human trafficking (especially child trafficking), as well as organized crime more effectively Increased institutional and human capacities to combat organized crime, drug trafficking and human and child trafficking The 2011-2014 action plan of the Government to fight drug trafficking is operational and supported by the international community Increased commitment of the Government of Guinea-Bissau to regional and international mechanisms and frameworks for fighting drug trafficking and organized crime, including G-8 initiatives and maritime patrols Action plan to combat trafficking of minors is approved and launched Returned trafficked children and children victims of violence receive appropriate care and are reintegrated into families and/or communities National child protection policy and action plan exist Undertaking human rights promotion, protection and monitoring activities and supporting the institutionalization of respect for the rule of law and Mainstreaming a gender perspective into peacebuilding, in line with Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) (6) State institutions and civil society organizations guarantee the promotion and protection of human rights and gender equality Improved technical capacity of civil society organizations to promote and protect human rights Improved capacity of national human rights institutions on Paris Principles and other international human rights standards Mechanisms to monitor the human rights situation, including the implementation of universal periodic review recommendations, are established and functional Draft national policy on gender equality and equity is finalized Draft law on domestic violence is finalized A national policy on human rights and an action plan for its implementation are drafted and transmitted to the Government Human rights and gender are mainstreamed into policy documents, national budget, national strategies and action plans (7) A gender perspective is mainstreamed into the holistic security sector reform process in line with Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) Increased number of women who play a role in the security and defence institutions Number of women who contribute to security sector reform planning and implementation processes Improved capacity of the national steering committee on the implementation of the National Action Plan on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) Security sector reform aspects of the national gender policy are promoted (8) The Guinea-Bissau Peacebuilding Strategic Framework and Priority Plan help address the country's youth and women employment needs Increased number of youth and women who have access to credit Increase in employment and income generating activities Enhancing cooperation with the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the European Union and other partners in their efforts to contribute to the stabilization of Guinea-Bissau Helping in the mobilization of international assistance (9) Bilateral, regional and international partners remain engaged in support of Guinea-Bissau's stabilization efforts and the implementation of key reforms The ECOWAS/CPLP road map is adopted and being implemented Adequate strategic and operational support is provided for the implementation of the ECOWAS/CPLP road map ECOWAS, CPLP, European Union, African Union, and bilateral partners step up technical and financial assistance to Government-led reforms in Guinea-Bissau International round table for the mobilization of resources for the implementation of the Second Generation Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper is organized Aid coordination mechanisms and policy are operational Economic reform programme agreed with IMF is implemented successfully Meetings of the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau and for the coordination of international assistance held 