%%%REGIONAL SECURITY|AFRICA|TERRORISM|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|HUMAN RIGHTS IN ARMED CONFLICTS|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|SPECIAL MISSIONS|BURUNDI|CHAD|COTE D'IVOIRE|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|ERITREA|ETHIOPIA|LIBYA|SOMALIA|SUDAN|MIDDLE EAST|LEBANON|PALESTINE QUESTION|YEMEN|EUROPE|BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA|DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA|

Letter dated 1 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Please find attached the assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of France in May 2011 (see annex). This report was prepared under my supervision, after consultation with the other members of the Security Council. I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Gérard Araud [Original: English] Assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of France (May 2011) Introduction During May 2011, under the presidency of Ambassador Gérard Araud, Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, the Security Council held 11 consultations of the whole and 17 official meetings. The Council also adopted two resolutions and three presidential statements and issued five statements to the press. Africa Burundi On 17 May, the Council held its biannual consultations on the situation in Burundi. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office in Burundi, Karin Landgren, the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Paul Seger, and the Permanent Representative of Burundi, Ambassador Zacharie Gahutu, reported on the latest developments in the situation in Burundi. The Special Representative gave a briefing on the political, security and economic situation in the country. The United Nations Office in Burundi would work on developing indicators for the transition with a view to its final withdrawal. The Chair of the Burundi configuration reported on the latest efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission in cooperation with the Government of Burundi. He announced that a donor conference would be held in mid-2011 in Bujumbura. The Permanent Representative recalled that the 2010 elections had been conducted successfully as a result of the dialogue between the Government and the political parties and the consensus established on the Independent National Electoral Commission. He underlined government efforts in the areas of protection of human rights and security. Chad: post-MINURCAT report On 13 May, the Council held consultations on the protection of civilians in eastern Chad following the departure of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT); the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, participated. She reported that no deterioration in the security situation in eastern Chad had been observed since the departure of MINURCAT. The performance of the Détachement intégré de sécurité in protecting refugee camps and humanitarian personnel was satisfactory as a replacement for MINURCAT. The capacity for observation by the United Nations had however, noticeably diminished since the departure of MINURCAT. Côte d'Ivoire On 13 May, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 1981 (2011), by which it extended until 31 July 2011 the mandate of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and until 30 June 2011 the authorization for the temporary redeployment of some troops and aviation resources from the United Nations Mission in Liberia. The Council also requested the Secretary-General to provide it with new proposals by 15 June on the authorization for deployment and to keep the Council informed of efforts made by the two United Nations missions to resolve trans-border security problems between Côte d'Ivoire and Liberia. Democratic Republic of the Congo On 18 May, the Council held an open debate on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The members of the Council heard a report presented by the Secretary-General and a statement by the Congolese Minister for International and Regional Cooperation, Raymond Tshibanda. The latter gave an assessment of actions taken by the Congolese authorities to stabilize the country and presented his Government's commitments and vision for the local role of the United Nations in the coming years. Council members and the organizations invited to participate, the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme and the European Union, acknowledged the progress made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the remaining security challenges and the essential role of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). They called for continued efforts to combat impunity and underlined the importance of holding free, credible and transparent presidential and legislative elections to consolidate the peace. They welcomed the new phase in the partnership to be built between the United Nations and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Finally, the Council adopted a presidential statement reflecting these positions as a whole (S/PRST/2011/11). Eritrea-Ethiopia On 17 May, in consultations, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, B. Lynn Pascoe, raised the issue of the dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea. He brought to the attention of members of the Council the respective letters from Ethiopia and Eritrea to the Council and provided an update on the ongoing tensions between the two countries. Libya During consultations on 3 May, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Libya, Abdel-Elah Al-Khatib, reported on the results of his mediation efforts. Initial contacts had been established with Tripoli and with Benghazi, but the parties were not ready at this stage to begin negotiations on a ceasefire. The Special Envoy would continue his efforts to launch a political process. The members of the Council reiterated their full support and stressed the need for him to coordinate the international community's initiatives. The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, presented his first report to the Security Council on 4 May. He informed the Council that he intended to request the judges to issue three arrest warrants for crimes against humanity committed in Tripoli and other cities against the civilian population. On 9 May, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs briefed the Council on the situation in Libya at an open meeting followed by consultations. She reported that the humanitarian situation was deteriorating, in particular in Misratah and Jebel Nafusah. The members of the Council expressed their support for the actions of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. They recalled the urgent need for the parties to respect the principle of humanitarian access. During consultations with the Council on 13 May, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs reported that the Rome meeting of the Contact Group had reaffirmed the central role of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. He announced that the Secretary-General would participate in the African Union Summit on Libya planned for 25 May. He stated that the United Nations would attempt to reopen its Tripoli office. On 31 May, the Under-Secretary-General presented to the Council the Secretary-General's monthly report on Libya. He stated that the humanitarian situation in Libya was deteriorating. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General was continuing his mediation efforts. The African Union wished to further increase its involvement, as the summit held in Addis Ababa on 25 May had demonstrated. The members of the Council as a whole reiterated their desire to find a swift political solution. Somalia On 11 May, the Council held a briefing on Somalia, attended by the Prime Minister of Somalia, Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Augustine Mahiga. The meeting provided an opportunity to report on the progress made on the ground by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), what was at stake on the political, security and humanitarian levels in Somalia and to address the arrangements that should be agreed by stakeholders with a view to bringing the transition period to an end. After the consultations, the Council issued a presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/10), in particular inviting the Somali transitional federal institutions to focus on implementing reforms to build their legitimacy, representativeness and credibility, and to reach agreement as soon as possible on the holding of elections for the positions of President of the Republic and Speaker of Parliament, without which there could be no extension. Sudan On 11 May, the Council issued a statement to the press on the situation in Abyei, in particular following an attack on the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in which four peacekeepers were wounded. It called on the parties to implement the Kadugli Agreements and to resolve the question of the status of Abyei. On 17 May, the Council adopted unanimously resolution 1982 (2011), extending by three months the mandate of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan. Their mandate will thus continue until 19 February 2012. On 22 May, during its mission to Africa, the Council issued a statement to the press, read out by the President of the Council in Khartoum. It condemned the fact that the Sudanese Armed Forces had taken control of Abyei on 21 May, deplored the unilateral dissolution of the Abyei administration and called for the immediate withdrawal of the Sudanese Armed Forces and all military elements from Abyei. On 31 May, the Council held a briefing on the Sudan followed by consultations. The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Alain Le Roy, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan, Haile Menkerios, briefed the Council on the situation in Abyei. In particular, they noted the looting and attacks on dwellings, civilian infrastructure and a World Food Programme warehouse in Abyei. The representatives of the Sudan and South Sudan presented their views to the Council. The members of the Council expressed their concerns regarding the violence in the region. Middle East Lebanon On 6 May, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), Terje Roed-Larsen presented the Secretary-General's report during informal consultations of the Council. He stressed the lack of progress during the reporting period on the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) and expressed his concern at the delay in forming a government in Lebanon. The members of the Council reiterated their support for the Special Envoy's mission and expressed the hope that a Lebanese government that respected its international commitments would soon be in place. The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question During consultations on 19 May on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, Robert Serry, briefed the Council on the Palestinian reconciliation agreement and the serious confrontations that had occurred on 15 May between Israeli security forces and Palestinians. He noted that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would not be immune from the dramatic developments sweeping the Arab world. He said that deep differences over the stalemate in the peace process remained, as did a genuine lack of trust. He supported strengthened engagement by the Quartet to shape the process. The members of the Council called for a swift resumption of negotiations. Yemen During informal consultations of the whole on 17 May, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, Jamal Benomar, gave a briefing on the results of his trip to Yemen from 3 to 10 May. On that occasion, he had met with the President, Ali Abdullah Saleh, and other Yemeni political figures. He stressed the deterioration in the political, security and humanitarian situation in Yemen and the importance of supporting the efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council. Some members of the Security Council expressed their deep concern about the situation in Yemen and their support for the mediation efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council. Europe Bosnia and Herzegovina: report of the High Representative On 9 May, the Council held a debate on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Valentin Inzko, briefed the Council. He expressed concern at the decision taken by the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska to hold a referendum on central judicial institutions. The High Representative stated that no progress had been made since his previous report on completion of the five objectives and two conditions that would allow the Office of the High Representative to be closed. The Council members expressed their concern at the political obstructions in Bosnia and Herzegovina and urged all parties to engage in constructive dialogue in order to achieve genuine reconciliation and pave the way towards the Euro-Atlantic integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999) On 12 May, the Council held a debate during which the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Lamberto Zannier, presented a report. The Serbian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Vuk Jeremić, and Enver Hoxhaj of Kosovo also addressed the Council and expressed their views. Other issues Briefing by the Department of Political Affairs During his monthly overview on 13 May, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs referred to the situation in Yemen and underlined the Secretary-General's concern. The Under-Secretary-General also highlighted the broadening and intensification of repression in the Syrian Arab Republic. He reported on United Nations efforts to send a humanitarian assessment mission to Deraa which, as the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs had explained to the Council on 10 May, had been postponed at the request of the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He also mentioned the fact-finding mission requested by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and emphasized the Secretariat's concern about the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. The members of the Council expressed their concern and called for the opening of a dialogue that would allow a return to stability. Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts The Council met on 2 May to adopt a presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/9) in reaction to the death of Osama bin Laden. Member States were urged to remain vigilant and to intensify their efforts in the fight against terrorism. Joint briefing by the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies dealing with terrorism On 16 May, the Council heard a joint briefing by the Permanent Representatives of Germany, India and South Africa in their respective capacities as Chairs of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). Each reported on recent activities of his Committee and its panel of experts. Non-proliferation (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) In informal consultations on 17 May, the Council heard a briefing by the Permanent Representative of Portugal in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). He reported on the recent activities of his Committee and its Panel of Experts, which had submitted its final report to the Council on 12 May, in accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 1928 (2010). He further indicated that, during the period covered by his quarterly report, six Member States had submitted their implementation reports in accordance with paragraph 22 of resolution 1874 (2009). Member States had also exchanged views on, in particular, the final report of the Panel of Experts. Protection of civilians in armed conflict On 10 May, the Council held an open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Opening statements were delivered by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights. The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs emphasized that failure to respect international humanitarian law was responsible for the heavy civilian casualties in armed conflicts. She reported on developments in the protection of civilians over the past six months. She referred, in particular, to the situations in Libya and in Côte d'Ivoire, where civilians had been the victims of indiscriminate attacks. The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations reported on institutional progress by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (strategic framework, identification of resources, indicators, training) as well as efforts by peacekeeping operations to carry out their protection mandates more effectively (UNOCI, MONUSCO and UNMIS). The Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights stressed the importance of combating impunity and carrying out independent and impartial investigations of human rights violations in order to prevent the outbreak or resurgence of conflicts. Thirty States participated in the debate that followed, in addition to the members of the Council. They all called for respect for international humanitarian law, human rights and the rights of refugees. Post-conflict peacebuilding On 12 May, the Council held a briefing on the independent report entitled "Civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict" (S/2011/85). The Chair of the Senior Advisory Group for the Review of International Civilian Capacities that had drafted the report, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support and Chair of the Steering Committee, Susanna Malcorra, and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Eugène-Richard Gasana, presented recommendations and a timetable for action to Member States. The Chair of the Senior Advisory Group stressed that the goal was to enable deployment "of the right people in the right place at the right time". The Under-Secretary-General for Field Support said that civilian capacity is deployed in all peacekeeping operations. With regard to the way ahead, she wished to be open and consultative and to work with all Member States, taking into account other initiatives and reforms across the United Nations system. She stressed the importance of prioritizing those recommendations that could deliver the most immediate and tangible improvements in the field. The Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission noted that the Commission had been involved in the preparation of the report, and that it accorded priority to national ownership. Security Council mission to Africa From 19 to 26 May, the Council conducted a mission to Africa, which visited Addis Ababa, Khartoum, Juba and Nairobi. In Addis Ababa, on 21 May, the Council met with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Meles Zenawi. It also held its annual meeting with the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at African Union headquarters. At that meeting, the two Councils discussed modalities for strengthening their cooperation as well as the situations in Libya, Côte d'Ivoire, the Sudan and Somalia. A joint communiqué was adopted at the close of the meeting. The Security Council mission then proceeded to Khartoum. On 22 May, it met with the Minister of State of the Sudan, Amin Hassan Omer. The meetings between the Security Council and the Second Vice-President of the Sudan, Ali Osman Taha, and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ali Karta, were cancelled by the Sudanese authorities. The Council also met with the Chair of the High-level Implementation Panel of the African Union, President Thabo Mbeki, who reported on the still-suspended negotiations between the north and the south on aspects of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Lastly, the Council met in Khartoum with the Joint Special Representative for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), Ibrahim Gambari, in order to assess the situation in Darfur. The Security Council mission went on to Juba, where it met, on 23 and 24 May, with the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, as well as local UNMIS leaders in order to explore modalities for a future United Nations presence in South Sudan. On 25 May, in Nairobi, the Council met with the Vice-President of Kenya, Stephen Kalonzo Musyoka, and the Prime Minister of Kenya, Raila Odinga. It subsequently met, in the presence of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Augustine Mahiga, with the principal Somali stakeholders: President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, the Speaker of Parliament, Sharif Hassan Sheikh Adam, and the Presidents of the regions of Somaliland, Puntland and Galmudug. Those meetings provided an opportunity for the Security Council to reiterate its expectations with regard to the transitional federal institutions in anticipation of the end of the transition period, and to reaffirm its support for AMISOM. 