%%%WOMEN IN ARMED CONFLICTS|GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE|WAR PREVENTION|HUMAN RIGHTS IN ARMED CONFLICTS|INTERNATIONAL RELIEF|POST-CONFLICT RECONSTRUCTION|WOMEN|DECISION-MAKING|PEACEBUILDING|SOCIAL INDICATORS|ACCOUNTABILITY|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|

Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to the presidential statement of the Security Council dated 26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), which was made in connection with the tenth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. In that statement, the Council, inter alia, requested me to continue to submit an annual report on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and underlined the need for timely and systematic reporting on women and peace and security issues. Specifically, the Council supported "taking forward, including by relevant United Nations entities, the set of indicators contained in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/498) for use as an initial framework to track implementation of its resolution 1325 (2000) in situations of armed conflict and post-conflict and other situations relevant to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), as appropriate, and taking into account the specificity of each country". It further requested me to propose a strategic framework to guide the United Nations implementation of the resolution in the coming decade and to include recommendations for policy and institutional reforms to facilitate the United Nations response to women and peace and security issues. 2. The report is based on contributions from 38 Member States, 4 regional organizations and 27 entities of the United Nations system. II. Overview of progress 3. The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) provided an impetus to renew commitments and launch new strategies to address gender equality issues in peace and security processes. Across these efforts, some shared priorities emerged, including: (a) the need for accountability for results and improved coordination of implementation; (b) the need to strengthen women's participation and leadership in conflict prevention, resolution and long-term peacebuilding; (c) the need for a more effective justice and security environment for women and girls during and after conflict; and (d) the need to increase resources for all aspects of the women and peace and security agenda. These issues were brought to the attention of the Security Council in my reports last year on women and peace and security (A/65/354-S/2010/466, A/65/592-S/2010/604 and S/2010/498). 4. The present section provides an overview of progress made in responding to those and related priority concerns, with a focus on actions taken by various actors since October last year. The information is organized under four broad action areas: prevention, participation, protection, and relief and recovery. Baseline data for 2010 has been included throughout this section on one third of the initial set of indicators presented in my report of last year. 5. One of the most significant institutional developments with regard to women and peace and security has been the creation of UN-Women. Part of its role is to leverage the entire United Nations system to ensure accelerated implementation of all women and peace and security resolutions. This will require leadership and accountability for results across the system in supporting gender equality, as well as improvements in deployment of expertise, sequencing of interventions, targeting financial allocations and monitoring. Many of these improvements are either foreseen in or consistent with my report on women's participation in peacebuilding (A/65/354-S/2010/466) and the independent review on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (A/65/747-S/2011/85). A. Prevention 6. The prevention of conflict in general, and of all forms of violence against women and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations in particular, are core elements of resolution 1325 (2000). Prevention includes promoting targeted and coordinated measures to prevent conflict-related sexual violence, sexual exploitation and abuse and other forms of gender-based violence; ensuring that women's conflict prevention efforts are supported and that early warning systems generate information about the specific threats that women and girls face; and explicitly addressing women's rights and violations of such rights in reports to and resolutions of the Security Council or reports to human rights bodies, as important tools and mechanisms for prevention. Specific information on threats and challenges and instructions for action are critical for ensuring timely response and action. 7. Over the last five years, a growing number of reports to the Security Council, as well as mandate renewals, have included references to women and peace and security. This trend continued in 2010. Indicator: extent to which United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions include information on violations of women's and girls' human rights in their periodic reporting to the Security Council. Of the 58 country reports submitted by peacekeeping and political missions to the Security Council during 2010, 52 (90 per cent) addressed women and peace and security issues -- mainly sexual and gender-based violence, human rights violations and political participation. However, only 13 of those 52 reports (25 per cent) made specific recommendations on gender issues. Indicator: number and type of actions taken by the Security Council related to resolution 1325 (2000). In 2010, a majority of the Council's actions in this area involved requesting specific information in thematic and country-specific reports (including on Afghanistan, Côte d'Ivoire, Darfur, Haiti and Sudan) and establishing and renewing mission mandates with language on women's rights or gender mainstreaming (for Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti and Timor-Leste). For example, the Council strongly condemned mass rapes in Walikale and Fizi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, urged the Government to take action and expressed readiness to use all appropriate measures, including targeted sanctions, against perpetrators. The Security Council also adopted a resolution on sexual violence in conflict for the third consecutive year (resolution 1960 (2010)). Of the 59 resolutions adopted by the Council in 2010, 22 (37 per cent) made specific reference to resolution 1325 (2000). Indicator: extent to which Security Council missions address specific issues affecting women and girls in their terms of reference and mission reports. All three Security Council missions undertaken during 2010 -- to the Democratic Republic of the Congo (May 2010), Afghanistan (June 2010), and Uganda and Sudan (October 2010) -- addressed issues affecting women and girls in their terms of reference and in their reports. The mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo was briefed by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice on cases of sexual violence. The mission to Afghanistan met with women activists and opposition leaders, civil society and women's organizations, and was briefed on human rights crimes against women. The mission to Sudan met with representatives of women's groups in southern Sudan and internally displaced persons, including women and youth, and visited a hospital providing medical services to women in El Fasher. 8. I welcome this positive trend towards more systematic integration of women and peace and security in Security Council actions. However, Council discussions of this topic focus mainly on gender mainstreaming in peacekeeping missions, compliance with my zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and the protection of women and girls from sexual violence. More attention needs to be paid to women's roles in conflict prevention, to all human rights violations against women and girls and to issues of long-term prevention and participation, including in the renewals of mandates of special political missions. Furthermore, I recommend that all briefings to the Council, including oral briefings, include women and peace and security issues, where relevant, and that these matters be better integrated into the work of the Security Council's subsidiary bodies, such as the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations and the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa. 9. Two types of violations have been the focus of prevention efforts over the last few years: conflict-related sexual violence and sexual exploitation and abuse. In April 2010, the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict was established. The Special Representative has focused on supporting national and international efforts to identify and prosecute perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict, and on the development of guidance to establish field-based monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence as requested by the Security Council in its resolution 1960 (2010). The Special Representative has worked closely with the team of experts established pursuant to resolution 1888 (2009) to strengthen the rule of law with respect to sexual violence in conflict. While information on the prevalence and patterns of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations is still incomplete, I expect that these arrangements, along with improvements in systems to collect data and manage information, will help answer questions in this area in the future. More information on progress in this area is provided in my report on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) on conflict-related sexual violence. Indicator: patterns of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. In the report of the Secretary-General on implementation of Security Council resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) (S/2010/604) patterns of conflict-related sexual violence were identified in 12 situations: Afghanistan, Chad, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Haiti, Iraq, Liberia, Nepal, Somalia, South Sudan and Darfur, Sudan. 10. Elimination of impunity is critical for preventing gender-based crimes. Important gains have been made by international tribunals. International courts, however, will only be able to prosecute a handful of perpetrators. Enhanced measures are needed to build specific capacity in national justice systems to prosecute gender-based crimes and improve infrastructure for victim and witness protection. States should be encouraged to ratify the Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal Court and to domesticate it in its full form. Recent promising initiatives at the country level to address sexual and gender-based violent crimes include the use of mobile courts, establishment of paralegal centres and support provided by human rights components of field missions and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to strengthen national capacities to fight impunity, including through support to prosecutors, judicial investigators and public defence services. In 2010, mobile courts established by the Government in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, in partnership with the American Bar Association and the Open Society Justice Initiative, adjudicated 186 cases, 115 of which were rape cases that resulted in 95 convictions. UNDP indicates that the provision of legal aid to sexual violence survivors in Sierra Leone yielded 45 convictions in 2010, compared to zero in 2009. To prevent future violence it is also critical to ensure that those who commit crimes during conflict are not simply returned to homes and communities where they may continue to perpetrate violence. This requires coordination between disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, transitional justice, security and local government institutions. 11. As an important complement to such efforts, several countries have launched awareness-raising campaigns on violence against women and girls. These include national campaigns, like the anti-rape campaign in Liberia launched by President Johnson-Sirleaf. Community-level examples include mobile cinema projections in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo that help sensitize the community about this issue and initiatives aimed at engaging men and boys in ending violence against women and girls such as the Government-funded Men as Partners programme in Mauritius and the UNDP Gender Dimensions of Violence initiative. A project developed by UNDP, UNFPA, the Northern Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission and local implementing partner Mubadiroon has demonstrated that enabling men and women to dialogue on sensitive issues is a critical means of changing attitudes. Alternatively, for adolescents, UNICEF has found that single-sex discussion groups can be effective in changing behaviours related to discrimination and gender-based violence and have shown results in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with teenage boys supporting girls by volunteering to participate in community protection patrols. 12. The concerted efforts to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel and humanitarian staff and implement my zero-tolerance policy are progressing. The reporting of allegations has been uneven, with the number of reported allegations going from 127 in 2007, to 83 in 2008, 112 in 2009 and 85 in 2010. It is imperative that the Security Council continue to call upon Member States to address, prevent and prosecute sexual exploitation and abuse committed by their nationals. A stocktaking global review of actions and actual results has indicated that the United Nations still lacks a system that enables complaints to be reported safely, provides robust responses to known or reported abuse, and drives staff awareness throughout the chain of command, and that the agencies, funds and programmes need to take stronger measures against sexual exploitation and abuse. Indicator: percentage of reported cases of sexual exploitation and abuse allegedly perpetrated by uniformed civilian peacekeepers and/or humanitarian workers that are acted upon out of the total number of referred cases. In 2010, 87 per cent of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were followed up with Member States.a Of those followed up, 39 per cent received responses from Member States. a Notes verbales sent and received by the United Nations, recorded by the Conduct and Discipline Unit, updated through 19 July 2011. 13. Although both conflict-related sexual violence and sexual exploitation and abuse deserve special attention, it is crucial that we do not overlook prevention of other gender-specific human rights violations highlighted by human rights mechanisms. Indicator: extent to which violations of women's and girls' human rights are reported and referred to and investigated by human rights bodies. Between 30 April 2010 and 30 April 2011, special procedures mandate holders took action on 12 cases in 6 out of the 28 countries reviewed.a Most of these cases referred to arbitrary arrest and detention, summary executions, torture or intimidation of women human rights defenders, including journalists, lawyers and gender equality activists. At least three cases concerned human rights violations against women promoting women's rights or working to assist victims of sexual violence. a These included countries in which a political, peacebuilding or peacekeeping mission operated during 2010, or that were eligible for peacebuilding funds in 2010, or countries with an issue of which the Security Council was seized between 1 January 2008 and 31 December 2010. Indicator: number and percentage of women in governance bodies of national human rights bodies. As of May 2011, 32 per cent of the members of the governance bodies of the 12 accredited national human rights institutions were women.a The information available indicated that less than half (5 of the 12) of these bodies have explicit gender policies or units. a Twenty-eight countries were reviewed. These included countries in which a political, peacebuilding or peacekeeping mission operated during 2010, or that were eligible for peacebuilding funds in 2010, or countries with an issue of which the Security Council was seized between 1 January 2008 and 31 December 2010. For information on the accreditation procedure, see http://nhri.ohchr.org/EN/Pages/default.aspx. 14. Over the last decade, gender analysis and consultations with women have improved early warning data collection and design of appropriate responses. Examples include the women's peace committees established in Kyrgyzstan after the June 2010 crisis and the support provided by UNDP with national and international development partners to the Government of Timor-Leste in establishing a cadre of community mediators -- of whom 50 per cent are women -- deployed to assist with local land conflicts and in communities targeted for resettlement of internally displaced persons. 15. However, with few exceptions most early warning systems could do more to incorporate a gender perspective and involve women. The Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and UN-Women, in collaboration with other relevant entities, are developing a framework of early warning signs specific to conflict-related sexual violence, to be integrated into existing and emerging United Nations early warning and prevention systems. Other initiatives linked to conflict prevention include efforts by the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) to connect women peace leaders across West Africa to monitor the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). 16. The importance of women's participation in conflict prevention has been recognized for a decade; however, more needs to be done systematically to integrate women and peace and security issues in preventive diplomacy, early warning and human rights and security monitoring. As indicated in the 2011 OHCHR compilation of good practices for preventing violence against women (see A/HRC/17/23, sect. II), the role of unequal economic and social power structures that make women more vulnerable to violence is often overlooked in prevention efforts. Women and peace and security issues tend to be addressed at a relatively late stage of the conflict prevention/resolution cycle, when it is often too late for women to ensure their rights and needs are addressed in peace accords and institutional arrangements. Analysis of the security situation of women and girls should be included in a broader range of reports and oral briefings to the Security Council, including those relating to preventive diplomacy. B. Participation 17. The call for representation and participation of women in decision-making forums, institutions and mechanisms related to conflict prevention and resolution and peacebuilding is at the core of all five women and peace and security resolutions. In the past year, a broader range of stakeholders has noted the importance of women's participation. In 2011, for instance, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations encouraged measures to ensure women's participation and the provision of gender expertise in peace processes, post-conflict planning and peacebuilding, and in post-conflict public institutions, and to ensure women's equal involvement in programmes created to support economic recovery (A/65/19, para. 115). I am deeply concerned, however, to see that, on the basis of available data and contributions to the present report, there is still slow progress in ensuring women's participation at the earliest opportunity, or in addressing the many constraints on women's capacity to participate in sufficient numbers or to influence decision-making. 18. The Security Council noted with concern last year that women's participation at all levels of peace processes remained too low (see S/PRST/2010/22). Research shows that the inclusion of women in negotiating and observer teams in combination with the application of gender expertise to substantive peace accord areas makes peace agreements more likely to address gender equality issues. Exclusion of women and lack of gender expertise in negotiations leads to irreversible setbacks for women's rights, leaving crucial issues, such as women's engagement in post-conflict governance and women's access to economic opportunity, justice and reparations, neglected in the peace accord. Having more specific gender-relevant provisions in peace agreements is an important target. Indicator: percentage of peace agreements with specific provisions to improve the security and status of women and girls. In 2010, a total of nine peace agreements were signed involving six countries, with only two (22 per cent) having provisions ensuring women's rights (both signed by the Government of Sudan and the Liberation and Justice Movement). One of these specifically called for an immediate cessation of gender-based violence and of the recruitment and exploitation of girls and investigation of all crimes, including those committed against women. Included in the nine agreements mentioned above, were four brokered by the United Nations vis-à-vis Sudan. 19. In the past year, we have seen good examples of efforts to engage women in conflict resolution. In April 2011, women ambassadors from Austria, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Ireland and Kenya to the African Union undertook a mission to Sudan to encourage the continued engagement of women in all efforts to secure and sustain peace. In the Philippines, the appointment of a woman as the head of the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process in July 2010 had a powerful role-modelling effect, leading to greater participation of women in the peace process. Of the 12 negotiators (6 from each side) 5 are women, and of the executive officers of the Office, 50 per cent (3) are women. 20. It is time for all international, regional and national actors that provide technical and financial support to peace processes to take proactive steps to engage women and ensure gender expertise. Within the United Nations system, over the past year the Department of Political Affairs-UN-Women joint strategy on gender and mediation has begun to equip mediators and their teams with the expertise to address gender issues and to build the capacity of women leaders to engage in peace processes. As part of this strategy, in 2011 the Mediation Support Unit of the Department of Political Affairs recruited a gender and mediation specialist in the United Nations Standby Team of Mediation Experts and increased the proportion of women candidates in its rosters of senior mediators, mediation team members and thematic mediation experts to 33 per cent. 21. Member States engaged in contact groups and other conflict resolution processes could provide financial and other incentives to negotiating delegations to enable women to participate. Special envoys and mediators should meet with women leaders and peace activists at the earliest possible moment in mediation processes. As a standard operating procedure, they should establish regular and structured consultations with women's civil society groups and broker engagement between parties to armed conflict and women's groups. A set of options and methods for engaging women directly in peace talks is needed, and senior United Nations leadership must be held to account for ensuring that no effort is spared in engaging women in peace processes. In this regard I draw attention to the concrete proposals made in my report to the Security Council last year on women's participation in peacebuilding (A/65/354-S/2010/466, para. 28). 22. The absence of women in formal negotiations is also often evident in technical bodies assisting mediation and in implementation bodies such as ceasefire monitoring teams, constitutional commissions, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration commissions, land and law reform commissions, and truth and reconciliation bodies. Women continue to be marginalized in other crucial post-conflict decision-making arenas, such as governance institutions, donor conferences, and planning processes. 23. Efforts have been made at national and regional levels to increase women's participation in decision-making bodies and institutions. In Colombia, a National Gender Commission was established for the judicial branch to investigate and document discrimination in the internal operations of the judiciary and promote equal opportunities for all staff in the public service. In Israel, the Knesset enacted a new law in March 2011 that requires the representation of women on Government investigative commissions. In Colombia, Kenya and the Solomon Islands, women were included as commissioners in truth commissions or reconciliation bodies. In the Sudan, women comprised 49 per cent of technical staff assisting in organizing the referendum. Cyprus increased the representation of women in its foreign service, including as ambassadors and diplomats, and two out of six directorates (political affairs, and protocol) are headed by women. In OSCE, women currently occupy 31 per cent of senior posts within executive structures, and women managers now head several programmes of direct relevance to conflict prevention and security. Indicator: women's political participation in parliaments and ministerial positions. As of June 2011 women made up 19 per cent of parliamentarians globally. Out of 28 countries reviewed,a women on average made up 18 per cent of parliamentarians, with only 4 countries with representation higher than 30 per cent (Burundi, Nepal, Rwanda and Uganda -- all of which have legislated quotas) and 8 countries with 10 per cent or less (Comoros, Côte d'Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Georgia, Haiti, Lebanon, Myanmar and Somalia). Burundi had the highest level of representation of women in the upper house, or senate (46 per cent), in Africa and the second highest in the world. Rwanda had the highest level of representation of women in the lower house (56 per cent) in the world. As of 1 January 2010, women held 14 per cent of ministerial positions in the countries reviewed (only 23 of 28 had data on this). 24. Quotas and other temporary special measures, such as reserved seats, can play a significant role in increasing women's representation in decision-making. The potential of temporary special measures is evident in various settings. Support by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for a quota system for the election of members of the refugee camp committee in the Meheba refugee settlement in Zambia, for example, contributed to a dramatic increase of women members in camp committees, from 7 to 36 per cent. However, quotas alone are not enough. In the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, a 12 per cent quota mandated in the Transitional Federal Charter was never met, and just 6 per cent of parliamentarians are women. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a constitutional article calling for parity between men and women in public and representative office has not yet been matched in electoral law. The effectiveness of quotas and other temporary special measures depends upon accompanying efforts to build constituencies for gender equality and hold leaders to account. 25. Where the United Nations provides technical assistance to electoral processes and the rebuilding of State institutions, it will support national authorities in assessing the potential advantages of temporary special measures in line with recommendations by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and other human rights mechanisms. Support for election management bodies by a number of United Nations field missions now includes attention to gender equality. This has included support for the establishment of a gender unit in the Elections Commission in Liberia and improved guidance for field personnel assisting host Governments during elections to increase women's participation as voters and candidates in post-conflict elections. In addition, increased security around elections has enabled more women to vote and run for office. 26. Women's full participation in United Nations field missions is an integral aspect of implementing the prevention and protection agendas of resolution 1325 (2000) and ensuring that relief and recovery efforts include women's and girls' priorities and needs. I remain fully committed to continuing my efforts to increase the number of women in senior leadership positions within the United Nations, and call on Member States to submit names of candidates. Indicator: women's share of senior positions in United Nations field missions. As of June 2011, of 28 peacekeeping operations, political and peacebuilding missions, women headed 5 (in Burundi, Central African Republic, Cyprus, Liberia and Timor-Leste) and were deputy heads of 5 (in Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Liberia and Darfur). Women's share of senior positions (P-5 to D-2) is 23 per cent in political and peacebuilding missions and 24 per cent in peacekeeping missions. 27. Last year, the Security Council encouraged Member States to deploy greater numbers of women military and police personnel to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Argentina, Australia, Botswana, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Japan, Mexico, Poland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and others have made efforts to accelerate the recruitment and retention of women in the military and/or police and their deployment in field missions, including through removal of legal barriers to women's participation in security services, revisions to parental rights and leave, stronger anti-sexual harassment policies and efforts to address gender stereotypes and discriminatory attitudes. Spain has established an award to recognize efforts to promote the role of women or gender equality in the armed forces. National data and information on deployments show that some progress has been achieved as a result of such efforts. In Timor-Leste, for example, women make up 18 per cent of the total national police force. From May to June 2011, over 170 women police officers from Bangladesh, Ghana, Namibia, Pakistan, the United Republic of Tanzania, and Zimbabwe were deployed to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), bringing the percentage of women police officers deployed in the Operation to over 10.5 per cent. In addition, all-women police units from Bangladesh and India were deployed to Haiti and Liberia respectively. However, there are still few women in leading positions in the military and police at national levels and in field missions. Slovenia appointed its first woman brigadier general in 2010. The first female Police Adviser in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was appointed in 2010 and in June 2011, a woman was deployed in a command role in the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in Lebanon. 28. While it is essential to increase women's direct representation and participation in decision-making processes in all institutions related to peace and security, it is equally important to ensure that gender expertise is available to provide the necessary support to field missions, national institutions and policymaking and planning processes. There are good examples to build on. For example, in the Doha Darfur peace process, the contribution of a gender adviser to the mediation process brought attention to the gender-specific aspects of the peace process at the negotiation table. Countries such as Iceland and Sweden have provided gender advisers to several field missions, including to the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, and regularly organize training opportunities for women and men gender advisers to be deployed to the field. Indicator: percentage of field missions with gender experts. As of June 2011, 100 per cent of field missions managed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations have gender components, and 60 per cent of them are headed by a senior gender expert. Of the field missions managed by the Department of Political Affairs (including regional missions), 46 per cent have gender advisers; the rest have designated gender focal points. 29. A number of countries, regional organizations and United Nations entities have continued to provide financial and technical support aimed at enhancing the participation and contribution of women leaders and civil society groups in decision-making processes. In Nepal, for example, support by UNDP, UN-Women and others for participatory constitution-building has helped women to take leadership roles in the process and to prioritize gender issues in the new constitution. International contact group meetings, partner round tables and donor conferences can play a significant role in translating national priorities into specific international financial commitments. In May 2011, UN-Women, the Peacebuilding Support Office and UNFPA supported national women's organizations in the Central African Republic to participate in a partner round table of national and international stakeholders that took place in Brussels. Investing in and fostering the meaningful post-conflict political participation of youth, including adolescent girls, is essential to any peacebuilding effort. For example, inclusive youth groups, where both girls and boys have opportunities to take on leadership roles, can contribute positively to the reconstruction and development of communities. 30. Too many of these initiatives, however, are small-scale, ad hoc and underfunded. A particularly underfunded area is capacity-building for women's organizations in conflict and post-conflict situations. Women's peace movements urgently require support and strengthening, especially while a conflict or crisis continues to rage. Crisis and conflict thrust women into new, unconventional roles, as leaders of peace and democracy movements, as we see so vividly in some of the Arab States today. But the transition from crisis mode to enabling women to engage in peace talks, constitutional reform, democratic transitions, and post-conflict planning requires sustained support for mobilization, for which there is rarely adequate funding. 31. The practice of organizing global open days on women and peace and security was continued this year. Between June and September 2011, open day dialogues were organized between women from civil society and senior United Nations leaders in more than 20 countries. Reflecting the value of this process, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in 2011 called on the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to establish, as a regular practice, the convening of open days in field operations (A/65/19, para. 148). UNOWA and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) have already institutionalized these dialogues. 32. Improved mechanisms and resources are needed to ensure civil society and other stakeholder groups are informed, supported and represented in public decision-making processes. In my report on women's participation in peacebuilding, I called on the United Nations, regional organizations, international financial institutions and Member States to provide meaningful opportunities for women to participate in conflict resolution and peacebuilding forums. I asked for standard procedures to ensure that a cross section of women from civil and political society be invited to donor conferences, and that they be provided access to all conference documentation, space on the agenda to present issues of concern and assistance in convening preparatory meetings and developing policy papers. Over the next year, international conferences will be arranged for South Sudan, Darfur, Afghanistan and Guinea, to name a few. I will continue to call on my senior leaders to carry out the commitments we have made to ensure that these forums are inclusive and representative. C. Protection 33. Significant progress has been achieved at the normative level in this area over the past decade, including through the increased attention of the Security Council to the issues of women and peace and security, children and armed conflict and the protection of civilians. There is now a better understanding of the specific protection and security concerns of women, men, boys and girls and strong recognition that the integration of gender issues is essential to the effectiveness of the security sector. 34. The normative framework for protection, however, still needs to be fully translated into more effective and better coordinated efforts on the ground. The challenges are daunting. The exceedingly high number of people displaced by armed conflict, generalized violence and human rights violations, estimated at 27.5 million, is a reflection of protracted conflicts and evolving patterns of armed violence. Women and girls often constitute the majority of displaced populations and are at particular risk of sexual and gender-based violence during flight, in the camps and during the return and reintegration phase. Continuing reports of sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as reports of human rights violations, including from recent commissions of inquiry established by the Human Rights Council on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (see A/HRC/17/44) and Côte d'Ivoire (see A/HRC/17/48), serve as reminders of the need to strengthen efforts to ensure respect of international legal obligations and to provide protection against such atrocities. 35. Addressing security challenges and the distinct protection needs of women and girls requires long-term concerted efforts by all stakeholders and the unfaltering attention of the Security Council, including its informal expert group on the protection of civilians. It is critical to continue to invest in strengthening the capacities of national, regional and international actors to integrate gender perspectives in security policies, operating procedures, programmes and activities, and to institutionalize innovative strategies that have yielded positive results. Some examples include the May 2011 review by UNICEF of promising protection practices for child survivors of sexual violence and UNHCR standard operating procedures for sexual and gender-based violence coordination, which are used in 80 per cent of their operations in urban settings and in 93 per cent of camp settings. 36. The capacity to prevent and respond to violations of women's and girls' rights must be integrated into the preparation, training and guidance of peacekeeping, humanitarian and national security sector actors. Contributions to the present report show a number of new initiatives to develop or improve training and guidelines on the protection, rights and particular needs of women and girls. These include gender e-learning courses for security personnel in Argentina and Mexico, the training strategy of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to support the promotion of gender perspectives by all personnel in multidimensional peacekeeping activities, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Field Support guidelines for integrating a gender perspective into the work of the United Nations military in peacekeeping operations, guidance and training developed by the United Nations Police Division on investigating and preventing sexual and gender-based violence, the integration of gender issues as part of the UNITAR peacekeeping training programme and the inclusion by WFP of specific training on sexual exploitation and abuse and gender-based violence in its training on protection in food assistance. A further example is the partnership between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support, UN-Women and UN Action on Sexual Violence in Conflict to develop scenario-based training materials on combating sexual violence for military peacekeepers. In 2011, trainings based on these materials began in troop-contributing countries. 37. The establishment of protection patrols and community policing are other good practices that could be expanded. Reports from missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti and Darfur show that protection patrols within and around camps and communities of internally displaced persons, as well as escorts for women during livelihood activities helped deter sexual and gender-based violence. Positive results were recorded in Haiti where United Nations Police community policing included an increased presence of women officers and a mobile police internally displaced persons gender unit specialized in dealing with sexual and gender-based violence. Other promising measures include the development of protection plans; the establishment of joint protection teams with women staff; provision of solar lights and lamps, water collection aids and fuel efficient stoves; and the deployment to missions of women protection advisers. The roll out of the WFP Safe Access to Firewood and Alternative Energy in Humanitarian Settings (SAFE) stoves initiative, for example, has reduced women's exposure to violence during fuel collection in several countries. I welcome all these efforts and urge that they be evaluated to allow for good practices to be replicated. 38. It is essential to continue to invest in strengthening the capacity of national security, legal and judicial institutions to address gender-specific protection challenges. In Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) appointed national gender officers in the Security Sector Support Unit and the Administration of Justice Support Unit. In Liberia, with UNDP support, the Liberian National Police established 58 women and child protection units across the country to provide protection to women, children and vulnerable persons; and the Ministry of Justice and Criminal Court established a Sexual and Gender-Based Violence Crime Unit. In Sudan, UNMIS supported capacity-building of the Sudanese National Police to address incidents of gender-based violence. In Colombia, efforts have been made by the Government, with the support of national and international actors, to improve programmes to protect victims and witnesses. Provision of documentation to women, including birth certificates, individual identity documentation, and certification of marriage and refugee status is another critical protection intervention supported by UNHCR and others. UNFPA has continued to train police and military units to respond sensitively to survivors of gender-based violence, including through support for the establishment of special units. UN-Women supports national security sector capacities to respond to and prevent gender-based violence in Haiti, Liberia, Timor-Leste and Uganda through initiatives such as the establishment of a women's hotline in Liberia and the provision of response equipment to special protection units in Haiti. With the Ministry of Gender and Development in Liberia, UN-Women has supported local women in community peace huts to undertake conflict mediation and resolution, to address negative attitudes of men and boys, and to provide counselling and referral to survivors of sexual and gender-based violence. 39. Gender-based violence is more prevalent and more severe when guns are readily available. This year (2011) marks the tenth anniversary of the United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms, and significant steps have been taken in the process towards an arms trade treaty. Next year (2012) will see the Second Review Conference on the Implementation of the Programme of Action and the United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty. These events provide opportunities for gender and age issues to be considered in the formulation of small arms policy. In February 2011, the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs signed a memorandum of understanding with the International Action Network on Small Arms that included mainstreaming gender and diversity in the fields of arms control, disarmament, peace and security as one of the areas of cooperation. In addition, renewed attention has been given to the participation of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control decision-making at the intergovernmental level with the adoption of General Assembly resolution 65/69. 40. While improved protection and security, as well as preparation of first responders to address incidents of sexual and other gender-based violence are essential, the effectiveness of these measures depends upon women's and girls' participation to ensure that assistance directly responds to their specific needs and contributes to long-term prevention of violence against women and girls. All efforts to improve prevention and protection should also be coupled with increased resources to address the various social, health, educational, economic and legal needs of survivors. The severity of the protection challenges faced by women has serious resource implications, and I call on Member States to make special efforts to ensure that adequate resources are available in this area. D. Relief and recovery 41. Since my last report, the work on women's participation and gender equality in relief and recovery has strengthened considerably. My 2010 report on women's participation in peacebuilding (A/65/354-S/2010/466) sets out system-wide commitments for the United Nations in this area. In the report of the independent review on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (A/65/747-S/2011/85), the Senior Advisory Group called for gender equality to be mainstreamed throughout the United Nations post-conflict response. The World Bank World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development, made it clear that women must participate fully in the priority areas of justice, security and job creation if post-conflict stability and growth are to be achieved. 42. In the past year, there has been more consistent inclusion of gender analysis in relief and recovery planning frameworks. The Government of Liberia, for example, with support from UNDP, is developing a framework to generate sex-disaggregated data to improve targeting of services. The introduction of a gender analysis tool to UNICEF partners operating in conflict areas of the Central African Republic fundamentally changed the way they conducted their girls' education programme by helping them reassess the root causes of girl school drop-outs in conflict zones and redesign the strategy accordingly. 43. However, women and girls largely continue to be an afterthought in most economic recovery programming. Equally, outside of a small number of multi-donor trust funds, financing for women's and girls' post-conflict needs -- in particular financing channelled through women's civil society groups -- remains strikingly low. 44. In April 2011, the World Bank, the United Nations and the European Union convened to review post-conflict and post-disaster planning processes and agreed to promote the development and systematic integration of sector-specific gender expertise into all national planning and resulting programme development processes. This will require systematic training of sector experts on gender equality before deployment, embedding sector-specific gender experts in sector teams rather than in stand-alone teams, and creating accountability and incentive systems to promote gender mainstreaming. 45. Expertise, analysis and programme development will only bear fruit when it is supported by increased funding. Last year, in my report on women's participation in peacebuilding (A/65/354-S/2010/466), I provided data to the Security Council on levels of funding allocated to women's empowerment and gender equality in post-conflict contexts, noting that the overall level was 5.7 per cent, and asked Member States and regional bodies to work with me on achieving a minimum level of 15 per cent for all United Nations-managed funds in support of peacebuilding. Progress has been made towards meeting this goal, and there are good practices for replication. The Peacebuilding Fund recently issued a $5 million gender promotion initiative, a one-off call for proposals to support women's participation in peacebuilding, and has committed to doubling its spending on women's empowerment by 2012. Indicator: proportion of disbursed multi-donor trust funds used to address gender equality issues. Improved tracking mechanisms within the United Nations system are providing a better picture of how funds and projects support gender equality objectives. The Peacebuilding Fund, for example, adopted a gender marker system in 2009, based on the 0-3 scoring system pioneered by UNDP. A score of 2 means that projects have gender equality as a "significant" objective. A score of 3 means that projects have gender equality as a "principal" objective. During 2010, 39 per cent of the funds scored a 2, and 5 per cent of the funds scored a 3, compared to 22 per cent and 2 per cent, respectively, in 2008. Information on the extent to which other United Nations-managed multi-donor trust funds address gender equality issues will be collected next year. 46. I called for all United Nations entities to implement a tracking system in my 2009 and 2010 reports on peacebuilding (A/63/881-S/2009/304 and A/64/866-S/2010/386). Gender markers, or tracking systems to measure spending on women's and girls' empowerment and gender equality, are currently being applied by UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF, the Inter-Agency Standing Committee and the Peacebuilding Fund. Data from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs suggests that since the rolling out of the gender marker, the 2011 consolidated appeals contain projects which include significantly more gender analysis than in 2010, and for the first time the cluster coordination projects consistently include gender-specific actions. This marks important progress. However, there remains a shortage of capacity to undertake effective and concrete gender analysis of funding flows. Greater political will and leadership is needed in this area to ensure coherence and consistency in the use of gender markers, and I am calling on all United Nations entities to continue their efforts in this area. 47. In the past year there has been a renewed focus on the issue of women's economic empowerment and access to resources, including access to job creation programmes, land, housing, property and other productive resources. Significant challenges still exist. For example, in Africa, women farmers' productivity suffers due to lack of control over productive assets, including land and access to credit. Data from the West Bank highlights significant differences between food insecurity levels in male-headed and female-headed households linked to employment opportunities: 30 per cent of female-headed households are food insecure, compared to 22 per cent of male-headed households. Across regions, women continue to be disproportionately concentrated in vulnerable employment. These challenges are slowing progress on achieving global goals related to gender equality, development and poverty reduction and continues to put women at risk. This is an area that requires investment by Member States, the private sector and United Nations entities. 48. A renewed focus on prioritizing job creation during the immediate post-conflict period is likely to translate into programming over the coming years. It is essential that gender equality be promoted in all these efforts. There are good examples to build on, such as the cooperation between UNDP and WFP in Haiti. In 2010, they created temporary employment for 240,000 Haitians, 40 per cent of them women. I reiterate the commitment in my report on women's participation in peacebuilding that the United Nations will apply a range-of-parity principle to all post-conflict temporary employment programmes so that neither sex receives more than 60 per cent of employment person-days generated (A/65/354-S/2010/466, para. 50). National job creation efforts must address gender-related constraints on women's capacities and mobility. The United Nations/Government of Liberia joint programme for employment and empowerment of young women and men includes special measures to address the structural constraints faced by adolescent girls, promotes non-traditional jobs for young women and has a pool of female trainers to provide female role models for young women. 49. Access to basic services is another area for immediate international attention after conflict. Providing post-conflict services to a population to meet basic needs is an enormous task and adequate attention is rarely given to the different capacities of women, men, boys and girls to access services. The specific needs of women and girls must be addressed in health, education, legal and livelihood support, as well as the provision of other services, such as water and sanitation. Innovative programming is needed to support women in accessing the services that they and their families need. A promising example is the "City of Joy", which opened earlier this year in Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo, as a centre to empower and support women and girl survivors of sexual violence through training on activism, leadership and other skills. Another is the WFP special assistance programme in the Panzi Hospital in South Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo, which, by providing direct food assistance, has allowed survivors of sexual and gender-based violence to stay longer in care and receive necessary medical and psychological assistance. 50. Particular attention is needed to investments in education, life skills and livelihood opportunities for girls affected by armed conflict. UNICEF works with national authorities and local partners to ensure learning is resumed as quickly as possible via temporary learning spaces, adolescent-friendly spaces and child-friendly schools during and after crises. In Iraq, the back-to-school campaign reached 196,000 students (39 per cent girls) and 15,000 teachers (46 per cent female), with basic learning and teaching materials aiming to reduce educational costs for families and promote enrolment and retention in school. 51. In processes of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, reintegration remains the most challenging phase, with female ex-combatants and supporters often not benefiting adequately from such programmes. Although participants typically receive up to one year of economic reintegration assistance, the majority of programmes lack social components necessary for effective reintegration into communities. The United Nations has developed system-wide comprehensive guidance on gender-responsive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes. In November 2010, the first training on gender-responsive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programming for managers was conducted in Oslo by the Inter-Agency Working Group on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration, with support from the European Commission and the Norwegian Defense International Centre. Over the past year, donor countries and entities such as IOM, UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF and UN-Women have implemented a range of initiatives in, for example, Indonesia, Burundi, Liberia, Nepal, South Sudan, Sudan, Sierra Leone and Uganda to promote gender equality in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, improving referrals to services such as health and psychosocial counselling for female ex-combatants and supporters and their access to economic reintegration assistance. 52. Transitional justice mechanisms are crucial for ending cycles of violence and asserting a new national compact for peace. They are therefore unique means to address violations of women's rights and assert gender equality as a foundational principle of citizenship. The inclusion of gender expertise in fact-finding processes, such as in Côte d'Ivoire, has ensured that violations of women's and girls' rights are not ignored. Similarly, mandates of truth commissions and other justice processes must address conflict-related abuses of women's and girls' rights, be designed on the basis of consultations with women, ensure women's representation at all levels, engage gender equality experts and ensure women's full participation as witnesses and beneficiaries. In Nepal, UN-Women supported civil society organizations in conducting country-wide consultations culminating in a national meeting for women to voice their priorities and demands for justice. In Uganda, OHCHR and the Uganda Human Rights Commission have conducted consultations with victims, including separate groups of women, which will now inform a gender-sensitive reparations programme. Indicator: extent to which truth and reconciliation commissions include provisions to address the rights and participation of women and girls. On average, since 2000, women have made up 25 per cent of commissioners in truth and reconciliation commissions. Of 20 truth and reconciliation commissions, 15 had 20 per cent or more women commissioners, and 8 had 33 per cent or more.a a UN-Women, A Window of Opportunity? Making Transitional Justice Work for Women (New York, 2010). Available from http://www.unifem.org/attachments/ products/0701_MakingTransitionalJusticeWorkForWomen_en.pdf. 53. Reparations programmes must be improved to ensure comprehensive and transformative redress for women, including for crimes of sexual violence, with particular attention to avoiding endangerment or re-stigmatization of victims. Reparations programmes have gained increased attention in recent years, including through the 2010 thematic report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences on this issue (A/HRC/14/22) and the delivery of reparations to women victims of war crimes in various contexts, including in Colombia, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste. The United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence against Women supported Sierra Leone's national reparations programme in providing livelihood support, skills training and trauma counselling to women. Land restitution is an important component of reparations programmes with potential for transformative impact on women's economic security and recovery, but it must be linked to protection measures, legislative reforms on property and inheritance rights, redistribution efforts and targeted development assistance. Colombia's 2011 Victims Rights Law and Land Restitution Bill presents a comprehensive programme for reparations and restitution, including provisions to include as beneficiaries children born of rape. 54. The present overview of progress strongly confirms the urgency of translating commitments on women and peace and security into real change on the ground. There is a need to address implementation gaps in a more systematic manner, including through improved coordination and accountability for results, issues that are addressed in the sections below. III. Coordination and accountability for results at national and regional levels 55. Since 2002, the Security Council has emphasized the roles and responsibilities of Member States in accelerating implementation of commitments on women and peace and security. Last year, the Council welcomed the increase in the number of Member States that had formulated or revised national action plans and strategies. The Council also welcomed the concrete commitments made by a number of Member States at the ministerial-level open debate of the Security Council on 26 October 2010. 56. Since my report last year, 13 more countries have adopted national action plans, bringing the total to 32, and a number of other countries, including Australia, Argentina, the Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Indonesia, Ireland, Lithuania, Mali, Nigeria, Timor-Leste and the United States of America are in the process of developing national action plans. Support and technical guidance for Member States seeking to develop national action plans or improve their implementation is available from Member States with national action plans, regional organizations such as OSCE and United Nations entities, including the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, OHCHR, UNDP, UNFPA, and UN-Women. 57. Good practices on coordination and reporting on national action plans include mechanisms established for regular reporting to parliaments on progress, scheduled audits and a formal monitoring role for civil society organizations. Belgium, Liberia and the Netherlands have formally provided for shadow reports of civil society organizations to be produced as part of monitoring mechanisms, and in Austria civil society actors are given the opportunity to comment on the annual implementation report. Most national action plans, however, still lack strong accountability mechanisms, to ensure effective implementation. Only half of existing national action plans have indicators, and only Sierra Leone has developed specific time-bound targets. In addition, only six countries have published national action plans with clear budget requirements, while eight have indicated that implementation would be resourced through existing sectoral budgets. 58. At the regional level, steps have been taken to improve coordination and accountability in support of national efforts. Regional organizations such as ECOWAS, the European Union, NATO, OSCE, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries and the African Union have adopted regional policies and/or action plans on women and peace and security. The European Union has prepared a set of 17 indicators for assessing progress that are closely linked to the indicators presented in my report to the Security Council last year. In the Asia and Pacific region, a high-level Regional Advisory Group on Women, Peace and Security was established this year under the auspices of the Regional Coordination Mechanism's Thematic Working Group on Gender Equality and Empowerment of Women, which is co-chaired by ESCAP and UN-Women, to provide technical advice and support for effective implementation. This is the first group of its kind globally. In addition, initiatives such as the establishment by UNESCO of a Regional Research and Documentation Centre for Women, Gender and Peacebuilding in the Great Lakes Region will help identify priority concerns and improve monitoring. 59. Implementation of commitments on women and peace and security at the national level should be grounded in human rights instruments, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The decision by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women in 2010 to prepare a general recommendation on the protection of women's human rights in conflict and post-conflict contexts marks an important step in further clarifying the obligations of States parties to the Convention in those contexts and in providing authoritative guidance on the necessary legislative, policy and other measures to meet such obligations. IV. Coordination and accountability for results within the United Nations system 60. UN-Women, with its mandate to improve coordination and accountability in the United Nations system on women's empowerment and gender equality and its recognition as the system lead on women and peace and security by the Security Council in its presidential statement of 26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), represents a major policy and institutional resource to respond to the Security Council's consistent call for support to Member States on sustained and coordinated efforts to implement its resolutions on women and peace and security. 61. In that presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/22), the Security Council asked me to develop a strategic framework to guide the United Nations implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) over the next 10 years. The strategic results framework on women and peace and security developed by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee on Women, Peace and Security (see annex) will be a key tool to ensure coordination, coherence and accountability for meeting commitments on women and peace and security. 62. While calling on the entire international community to adopt a more determined and consistent approach to implementation, the focus is on measures that the United Nations system will take towards supporting Member States, at their request, to reach intermediate targets by 2014 (a midterm assessment point prior to the proposed 2015 high-level review in the Security Council). While longer-term targets for 2020 are also set, the framework is considered a living document. Targets will therefore be revised over time to ensure that they reflect new opportunities for accelerating implementation in support of Member States' priorities and efforts. 63. The strategic results framework addresses key implementation gaps and challenges in the four areas covered by the present report: prevention, participation, protection, and relief and recovery. The framework incorporates major commitments agreed upon in other related United Nations strategic planning processes, including the seven commitments put forward in my report on women's participation in peacebuilding (A/65/354-S/2010/466), in the areas of mediation, post-conflict planning, financing, civilian capacity, post-conflict governance, rule of law and economic recovery. It is also informed by the strategic framework for 2011-2012 of UN Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. 64. Monitoring of the strategic results framework is enabled by use of the initial set of indicators on resolution 1325 (2000) presented to the Security Council on 26 October 2010. One third of those indicators are reported on in the present report, as foreseen in the timeline for development of the indicators outlined in my report to the Council last year. Next year, information will be collected on another third -- those that require system-wide agreement on adopting consistent means of tracking funds spent on women's empowerment or on assessing the distribution of benefits from disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, employment and reparations programmes. In addition, templates and guidance for voluntary reporting by Member States on the remainder of the indicators will be developed next year in consultation with Member States. 65. A High-level Steering Committee on Women and Peace and Security, chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General, has been formed to ensure commitment at the highest levels, to improve coordination and sequencing, and to monitor implementation of the strategic results framework. It consists of principals of agencies and entities with key roles in advancing the women and peace and security agenda. It also has civil society representation. In the end, however, it is coordinated action by all Member States, as well as regional organizations, international financial institutions, civil society organizations and, most importantly, the Governments and people of countries emerging from conflict that will ensure that the ambitions of resolution 1325 (2000) are fully achieved. V. Observations and recommendations 66. The tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) was an opportunity for Member States, regional organizations and United Nations entities to assess progress and develop new approaches. The acceleration in the production of national action plans on resolution 1325 (2000) demonstrates renewed commitment to addressing gender issues in peacemaking and peacebuilding and to ensuring the protection of women and girls during and after conflict. A major contribution to consistency and coherence in international efforts is found in the indicators contained in my report of last year and the strategic results framework on women and peace and security. 67. Resolution 1325 (2000) represents an extraordinary shift in the way conflict is addressed. It brings an approach centred on peacebuilding that engages new constituencies in conflict resolution and recovery -- constituencies focused on social justice, equality and community reconciliation. Such a profound shift in approach to conflict and its resolution poses considerable challenges, and it is not surprising that it is taking time to institutionalize. However, I am concerned that implementation has been so uneven. Proactive steps must be taken to accelerate implementation of key elements of this agenda, such as strengthening women's engagement in conflict resolution and deterring widespread and systematic abuses of women's rights during conflict. I welcome the creation of UN-Women and expect it to improve coherence and coordination, as well as galvanize innovation and ensure accountability in this area of our work. I look to Member States to support the effective functioning of UN-Women. 68. Other crucial policy and institutional reforms, as the present report shows, are outlined in my seven-point action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding (see A/65/354-S/2010/466, sect. IV), which seeks to establish standard operating procedures to address gender issues in the United Nations conflict resolution and peacebuilding architecture. It addresses sequencing problems (neglecting or postponing women's participation until late in mediation, elections and planning processes), expertise problems (lack of sector-specific gender experts or failure to deploy effectively) and financing problems. 69. The United Nations presence in conflict and post-conflict situations -- field missions and country teams -- must achieve greater coherence and coordination in addressing women and peace and security issues. Sector-specific gender expertise is needed for effective integration and implementation of women and peace and security objectives in all initiatives related to peace and security. Gender equality and women's empowerment issues must be addressed in all United Nations support for mediation efforts, implementation of peace agreements and post-conflict elections, inter alia by ensuring that all political assessment missions, mediation teams and electoral support teams thoroughly consider gender-related issues and implications, including in technical areas, as a matter of course. I commit to ensuring that all commissions of inquiry and related investigative bodies established by the United Nations and truth commissions supported by the United Nations will have dedicated gender expertise and access to specific sexual violence investigative capacity, drawing on the support of UN-Women. In addition, United Nations-supported peace agreements will support inclusion of gender-responsive transitional justice programmes. 70. It is my expectation that the timely provision of targeted gender expertise will help address the sequencing problems discussed in the present report. To that end, I will continue to increase the quantity of gender experts on our existing rosters for surge capacity for crises, standby experts for humanitarian response and for mediation and specialists on conflict prevention and post-conflict planning. This effort will be part of my overall endeavour to enhance civilian capacity. 71. Clarity, comparability and consistency are needed across the United Nations in monitoring the impact of its programming efforts on women's rights and empowerment in conflict and post-conflict situations. I call on United Nations entities to continue to work to ensure that consistent means of tracking and reporting on spending for gender equality and women's empowerment are developed within the next year. I also expect to see developed within a year a coherent approach to identifying the financial equivalents of benefits allocated to women of United Nations-supported reparations programmes, post-conflict temporary employment and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, so that indicators tracking these programme benefits can be populated with data. 72. I call on United Nations entities and Member States to offer technical and financial support to women's organizations in conflict and post-conflict situations, as they are key to strengthening constituencies for peace and building the leverage of women engaged in conflict resolution and peacebuilding. 73. I will be asking my special envoys and special representatives to report to me on their consultations with women's organizations and women leaders in all conflict resolution efforts. Periodic review of the indicators on women and peace and security and progress in meeting the targets of the strategic results framework will provide one source of information on gender-related results achieved by committed leadership in conflict and post-conflict situations. Incorporation of gender issues into the terms of reference and performance reviews of in-country leadership will provide an accountability mechanism. 74. The following recommendations aim to advance implementation of women and peace and security commitments and to strengthen accountability: (a) I note with appreciation that the Security Council is increasingly giving specific instructions in resolutions containing or renewing mandates of United Nations missions with regard to addressing gender issues in sector-specific aspects of peace consolidation and recovery. My report has shown that mere reference to women and peace and security resolutions is not enough; instead, detailed instructions are highly productive in driving resource allocation and institutional provisions on the ground in ways that deliver results for gender equality and improve accountability. I encourage the Council to continue this excellent practice and to add women and peace and security elements, as appropriate, to mandates of peacekeeping and political missions that do not contain these elements; (b) I appreciate the Security Council's invitation to the Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN-Women to brief the Council last April. These briefings, as well as those by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, greatly improve the information flow on matters of critical concern and advise the Council on its women and peace and security analysis and response. I hope these occur more frequently and I encourage the Council to accommodate women and peace and security briefings on request by the Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN-Women; (c) I have asked my special envoys and special representatives to report to me on their consultations with women representatives, including civil society and peace groups, in all ongoing mediation processes. I encourage Council members to follow up on these matters during Council consultations and briefings; (d) I welcome the fact that the Security Council is seized of and taking action in relation to instances of conflict-related sexual violence. I recommend that consistent attention also be paid to other conflict-related abuses of women's human rights in periodic reports to the Council and in oral briefings and Council debates, including threats to women's security such as attacks on women human rights defenders and journalists and women in public office. To that end, more specific recommendations on the means of addressing and preventing such threats will be made in my periodic country reports to the Council; (e) I encourage the Security Council to use its deliberations on preventive diplomacy and mediation, as well as its Working Group on Conflict Prevention in Africa, to consider means of enhancing women's conflict-prevention role; (f) The proposed 2015 high-level review of the Security Council on implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will serve as an important milestone for Member States, regional organizations and the United Nations system to demonstrate measurable progress. I propose that my report on women and peace and security in 2015 focus on the results of current efforts by national, regional and international stakeholders; (g) Specific actions to address the low numbers of women in conflict resolution and in the implementation of peace agreements are required. Member State participants in contact groups supporting specific peace processes should offer negotiating parties various incentives (such as training, logistics support or adding a negotiating seat) in order to ensure women's inclusion on delegations. I encourage Member States to increase the number of women in their foreign service and national security establishments and to take steps to ensure that women diplomats are engaged in leadership roles in conflict resolution; (h) I encourage Member States to support the United Nations' efforts to ensure that in post-conflict planning and programming women's needs and rights are more consistently addressed and that women benefit equally from all actions and investments. Member States supporting donor conferences and round tables should ensure participation by women civil society representatives; (i) I am encouraged by increases in the number of women in police and troops contributed to the United Nations and I urge Member States to continue their efforts to increase the number of women in security forces so as to increase the pool available for deployment as peacekeepers. I also encourage Member States to continue efforts to ensure predeployment training for military and police on gender issues; (j) I encourage Member States to strengthen measures to ensure the equal participation of women in peace agreement implementation bodies, including through the use of temporary special measures. Guidance and technical assistance is available through the United Nations; (k) I encourage Member States -- particularly those in conflict and post-conflict situations -- to develop and implement national action plans on women and peace and security, to ensure that the plans include aligned or dedicated budgets, spending plans, targets, timelines and indicators, and to link the plans to national peacebuilding plans, national defence and security plans or poverty reduction plans, as well as to the strategic results framework and indicators. To ensure consistent reporting, UN-Women will provide guidance to Member States willing to provide data against this set of indicators on a voluntary basis; (l) I invite Member States to identify means of bringing justice and redress to women and girls for the war crimes they have suffered and to end impunity for those atrocities. Member States need to invest in mechanisms -- for instance mobile courts, one-stop centres for gender-based crimes and legal aid -- to make judicial processes more accessible. I also urge Member States to develop mechanisms to ensure that women and girl war crimes victims receive the immediate services and assistance needed as well as the comprehensive reparations that are their right. Annex Strategic results framework on women and peace and security Goal 1: Prevention of conflict and all forms of violence against women and girls in armed conflict and post-conflict situations Outcome 1.1: Women contribute to and have access to the full range of conflict prevention systems Output Target by 2014 Target by 2020 Output 1.1.1 United Nations conflict and crisis early warning systems generate reliable information on security threats women and girls face and establish means to gather information on early warning from women UN Action Strategic framework deliverables C2 and C4. :: 50 per cent of United Nations early warning systems utilize gender-specific indicators :: 100 per cent of United Nations early warning systems utilize gender-specific indicators Output 1.1.2 Women's conflict prevention efforts, both formal and informal, are reinforced and supported by United Nations entities UN Action Strategic framework deliverables A10 and C12. :: United Nations development and other integrated planning frameworks and processes (integrated strategic framework, United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks, integrated mission planning process) include activities aimed at strengthening the capacities of women's civil society organizations working on conflict prevention in 20 per cent of countries with a United Nations presence :: United Nations development and other integrated planning frameworks and processes (integrated strategic framework, United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks, integrated mission planning process) include activities aimed at strengthening the capacities of women's civil society organizations working on conflict prevention in 80 per cent of countries with a United Nations presence :: 40 per cent of community-level conflict mediators trained by United Nations-supported programmes are women :: 50 per cent of community-level conflict mediators trained by United Nations-supported programmes are women Output 1.1.3 United Nations-supported disarmament, non-proliferation arms control (see General Assembly resolution 65/69) and armed violence prevention and reduction activities include regular structured consultation with and active involvement of women leaders and women's groups :: Inclusive and effective consultation with and involvement of women leaders and women's groups to be included in 50 per cent of United Nations-supported disarmament activities :: Inclusive and effective consultation with and involvement of women leaders and women's groups to be included in 75 per cent of all United Nations-supported disarmament activities Output 1.1.4 Security Council missions ensure consultations on the situation of women's and girls' rights and needs, and gender equality issues :: 75 per cent of Security Council missions (since 2011) meet with women leaders and organizations :: 100 per cent of Security Council missions meet with women leaders and organizations Outcome 1.2: Mechanisms are established to systematically monitor, report on and prevent human rights violations against women and girls in conflict, including sexual violence in conflict Output 1.2.1 United Nations field missions to initiate immediate and long-term efforts to monitor and prevent conflict-related sexual violence against women and girls and other human rights violations See A/65/354-S/2010/466, para. 46, and UN Action strategic framework deliverables A1, C3 and C4. :: 75 per cent of Force Commander directives and multidimensional mission concepts of operations for military and for police incorporate human rights and sexual and gender-based violence prevention Traditional missions do not address sexual and gender-based violence; applies only to multidimensional peacekeeping operations. :: 100 per cent of Force Commander directives and multidimensional mission concept of operationse for military and for police incorporate human rights and sexual and gender-based violence prevention :: 15 per cent increase in human rights field missions to remote areas :: 25 per cent increase in human rights field missions to remote areas :: Women protection advisers are deployed to 50 per cent of countries with a peacekeeping mission with a protection-of-civilians mandate where sexual violence in conflict is prevalent :: Women protection advisers are deployed to 100 per cent of countries with a peacekeeping mission with a protection-of-civilians mandate where sexual violence in conflict is prevalent :: Monitoring and reporting arrangements, as requested in Security Council resolution 1960 (2010), are established and rolled out to selected countries :: Monitoring and reporting arrangements are in use in a selection of key countries Output 1.2.2 All country and relevant thematic reports of the Secretary-General to the Security Council provide women and peace and security analysis with concrete recommendations on prevention of violations of women's and girls' human rights :: The Secretary-General makes concrete recommendations on addressing women's and girls' rights in 50 per cent of countries and thematic issues on the Security Council agenda :: The Secretary-General makes concrete recommendations on addressing women's and girls' rights in 75 per cent of countries and thematic issues on the Security Council agenda Goal 2: Women participate equally with men, and gender equality is promoted in peace and security decision-making processes at national, regional and international levels Outcome 2.1: Increased meaningful representation of women at all levels in international, regional and national institutions for the maintenance of peace and security Output 2.1.1 Increased proportion of senior positions (P-5 and higher) held by women and improved gender-responsiveness of all senior management in all United Nations entities operating in conflict and post-conflict situations See A/65/354-S/2010/466, paras. 38 and 39; A/65/334; and A/65/747-S/2011/85. :: Women comprise at least 30 per cent of senior positions (P-5 and above) in United Nations entities operating in conflict and post-conflict situations :: All countries with political, peacebuilding or multidimensional peacekeeping missions have at least one gender adviser :: Women comprise at least 40 per cent of senior positions (P-5 and above) in United Nations entities operating in conflict and post-conflict situations Outcome 2.2: Increased attention to women's priorities and gender issues in peace agreements Output 2.2.1 Increased number of appointments of women as chief mediators/special envoys to United Nations-led peace processes UN Action strategic framework deliverable C8; A/65/354-S/2010/466, para. 28. :: At least one woman is appointed as chief mediator/special envoy to a United Nations-led peace process :: At least one in each three new appointments of chief mediators/special envoys to United Nations-led peace processes is a woman Output 2.2.2 Gender expertise is provided to United Nations-supported mediation effortsg :: 50 per cent of all United Nations mediation support activities include gender expertise :: 75 per cent of United Nations mediation support activities include gender expertise Output 2.2.3 Women's representatives engage in consultations with mediation and negotiating teams during peace processesg :: 50 per cent of all United Nations special envoys and mediators and mediation teams undertake regular consultations with women leaders and women's civil society organizations :: 85 per cent of all United Nations special envoys and mediators and mediation teams undertake regular consultations with women leaders and women's civil society organizations Outcome 2.3: Increased representation of women at all levels as decision makers in post-conflict countries Outputs Output 2.3.1 United Nations technical assistance to conflict-resolution processes and countries emerging from conflict includes a rigorous assessment of options for temporary special measures, including quotas for women, in line with recommendations in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other relevant international human rights treaties A/65/354-S/2010/466, para. 42. :: At least 50 per cent of electoral support programme units in requesting countries include gender expertise :: All electoral support programme units in requesting countries include gender expertise Output 2.3.2 The United Nations ensures that technical assistance to public administrative reform includes comprehensive options for measures, including but not limited to quotas and fast-track promotion schemes, to increase proportion of women in state institutions at all levels, and capacity-building to improve institutional effectiveness in line with recommendations in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and other relevant international human rights treaties A/65/354-S/2010/466, para. 44. :: Technical assistance or strategy on support for achieving gender balance in public administration is available to 50 per cent of countries with armed conflict and post-conflict situations :: Technical assistance or strategy on support for achieving gender balance in public administration is available to all countries with armed conflict and post-conflict situations Goal 3: Women and girls' rights are protected and promoted in armed conflict and post-conflict situations Outcome 3.1: Institutional mechanisms and structures ensure the security, safety and health of women and girls Output 3.1.1 Women's and girls' rights are integrated into all operational guidance on protection of civilians and rolled out in relevant missions :: Operational guidance reflecting women's and girls' rights are implemented in 50 per cent of countries with integrated missions with protection-of-civilian mandates :: Operational guidance reflecting women's and girls' rights are implemented in 100 per cent of countries with integrated missions with protection-of-civilian mandates Output 3.1.2 Special measures to increase security of female refugees and persons internally displaced by armed conflict and promote women's representation in all camp committees and to ensure multisectoral prevention and response mechanisms for sexual and gender-based violence in camp and non-camp settings Special measures could include activation of the protection cluster, provision of fuel-efficient stoves or hippo water drums, community policing initiatives, etc. :: Special measures to protect conflict-displaced women and girls operationalized in 50 per cent of United Nations-managed responses to displacement :: Special measures to protect conflict-displaced women and girls operationalized in 75 per cent of United Nations-managed responses to displacement Outcome 3.2: Security sector reform and community security and arms control programmes respond to threats faced by women and girls and promote women's meaningful participation in reform processes and activities related to disarmament, non-proliferation arms control (General Assembly resolution 65/69) and armed violence prevention and reduction activities Output 3.2.1 The United Nations provides technical and advisory support and capacity-development to strengthen gender-responsive mechanisms for the control of small arms and light weapons :: 75 per cent of United Nations-sponsored and United Nations-led disarmament and arms control programmes mainstream gender throughout programme design and delivery :: 100 per cent of United Nations-sponsored and United Nations-led disarmament and arms control programmes mainstream gender throughout programme design and delivery Output 3.2.2 The United Nations supports national efforts to ensure gender-responsive security sector reform through capacity development and advocacy UN Action strategic framework deliverable A4. :: 20 per cent of participants in security sector training activities are women :: Gender considerations are effectively mainstreamed in United Nations-supported national security policies, strategies, plans and programmes :: 30 per cent of participants in security sector training activities are women Outcome 3.3: Increased access to justice for women and girls whose rights are violated Output 3.3.1 Relevant United Nations entities promote, support and provide technical assistance to judicial and corrections reform and legal support services (both formal and informal) to protect and enforce women's and girls' human rights consistent with international standards, with specific attention to survivors of sexual and gender-based violence and other vulnerable women A/65/354-S/2010/466, paras. 46 and 47. :: 15 per cent of funding of rule of law and access to justice programming is dedicated to gender equality and women's empowerment :: 30 per cent of funding of rule of law and access to justice programming is dedicated to gender equality and women's empowerment Goal 4: Women's and girls' specific relief needs are met and women's capacities to act as agents in relief and recovery are reinforced in armed conflict and post-conflict situations Outcome 4.1: Planning and funding of relief and recovery initiatives in conflict and post-conflict situations respond to the needs of women and girls, especially vulnerable groups (internally displaced populations, victims of sexual and gender-based violence and war crimes, disabled women and girls, female heads of household, female ex-combatants, refugees and returnees and women living with and affected by HIV) Output 4.1.1 Fund-tracking mechanisms to assess attention to gender equality issues are developed by all United Nations and multi-donor trust funds with programming mandates working in conflict and post-conflict situations UN Action strategic framework deliverable A9; A/65/354-S/2010/466, para. 36. :: Gender equality programme funding tracking mechanisms (e.g., gender markers) are established and operational in 40 per cent of United Nations entities operating in conflict and post-conflict situations :: Gender equality programme funding tracking mechanisms (e.g., gender markers) are established and operational in 100 per cent of United Nations entities operating in conflict and post-conflict situations Output 4.1.2 United Nations-led planning processes in conflict and post-conflict situations (including humanitarian and peacebuilding processes) are gender responsive :: At least 70 per cent of United Nations-led planning documents and resulting projects and programmes in conflict and post-conflict situations respond to the distinct needs and capacities of girls, boys, women and men, especially vulnerable groups :: Rosters for technical surge capacity for conflict and post-conflict situations include gender experts in each of the relevant areas (i.e., camp management, natural resources, etc.) :: 100 per cent of United Nations-led planning documents and resulting projects and programmes in conflict and post-conflict situations respond to the distinct needs and capacities of girls, boys, women and men, especially vulnerable groups :: All United Nations-led local development and community infrastructure rehabilitation programmes include institutionalized mechanisms to ensure informed and effective participation of women's groups at the community and local levels :: At least 50 per cent of all United Nations-led local development and community infrastructure rehabilitation programmes include institutionalized mechanisms to ensure informed and effective participation of women's groups at the community and local levels (i.e., setting of priorities, identification of beneficiaries, monitoring implementation) Outcome 4.2: Post-conflict institutions and processes of peace consolidation fully engage women and acknowledge their roles in conflict and their right to redress for injustices Output 4.2.1 Women equitably participate in all stages of United Nations-supported disarmament, demobilization and reintegration -- from the negotiation of peace agreements and establishment of national institutions to the design and implementation of programmes in order to ensure that the specific needs of male and female ex-combatants are addressed, as well as those of women, men, boys and girls associated with armed forces :: At least 15 per cent of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme funds are dedicated to addressing specific gender needs, including the gender dimensions of violence :: Adequate and sufficient gender expertise is available in 75 per cent of United Nations-supported disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes at management and implementation levels :: At least 20 per cent of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme funds are dedicated to addressing specific gender needs, including the gender dimensions of violence :: Adequate and sufficient gender expertise is available in 95 per cent of United Nations-supported disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes at management and implementation levels Output 4.2.2 Minimum standards of gender-responsiveness are established (and options for ensuring their implementation are incorporated into the technical advice activities of relevant United Nations actors) for truth and reconciliation commissions, reparations programmes and related bodieso :: At least 15 per cent of funding on transitional justice programmes (including reparations projects) is specifically dedicated to gender equality :: At least 30 per cent of funding on transitional justice programmes (including reparations) is specifically dedicated to gender equality. Of the rest, at least 50 per cent incorporates gender equality issues Outcome 4.3: Women and girls have equitable access to livelihood support servicesp Output 4.3.1 Economic recovery and temporary employmentq programmes specifically target women and girls as participants :: At least 15 per cent of funding on economic recovery programmes is specifically dedicated to gender equality :: At least 30 per cent of participants in economic recovery, temporary employment and post-conflict poverty reduction programmes are women :: At least 30 per cent of funding on economic recovery programmes is specifically dedicated to gender equality, with 50 per cent of the rest explicitly responding to different needs of men and women, girls and boys :: At least 40 per cent of participants in economic recovery, temporary employment and post-conflict poverty reduction programmes are women o UN Action strategic framework deliverables A7 and C9; A/65/354-S/2010/466, para. 48. p A/65/354-S/2010/466, paras. 50 and 51. q This includes short-term cash for work, training and grants programmes. 