%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|BORDER INCIDENTS|PAKISTAN|

Letter dated 27 November 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to forward herewith a statement issued by the Defence Committee of the Cabinet of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization/International Security Assistance Force (NATO/ISAF) attack on border posts on 26 November 2011 (see annex). Coming in the early morning of 26 November 2011, the attack by NATO/ISAF aircraft on Pakistan's border posts resulted in the martyrdom of 24 officers and soldiers of the Pakistan Army. Thirteen members of personnel were injured. I would be grateful if the appended statement, issued by the Defence Committee of the Cabinet on 26 November 2011, could be forwarded to the President of the Security Council, with the request for its circulation as a document of the Council. (Signed) Abdullah Hussain Haroon Ambassador Permanent Representative Statement issued by the Defence Committee of the Cabinet on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization/International Security Assistance Force attack on border posts, 26 November 2011 An emergency meeting of the Defence Committee of the Cabinet was chaired by the Prime Minister this evening at the Prime Minister's House. Federal Ministers, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee, Services Chiefs and members of the Defence Committee of the Cabinet attended. The Defence Committee of the Cabinet strongly condemned the attack by NATO/ISAF aircraft on Pakistani border posts in the Mohmand Agency, which has resulted in the loss of precious lives of officers and men of the Pakistan Army and injuries to several. The Defence Committee of the Cabinet expressed heartfelt sympathies and condolences to the families of the brave soldiers who fought valiantly and embraced Shahadat, and also prayed for the early recovery of those injured. The Defence Committee of the Cabinet reiterated the resolve of the Pakistani people and Armed Forces to safeguard Pakistan's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity at all costs. The Defence Committee of the Cabinet noted that strong protests had been lodged with the United States and at NATO Headquarters in Brussels conveying in the strongest possible terms Pakistan's condemnation of these attacks, which constituted a breach of sovereignty, were violative of international law and had gravely dented the fundamental basis of Pakistan's cooperation with NATO/ISAF against militancy and terror. NATO/ISAF attacks were also violative of their mandate, which was confined to Afghanistan. Pakistan had clearly conveyed to the United States/NATO/ISAF its red lines, which constituted an integral element of Pakistan's cooperation that was based on a partnership approach. The attack on Pakistan Army border posts is totally unacceptable and warrants an effective national response. In accordance with the resolution of the Joint Session of the Parliament of 14 May 2011, the Defence Committee of the Cabinet decided to close with immediate effect the NATO/ISAF logistics supply lines. The Defence Committee of the Cabinet also decided to ask the United States to vacate the Shamsi airbase within 15 days. The Defence Committee of the Cabinet decided that the Government will revisit and undertake a complete review of all programmes, activities and cooperative arrangements with the United States/NATO/ISAF, including diplomatic, political, military and intelligence. The Prime Minister will take the Parliament into confidence on the whole range of measures regarding matters relating to Pakistan's future cooperation with the United States/NATO/ISAF, in the near future. 