%%%INTERNATIONAL SECURITY|SECURITY SECTOR REFORM|REGIONAL SECURITY|AFRICA|MIDDLE EAST|WOMEN'S STATUS|POLITICAL CONDITIONS|INTERNAL SECURITY|COTE D'IVOIRE|DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO|LIBERIA|LIBYA|SUDAN|SOUTH SUDAN|SOMALIA SITUATION|WESTERN SAHARA QUESTION|PIRACY|GULF OF GUINEA|HAITI QUESTION|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|AFGHANISTAN SITUATION|LEBANON|PALESTINE QUESTION|SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC|YEMEN|PEACEBUILDING|

Letter dated 15 December 2011 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit herewith a report on the work of the Security Council during the presidency of Nigeria in October 2011 (see annex). The document was prepared under my responsibility, after consultation with the other members of the Security Council. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) U. Joy Ogwu Ambassador Permanent Representative Assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of Nigeria (October 2011) Introduction During the month of October 2011, under the presidency of Nigeria, the Security Council adopted eight resolutions and two presidential statements and issued five press statements. The Council also adopted its annual report to the General Assembly for the period covering 1 August 2010 to 31 July 2011. It held one private meeting with the President of the International Court of Justice and two open thematic debates on security sector reform and on women and peace and security. A briefing on Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea was also held. Africa Côte d'Ivoire The Council was briefed in consultations of the whole by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire, Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, on 20 October 2011. She stated that, in spite of the positive developments in Côte d'Ivoire, any change in the sanctions regime at the current stage would be premature owing to the fragile security situation and the inadequate State presence in many parts of the country. Council members expressed similar views. Democratic Republic of the Congo On 17 October 2011, the Council was briefed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Roger Meece, by video link, in closed consultations on preparations for the forthcoming presidential and legislative elections; and the security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mr. Meece informed the Council of the efforts being made by the Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI) and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to promote dialogue between the political parties, through the election dispute mechanism. He stated that political parties have been requested to sign the electoral code of conduct, with a view to ensuring a peaceful atmosphere during the election. Council members called on all the political parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly the opposition party Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS) and its allies, to sign the electoral code of conduct, without further delay. In a statement to the press following the meeting, the Council reiterated its call for credible and peaceful elections for which the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo bears the primary responsibility. The Council called on MONUSCO to continue to support CENI in the conduct of the forthcoming election. Liberia On 17 October 2011, the Council received a briefing in closed consultations, by video link, by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia, Ellen Margrethe Løj, on the situation in that country following the conclusion of the first round of presidential elections. Noting that the stakes will be higher in the second round of the elections, she called for continued international engagement with the parties, especially the main opposition party, Congress for Democratic Change, to resolve all outstanding electoral issues. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General suggested that international observers be present in greater numbers for the run-off election and maintain their presence throughout the tallying of the results in order to enhance the credibility of the process. Council members expressed support for the electoral process in Liberia. They called on the parties to exercise restraint and urged them to avoid inflammatory rhetoric or provocative actions that could lead to civil unrest. On 26 October 2011, the Council issued a press statement commending the people of Liberia on the completion of the first round of the presidential and legislative elections and looked forward to the peaceful conduct of the second round. It underscored the importance of peaceful, credible and transparent elections. Libya In consultations of the whole on 13 October 2011, the Council heard a briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, Ian Martin, by video link. He informed the Council that the situation in Libya remained fragile in spite of the near total control of the country by the National Transitional Council. He stated that early demobilization of armed civilians, in view of the proliferation of arms across Libya, particularly in Tripoli, remained a critical challenge for both the National Transitional Council and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). Mr. Martin also stated that the National Transitional Council was actively engaged in addressing the security gaps and was in the process of forming a Supreme Security Council, tasked with the maintenance of security in the country. Council members called for national reconciliation and unity, and an inclusive political process. They expressed concern about the proliferation of arms in Libya, noting that it remained a threat to the stability of the country and the subregion. They stressed that demobilization should remain a key priority for the National Transitional Council. On 21 October 2011, the Council, in consultations of the whole, exchanged views on the lifting of the no-fly zone in Libya in view of the recent developments in the country. The Council was briefed again by Mr. Martin on 26 October 2011. He stated that the killings of Muammar al-Qadhafi and Mutassim al-Qadhafi were committed under circumstances that required investigation, and that other reports of extrajudicial killings were committed on both sides during the final battle for Sirte. He welcomed the announcement of an investigation by the National Transitional Council into the killings. He noted that such investigations were within the scope of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry mandated by the Human Rights Council. Mr. Martin observed that the flow of weapons across borders is a cause for concern for Libya's neighbours. He added that the migration of workers from Libya and the movement of armed elements from the former regime have grave regional implications. He stated that the United Nations will support the efforts of the African Union and Libya's neighbours to address the challenge. In consultations of the whole, Council members urged the National Transitional Council to act swiftly in establishing an inclusive interim government and to ensure that it keep to the transition timetable. They urged Libyans to cultivate a spirit of reconciliation and refrain from reprisal attacks. Council members called for the termination of the no-fly zone, noting that the conditions that had led to the imposition of the no-fly zone no longer existed. They acknowledged the important role that the United Nations should play in Libya's transition and rebuilding processes. On 27 October 2011, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2016 (2011), terminating the provisions of resolution 1973 (2011) concerning both the protection of civilians and the banning of all flights in the airspace of Libya with effect from 23.59 Libyan local time on 31 October 2011. The Council also unanimously adopted resolution 2017 (2011) on 31 October 2011, in which it called upon the Libyan authorities to take all necessary steps to prevent the proliferation of all arms and related materiel of all types, in particular man-portable surface-to-air missiles, to ensure their proper custody, and to meet Libya's arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation obligations under international law. It further called upon the Libyan authorities to continue their close coordination with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on the destruction of their stockpiles of chemical weapons. The Council also requested the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), with assistance from its Panel of Experts, in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and working with other relevant United Nations bodies, including the International Civil Aviation Organization, to submit a report on proposals to counter the threat of arms proliferation. Sudan and South Sudan On 6 October 2011, the new Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé Ladsous, briefed the Council on the situation in Abyei. Mr. Ladsous noted that the parties to the 20 June agreement had not made significant progress on the withdrawal of their armed forces from Abyei, as they had committed to do. He underlined the need for coherent administration of the border region, given that the Misseriya people, in their seasonal nomadic migration, would be traversing an international border for the first time. He therefore called upon the Council to authorize support of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) for the establishment of a border monitoring mechanism, as recommended by the Secretary-General. He also urged the Council to engage the parties in the withdrawal of their forces from Abyei to enable the return of internally displaced persons and to ensure peaceful migration. During consultations of the whole, Council members called on the parties to fulfil their commitments under the 20 June agreement, including the redeployment of their forces. They expressed readiness to consider additional tasks for UNISFA. They remarked that border administration in Abyei was one of the extant issues of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and called on the parties to recommit themselves to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in order to resolve the outstanding issues. Mr. Ladsous briefed the Council again on 11 October 2011, in closed consultations, on some outstanding questions, including the status of the withdrawal of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan People's Liberation Army, and the relationship between the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan on Abyei. He stated that the administration of Abyei was crucial for regional stability and security, and that progress was linked to a solution on border security, oil revenues and the joint political mechanism. On 11 October 2011, the Council issued a press statement condemning the attack on peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in Darfur, which resulted in the death of two soldiers and one police adviser and six seriously wounded. On the situation in Darfur, the Council heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations on 25 October 2011. He highlighted progress in the implementation of the provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, and the agreement between the Sudanese Government and the Justice and Equality Movement. He noted broad support among the civil society, internally displaced persons and local authorities for these initiatives. Council members, in consultations of the whole, expressed support for the Doha Document and the road map for peace and urged the Government of Sudan to cooperate with UNAMID. Somalia The Council issued a press statement on 4 October 2011, condemning the terrorist attack in Mogadishu, which resulted in more than 100 deaths and several injuries. On 24 October 2011, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2015 (2011) concerning piracy off the coast of Somalia. Among other issues, the resolution called upon Member States to report by the end of the year on the steps they have taken to criminalize piracy under their domestic laws. The Council also decided to continue its consideration, as a matter of urgency and without prejudice to any further steps to ensure that pirates are held accountable, of the establishment of specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia and other States in the region with substantial international participation and/or support. On 31 October 2011, the Council was briefed by Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, on the situation in Somalia. He stated that the fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia could be won only through an integrated strategy involving deterrence, security, the rule of law and development. He suggested that counter-piracy efforts should be an integral element of the Somalia peace process. In consultations of the whole, Council members pointed to the need for a comprehensive strategy to address the instability in Somalia. Western Sahara On 26 October 2011, the Council, in consultations of the whole, was briefed by the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General to Western Sahara, Christopher Ross. He said that the peace process remained deadlocked after several rounds of negotiations. Both parties had continued to maintain their mutually exclusive positions and to reject each other's proposals as a basis for future negotiations. They had, however, reached agreement on the subsidiary issues of natural resources, demining, education, health and environment. Council members called upon the parties to demonstrate further political will and to remain committed to the negotiation process. Peace and security in Africa: piracy in the Gulf of Guinea The Council held a briefing, on 19 October 2011, on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. In his address, the Secretary-General commended the States in the Gulf of Guinea and their partners for working together to deal with the threat of piracy. He noted that the forthcoming United Nations assessment mission would examine the scope of the threat, as well as the capacity of the countries of the West African subregion to ensure maritime safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea. It would also examine the threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea and explore options on how best to address the problem. The Secretary-General called upon Member States to join the efforts of the subregion to confront the threat. Briefing the Council, General Mahamane Touré, Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security of the Economic Community of West African States, reported on the key initiatives in the region to tackle the threat of piracy. He stated that more needed to be done and called for a Security Council resolution that would underpin ongoing regional efforts. In particular, he said the resolution should take into account the challenges facing inland countries in the region, as well as illegal trafficking and illegal dumping at sea. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, Deputy Executive Secretary for Political Affairs of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, noted that piracy, if not checked, could have negative consequences for both the countries of the Gulf of Guinea and landlocked countries that depend on coastal access. She called for international expertise and technical support for the region in the areas of monitoring and security. Speaking on behalf of the countries of the Gulf of Guinea, the Permanent Representative of Benin said that the adoption of a Security Council resolution would send a strong signal to the pirates that the international community was united in the fight against the threat. Council members welcomed the initiative of the Secretary-General to send an assessment mission to the subregion. They encouraged the international community to assist the efforts of the countries and regional organizations along the coast of the Gulf of Guinea through, among other things, technical assistance and capacity-building. Several speakers called for a holistic approach that would not only take into account maritime security, but also address the root causes of piracy, such as poverty and lack of economic opportunities for young people. On 31 October 2011, the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2018 (2011), condemning all acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea committed off the coast of the States of the Gulf of Guinea. Americas Haiti On 14 October 2011, the Council adopted resolution 2012 (2011), by which it decided to extend the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for 12 months. It endorsed the recommendation of the Secretary-General to reduce overall force levels based on an assessment of the security situation on the ground. Europe Kosovo The Council exchanged views on the situation in Kosovo, in consultations of the whole, on 17 October 2011. Asia Afghanistan On 12 October 2011, the Council adopted resolution 2011 (2011), by which it extended its authorization of the International Security Assistance Force for 12 months. It issued a press statement on 31 October 2011 condemning the terrorist attack against the guest house of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Kandahar, Afghanistan, which resulted in the deaths and injury of United Nations staff, as well as Afghan police officers, who were protecting the United Nations personnel. Middle East Lebanon The Council was briefed in consultations of the whole on 27 October 2011, by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Terje Roed-Larsen, on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). He lamented the lack of progress in the implementation of the remaining provisions of the resolution, such as those related to border delineation, the disarmament of militia groups, and violations of the territorial integrity of Lebanon and its airspace. He noted that these challenges continued to persist in spite of assurances by the parties of their commitment to implementing their obligations under said resolution. Council Members reaffirmed their call to respect the sovereignty of Lebanon, and urged neighbouring countries to refrain from violating its territorial integrity. They noted that only through a Lebanese-led political process can the disarming of militia groups in Lebanon take place. They condemned the attacks on the personnel of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the restrictions imposed on them in the discharge of the mandate of the Mission. They called on regional partners to support the efforts of the Government of Lebanon in ensuring stability in the country. Situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question On 24 October 2011, the Council held an open debate on the situation in the Middle East, at which it heard a briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Lynn Pascoe. He said that the recent exchange of prisoners between the Israelis and the Palestinians marked a significant humanitarian breakthrough. He encouraged the parties to display equal determination in the search for a lasting solution to the Middle East problem. Noting the Quartet statement of 23 September 2011, Mr. Pascoe urged the parties to refrain from provocations and to be ready to offer serious proposals on borders and security for negotiation in order to avoid the deepening of the impasse. Statements were made by the Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer for Palestine. Council and non-Council members called on the parties to seize the momentum and work towards early resumption of direct negotiations within the framework of the Quartet statement of 23 September 2011. In addition, they were encouraged to forge consensus on all permanent status issues. Several Member States expressed views on the Palestinian application for admission to United Nations membership, under consideration by the Security Council. Other issues On 4 October 2011, the Security Council considered a draft resolution on the Syrian Arab Republic. The draft resolution was not adopted owing to the negative vote of two permanent members. Four members of the Council abstained. The Council heard a statement by the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. Yemen On 11 October 2011, the Council, in consultations of the whole, was briefed by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for Yemen, Jamal Benomar, on recent developments in that country. Mr. Benomar informed the Council that the Yemeni parties had reached a consensus regarding endorsing the Vice-President, who is now steering the transition, to succeed President Saleh. He also noted the continued relevance of the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative in the search for peace in Yemen. However, he observed that President Saleh's refusal to endorse the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council in line with the agreements reached in July 2011 remained an impediment to a political solution. Council members noted the importance of the good offices of the Secretary-General and of the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative in the efforts to resolve the political crisis in Yemen. They urged the parties to renounce violence and engage in meaningful negotiations in order to end the conflict in the interest of the country and of regional and international peace and security. The Council adopted resolution 2014 (2011) on 21 October 2011, in which it expressed grave concern at the deteriorating situation in Yemen, and strongly condemned the continued human rights violations and abuses in Yemen. The Council called for the signing and the implementation of the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative for an inclusive, orderly and Yemeni-led process of political transition. Thematic and general issues Briefing by the Department of Political Affairs On 14 October 2011, the Council was briefed in consultations of the whole by the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs on the situation in the Horn of Africa and on Security Council sanctions and the Panel of Experts. There was an exchange of views by Council members following the briefing. International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda On 14 October 2011, the Council adopted resolution 2013 (2011), authorizing Judge Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov to work part-time and engage in another judicial occupation until 31 December 2011. Private meeting with the President of the International Court of Justice (report of the International Court of Justice (S/2011/784)) On 25 October 2011, Council members held discussions with the President of the International Court of Justice, Judge Hisashi Owada. Admission of new members On 18 October 2011, the Committee on the Admission of New Members, meeting at the permanent representative level, was briefed by its Chair on the progress of the expert level consultations on Palestine's application for membership in the United Nations. Annual report of the Security Council On 27 October 2011, the Security Council adopted its annual report to the General Assembly for the period 2010-2011. Maintenance of international peace and security The Council held an open thematic debate on security sector reform in Africa on 12 October 2011. In his briefing, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations noted that security sector reform was a crucial preventive tool. He said that an ineffective and poorly governed security sector is one of the major obstacles to stability, poverty reduction, the achievement of sustainable development and peacebuilding. He also noted that the African Union was at the forefront of developing a security sector reform framework, and encouraged other regions to draw on that rich experience to develop similar frameworks that aim to build professional, well-governed security sectors that could contribute to sustainable development, peace and security. The Under-Secretary-General said the United Nations Inter-Agency Security Sector Reform Task Force and the Security Sector Reform Unit of the Office of the Rule of Law and Security Institutions had become major providers of field support. The Task Force had been successful in bringing together a broad range of expertise to provide diverse, specialized and coherent United Nations support. He called on Member States to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations in that regard. The Council agreed on a presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/19) emphasizing that establishing effective, professional and accountable security sectors was at the cornerstone of peace and sustainable development. The Council noted that the bulk of the assistance of the international community in the area of security sector reform took place in or was directed to countries in Africa, and that a number of African countries were becoming important providers of such assistance. In welcoming the intra-African collaboration, it stressed the need to expand the consideration given to African perspectives on security sector reform. The Council recognized that security sector reform was a long-term process that should be nationally owned and rooted in the particular needs and conditions of the country in question. It encouraged reforming States to strive to allocate national resources to such reform efforts in order to ensure their long-term sustainability and viability. The Council emphasized the importance of improving women's participation in discussions pertinent to the prevention and the resolution of conflict and the maintenance of peace and security, and encouraged women to participate in national armed and security forces. In that regard, the Council encouraged the development of security sectors that were accessible and responsive to all, including women and other vulnerable groups. It further recognized the importance of regional frameworks as a foundation for multilateral security sector reform efforts. It welcomed the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union in developing a continental security sector reform policy framework, and encouraged other regions to consider establishing such partnerships in order to better facilitate the exchange of lessons learned and best practices. Women and peace and security On 28 October 2011, the Council held an open debate on women and peace and security. Addressing the meeting, the Secretary-General observed that women had minimal participation in conflict prevention and resolution. He said that, in order to reverse that trend, the United Nations would lead by example, and noted that in the past year the number of women leading United Nations peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding missions had gone up to 6 in 33 missions. The Under-Secretary-General for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and Executive Director of UN-Women, Michelle Bachelet, said in her statement that the United Nations system was working to increase post-conflict spending on women's empowerment and gender equality. She urged Member States to develop national planning instruments to increase the number of women in security, governance and foreign service sectors. In addition, she called for greater investment in women's post-conflict recovery and justice needs and reparations. The President of the Economic and Social Council, Lazarous Kapambwe, called on the United Nations system to develop a more coherent response to end all forms of discrimination and violence against women, with special attention to the linkage between HIV/AIDS and sexual violence. Speaking on behalf of the Non-Governmental Organization Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, Orzala Ashraf Nemat said that urgent steps must be taken to increase women's participation in the prevention of conflict. The Council agreed on a presidential statement (S/PRST/2011/20) that, among other issues, stressed the importance of promoting and protecting the human rights of women in armed conflict and post-conflict situations. It also acknowledged the potentially significant contributions that women can make to conflict prevention and mediation efforts, and encouraged measures to increase the numbers of women involved in such efforts. Post-conflict peacebuilding On 31 October 2011, the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, Judy Cheng-Hopkins, briefed the Security Council on the United Nations post-conflict peacebuilding agenda. She stressed that the agenda had been developed with the understanding that a coordinated, system-wide approach to the issue was required, given the multitude of actors that needed to be involved. She noted that progress had been achieved in galvanizing the United Nations system and Member States around the common goal of improved civilian expertise in peacebuilding operations. The Chair of the Guinea configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, Sylvie Lucas, also briefed the Council. She said that the Commission had adopted an action-oriented road map focused on reinforcing its impact in the field in the six countries on its agenda. Council members stressed that national ownership was key to peacebuilding efforts and called for international support for the United Nations peacebuilding agenda. They said that peacekeeping and peacebuilding should be seen as an integrated effort and stressed that relevant activities should therefore begin as soon as possible. 