%%%SANCTIONS|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) Note verbale dated 20 April 2011 from the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Moldova to the United Nations addressed to the Chair of the Committee The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Moldova to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and, with reference to the note of 4 February 2011, has the honour to transmit a report on measures taken by the Republic of Moldova to implement Security Council resolution 1929 (2010) (see annex). Report by the Republic of Moldova on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1929 (2010) 1. In accordance with the national legislation of the Republic of Moldova, including Law No. 1163 of 26 July 2000 on control of export, re-export, import and transit of strategic goods, the Republic of Moldova participates in the international activities in the field of control of export, re-export, import and transit of strategic goods within the United Nations and other international organizations, including those that deal with ensuring and consolidation of non-proliferation regime of weapons of mass destruction, as well as of other strategic goods used for military purposes. 2. The Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Moldova consistently observes United Nations Security Council resolutions with regard to the procedures of authorization of strategic goods to the Islamic Republic of Iran and it has not registered any exports of weapons or products with double destination towards that country. 3. The Ministry of Transport and Roads Infrastructure of the Republic of Moldova does not have any bilateral agreements signed with the Islamic Republic of Iran in the field of transports. 4. The Border Guard Service of the Republic of Moldova did not register any tentative of crossing or transiting the State border of the Republic of Moldova by the persons listed in the annexes to Security Council resolution 1929 (2010) during the period from 2006 to 2011. 5. In conformity with the procedure of risk management in customs, the Customs Service of the Republic of Moldova decided to establish the selectivity criteria within the Customs Integrated Information System ASYCUDA World, which stipulates that all deliveries performed with the implication of the Islamic Republic of Iran are subject to a detailed documentary and physical control. Similarly, all subdivisions of the Customs Service are informed on the sanctions imposed to the Islamic Republic of Iran through the relevant Security Council resolutions. 