%%%HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS|ARGENTINA|UNITED KINGDOM|FALKLAND ISLANDS (MALVINAS) QUESTION|

Sixty-sixth session Agenda item 45 Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Letter dated 3 August 2012 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith a copy of the letter of protest which the Government of the Argentine Republic has submitted to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in response to the desecration of the monument to the Argentine soldiers who fell in the 1982 conflict, located at the Darwin cemetery, Malvinas Islands (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the General Assembly under agenda item 45, concerning the question of the Malvinas Islands. (Signed) Mateo Estrémé Minister Chargé d'affaires a.i. Annex to the letter dated 3 August 2012 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship is addressing this letter to the Embassy of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in relation to the acts of vandalism recently carried out at the Darwin cemetery, Malvinas Islands. The Argentine Government condemns the desecration of the monument to the memory of the Argentine soldiers who fell during the 1982 conflict and demands immediate clarification of the events from the Government of the United Kingdom, through an impartial investigation identifying and punishing those responsible for this serious offence which violates the sanctity of the site. As you will recall, the monument's construction was among the confidence-building measures included in the joint statement signed by the Argentine Republic and the United Kingdom on 14 July 1999. The intolerance and violence of a few individuals, demonstrated at the Darwin cemetery, is a regrettable consequence of the United Kingdom's failure to respond to the requests for dialogue made on so many occasions by the United Nations. Argentina strongly believes that acts of vandalism such as those which we are condemning today can be avoided and counteracted through dialogue and respect for measures of the United Nations. The Argentine Government therefore reiterates its invitation to the Government of the United Kingdom to come to the negotiating table with the aim of resuming talks to end the sovereignty dispute in the South Atlantic. The Argentine Government reminds the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland of the mandate from the international community reflected in United Nations General Assembly resolutions 2065 (XX), 3160 (XXVIII), 31/49, 37/9, 38/12, 39/6, 40/21, 41/40, 42/19 and 43/25, and in the resolutions of the Special Committee on Decolonization, which recognize the existence of a dispute between Argentina and the United Kingdom concerning sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands, South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas, and invite both parties to resume negotiations with a view to finding a peaceful solution to the dispute as soon as possible. The Argentine Government once again reaffirms its rights of sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands, South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas, which are an integral part of its national territory. The Argentine Republic will inform the International Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations of this letter. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship presents to the Embassy of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland the renewed assurances of its highest consideration. Buenos Aires, 1 August 2012 