%%%INTER-AGENCY COOPERATION|DECISION-MAKING|SUBSIDIARY BODIES|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SPECIAL MISSIONS|GOVERNANCE|ACCOUNTABILITY|VETO|

Sixty-sixth session Agenda item 117 Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit Costa Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland: revised draft resolution Enhancing the accountability, transparency and effectiveness of the Security Council The General Assembly, Reaffirming that the States Members of the United Nations have conferred on the Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, acting on their behalf, as provided for by the Charter of the United Nations, Recalling the provisions relating to the powers and functions of the General Assembly in matters pertaining to the maintenance of international peace and security, in particular Article 11, Article 12, paragraph 1, Article 15, paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter, Recalling its authority under Article 10 of the Charter to discuss any questions or any matters within the scope of the Charter or relating to the powers and functions of any organ of the United Nations and to make recommendations to the Members of the United Nations and to the Security Council thereon, Stressing the special responsibility of the permanent members of the Security Council to uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter and to give their full support to the actions of the Organization aimed at maintaining international peace and security, Acknowledging the significant steps taken by the Security Council to enhance inclusiveness and the representation of the general membership, Noting with appreciation the adoption of the note by the President of the Security Council, and noting the updated information it contains regarding the current working methods of the Council, Noting with appreciation also the adoption of Security Council resolution 1904 (2009) of 17 December 2009, by which the Council created an Office of the Ombudsperson for the Committee established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1267 (1999), Emphasizing the need for further measures to ensure the accountability, transparency, inclusiveness and representativeness of the work of the Security Council, with a view to strengthening its effectiveness and the legitimacy and implementation of its decisions, Noting with appreciation the work carried out by the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the Security Council, Reaffirming its support for early reform of the Security Council as an essential element of the overall effort to reform the United Nations, as stated in the 2005 World Summit Outcome, Reiterating its support for the ongoing intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council reform, Acknowledging that efforts to improve the working methods of the Security Council will help to promote a comprehensive reform of the Security Council, including the increase in its membership, Noting that the measures recommended in the present resolution do not require amendments to the Charter of the United Nations and that they are part of an ongoing and dynamic process, 1. Invites the Security Council to enhance and report on the implementation of the measures contained in the note by its President;1 2. Also invites the Security Council to consider the measures contained in the annex to the present resolution, in order to further enhance the accountability, transparency and inclusiveness of its work, with a view to strengthening its effectiveness and the legitimacy and implementation of its decisions; 3. Further invites the Security Council to report to the General Assembly, by the end of 2012, on action it has taken pursuant to its consideration of the present resolution; 4. Stresses that the present resolution is without prejudice to decisions on comprehensive Security Council reform. Recommendations to the Security Council The following measures are recommended for consideration by the Security Council in order to institutionalize and/or improve current practices: Relationship with the General Assembly and other principal organs 1. Seeking the views of Member States, in an appropriate format, and ensuring that their ability to implement decisions is taken into account in the decision-making process of the Security Council, in particular in the context of the renewal of measures taken by the Council, and without prejudice to the need for timely action. 2. Issuing a standing invitation to the Chairs of the country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission to participate in relevant debates and, in an appropriate format, in informal discussions. In this regard, peacebuilding considerations should be included at all stages of the Council's work, especially in preparing, monitoring and terminating mission mandates. 3. Continuing the practice of making the Security Council's tentative programme of work for the coming month available to Member States as soon as it is available to members of the Council, and holding monthly information briefings for the larger membership by both the incoming and outgoing Presidencies of the Council, to present the new programme and brief Member States on the outcome of the previous one, respectively. 4. Continuing to improve the transparency in the preparation of the annual report by engaging in an informal, interactive discussion on the annual report of the Council both at the time of its drafting and when it is considered by the General Assembly. 5. Making more frequent use of its competence under Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations to submit special subject-oriented and timely reports to the General Assembly for its consideration on issues of relevance to the membership as a whole, including upon request from the latter. Effectiveness of decisions 6. Exploring ways to assess the extent to which its decisions have been implemented effectively, including by establishing a working group on lessons learned in order to analyse reasons for non-implementation or lack of effectiveness and suggest mechanisms aimed at enhancing implementation. Subsidiary bodies 7. Continuing to increase the transparency of the work of its subsidiary bodies, including by improving the quality and frequency of their formal and informal reports, giving substantive interactive briefings to non-members of the Council and making summary records more widely and promptly available. 8. Offering more frequent informal opportunities for Member States to provide substantive input to the work of its subsidiary bodies. 9. Continuing to improve procedures, reflecting standards of due process, regarding requests for delisting from sanctions lists. 10. Involving all Council members in the distribution of chairmanships of subsidiary bodies, with a view to distributing them in a manner that would promote the best possible outcomes of their work. 11. Striving to ensure that the country-specific and thematic lead roles are appropriately distributed among all Council members. Operations mandated and on-site missions carried out by the Security Council 12. Informing Member States more fully about relevant developments regarding the planning, preparation, conduct and termination of operations, special political missions mandated and on-site missions carried out by the Council, including through providing early information on estimated budgetary implications. 13. Continuing to improve the drafting of mandates, including through the articulation of clear goals and purposes, for new operations and special political missions established or authorized by the Council, and reviewing progress on the basis of clear criteria and reporting requirements. 14. Enhancing participation of troop- and police-contributing countries and other States with particular engagement in United Nations operations, so as to allow regular participation, in an appropriate format, in particular in informal discussions with Council members, especially with regard to situations involving heightened risks for the personnel deployed. Governance and accountability 15. Ensuring the consistent implementation of its agreed working methods including by adopting rules of procedure and including an analytical section in its annual report on the implementation of its working methods, in particular on the basis of the note by the President.1 16. Building on and enhancing progress achieved in thematic areas by applying key provisions and concepts of thematic resolutions to country-specific activities, where appropriate. 17. Enhancing the systematic use of all mechanisms available under international law to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes. Appointment of the Secretary-General 18. Contributing to the implementation of the measures regarding the appointment of the Secretary-General contained in General Assembly resolution 51/241 of 31 July 1997, including by taking into account the results of consultations that may be held by the President of the General Assembly. Use of the veto The following measures are recommended for consideration by the permanent members of the Security Council: 19. Explaining the reasons for resorting to a veto or declaring its intention to do so, in particular with regard to its consistency with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and applicable international law. A copy of the explanation should be circulated as a separate Security Council document to all Members of the Organization. 20. Refraining from using a veto to block Council action aimed at preventing or ending genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. 21. Establishing a practice, in appropriate cases, of declaring, when casting a negative vote on a draft resolution before the Council, that such a negative vote shall not constitute a veto in the sense of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter. 