%%%JUDGES|ELECTION OF MEMBERS|

President: Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) In the absence of the President, Mr. Thomson (Fiji), Vice-President, took the Chair. The meeting was called to order at 4.55 p.m. Agenda item 113 (continued) Election to fill vacancies in principal organs (c) Election of five members of the International Court of Justice Memorandum by the Secretary-General (A/66/182) List of candidates (A/66/183) Curricula vitae (A/66/184) The Acting President: As members are aware, one vacancy on the Court remains to be filled. The Assembly will now proceed to vote with respect to the remaining vacancy. Once again, I should like to remind representatives that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of procedure, "After the President has announced the beginning of voting, no representative shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order in connection with the actual conduct of the voting." We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot papers will now be distributed. All the candidates whose names appear on the ballot paper are eligible. May I remind delegations that the name of only one candidate should be marked with a cross. Any ballot paper on which more than one name is marked will be considered invalid. Votes may be cast only for those whose names appear on the ballot papers. At the invitation of the Acting President, Ms. Bonkoungou (Burkina Faso), Ms. Shiolashvili (Georgia), Ms. Mannion (Ireland), Mrs. Azmee (Malaysia), Ms. Martínez (Mexico) and Ms. Kloeg (Netherlands) acted as tellers. A vote was taken by secret ballot. The meeting was suspended at 5 p.m. and resumed at 5.35 p.m. The Acting President: The result of the voting is as follows: Number of ballot papers: 193 Number of invalid ballots: 0 Number of valid ballots: 193 Abstentions: 0 Number of members voting: 193 Required two-thirds majority: 97 Number of votes obtained: Ms. Julia Sebutinde (Uganda) 98 Mr. Abdul G. Koroma (Sierra Leone) 95 Ms. Julia Sebutinde has obtained an absolute majority in the General Assembly. I have communicated the result of the voting to the President of the Security Council. I have received a letter from the President of the Security Council, which reads: "I have the honour to inform you that at the 6654th meeting of the Security Council, held on 10 November 2011, for the purpose of electing five members of the International Court of Justice for a term of office beginning on 6 February 2012, Mr. Abdul G. Koroma obtained an absolute majority of votes." As a result of the voting that has taken place independently in the General Assembly and the Security Council, no candidate has obtained an absolute majority in both bodies. The Assembly will therefore need to proceed to a fifth meeting to fill the remaining vacancy. The 57th plenary meeting will be held immediately to fill that vacancy. The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m. 