%%%DISARMAMENT EDUCATION|FELLOWSHIPS|STUDY TOURS|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|ADVISORY SERVICES|

Sixty-seventh session Item 96 (b) of the preliminary list* Review and implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly: United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services programme Report of the Secretary-General Summary * A/67/50. In 2011 and 2012, 25 fellowships on disarmament were awarded. The programme of studies continues to be structured in three segments. The first segment is held at the United Nations Office at Geneva and introduces the fellows to various aspects of multilateral negotiations on disarmament. It also includes a study visit organized by the Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs. The second segment of the programme comprises study visits to international organizations of relevance in the field of disarmament and to Member States, upon their invitation. Specifically, the fellows visit the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in The Hague. At the invitation of the Governments of China, Germany and Japan, recipients of the fellowship programme participate in country study visits. The third segment of the programme, which takes place at United Nations Headquarters in New York, aims at familiarizing the fellows with the work of the First Committee of the General Assembly and of the Office for Disarmament Affairs. In 2011, the programme lasted from 22 August to 21 October. The programme in 2012 is scheduled to take place from 27 August to 25 October. In an effort to promote gender mainstreaming, the United Nations selected a total of 26 women to participate in the fellowship programme in the biennium 2011-2012, which amounts to 52 per cent of the total awarded fellowships. To date, the programme trained 858 officials from 160 Member States, a large number of whom hold positions of responsibility in the field of disarmament and international security with their own Governments. The Secretary-General is pleased to note the contribution of the programme of fellowships on disarmament towards a greater awareness of the importance of disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. The programme continues to afford an important opportunity to facilitate a better understanding of the work of the Office for Disarmament Affairs and of the other institutions working in the areas of international disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control at the global level, as well as of the security concerns of Member States. In addition, the Secretary-General is gratified to note that the number of women nominated fellows has remained high during the current biennium. The Secretary-General expresses his appreciation to all the Member States and international organizations that have supported the programme throughout the years, thereby contributing to its success. Contents Page Introduction Programme of fellowships on disarmament Fellowships for 2011 and 2012 Programme of studies Conclusion 1. In its resolution 65/82, entitled "United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services", the General Assembly, inter alia, commended the Secretary-General for the diligence with which the programme had continued to be carried out and requested him to continue to implement annually the Geneva-based programme within existing resources and to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. The present report is submitted pursuant to that mandate. II. Programme of fellowships on disarmament A. Fellowships for 2011 and 2012 2. In 2011, 25 fellowships were awarded to the following officials: Belarus Ms. Ekaterina Lozovskaya Cape Verde Ms. Gracinda Marisia da Cruz Fortes Chile Ms. Andrea Quezada Carrasco China Mr. Zhao Li Dominican Republic Ms. Katherine Mercedes Urbaez Martinez Egypt Mr. Mootaz Mansour Estonia Ms. Kristi Torim Germany Mr. Ulrich Kühn Honduras Ms. Tatiana Zelaya Bustamente Hungary Mr. David Elek Horvath Iraq Mr. Anas Abdul Lateef Mohi Al-Neiami Japan Mr. Shinsuke Sakamoto Kazakhstan Ms. Dana Smaganbetova Kenya Mr. Abel David Muniu Njuguna Malaysia Ms. Raja Intan Nor Zareen Mexico Ms. Ifigenia Argueta Sanchez Russian Federation Mr. Gleb Maslov Serbia Mr. Mirko Kuzmanovic South Africa Ms. Kershney Chantelle Naidoo Spain Ms. Teresa Díaz-Morera Ventós Switzerland Ms. Seraina Caduff Togo Mr. Dable Botre United Republic of Tanzania Ms. Ramla Khamis United States of America Ms. Andreea Paulopol Uzbekistan Mr. Berdibek Alibekov 3. In 2012, 25 fellowships were awarded to the following officials: Algeria Mr. Mohamed Lamine Siari Australia Ms. Heather Louise Bruce Chai Brazil Ms. Larissa Schneider Calza Mr. Fernando Guzman Muñoz Mr. Zhang Xiaohong Colombia Ms. Maria Andrea Torres Moreno Cuba Ms. Lilianne Sanchez Rodriquez Ethiopia Mr. Dilafera Bekele Bedane Guinea Mr. Tamba Tolno India Mr. Manjunath Denkanikotta Chenneerappa Indonesia Mr. Akbar Nugraha Italy Mr. Stefano Borgiani Mr. Ryohei Kanamaru Jordan Ms. Nour Mamdouh Aljazi Liberia Ms. Shanda Anne-Louise Cooper Lithuania Ms. Dalia Vitkauskaite-Meurice Nepal Ms. Mudita Bajracharya Niger Mr. Oumar Ibrahim Sidi Peru Mr. Carlos Garcia Castillo Poland Mr. Tomasz Tokarski Republic of Moldova Mr. Iurie Tabuncic Sweden Ms. Cecilia Anna Desirée Anderberg Ms. Rita Gruenenfelder Thailand Ms. Pakprapai Thontiravong Zimbabwe Ms. Tendisai Chigwedere 4. Over the years, the efforts by the United Nations to promote gender mainstreaming resulted in an increase in the number of women who were recipients of the fellowship. During the biennium 2011-2012, in particular, a total of 26 fellowships of the 50 fellowships were granted to women. B. Programme of studies 5. The United Nations programme of fellowships on disarmament is implemented by the Office for Disarmament Affairs. In 2011, the programme lasted from 22 August to 21 October. In 2012, the programme is scheduled to take place from 27 August to 25 October. The programme of studies is structured in three segments: (a) activities at the United Nations Office at Geneva; (b) study visits to intergovernmental organizations of relevance in the field of disarmament and to Member States, upon invitation; and (c) activities at United Nations Headquarters in New York. The activities of the 2011 programme are summarized below. The 2012 programme will generally follow the 2011 syllabus with updates to reflect the recent developments in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation. First segment 6. The first segment of the programme takes place at the United Nations Office at Geneva and exposes the fellows to various aspects of multilateral work on disarmament, including potential negotiations, through the work of the Conference on Disarmament and of some Geneva-based research institutions dealing with disarmament, non proliferation and arms control. The fellows attend the plenary meetings of the Conference on Disarmament and receive briefings on its history, achievements and methods of work. In 2011, the fellows were given lectures by the Director and staff of the Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian Demining, the Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), and by the staff of the Geneva branch of the Office for Disarmament Affairs. Such lectures covered the implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines, the work of UNIDIR, the Convention on Cluster Munitions and its victim assistance provisions, the role of non-governmental organizations in the multilateral disarmament process, the Conference on Disarmament, the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Security Council, the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, and the Biological (Toxin) Weapons Convention. A similar programme is being developed for 2012. In addition, in 2011, the fellows attended a seminar on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty which was jointly organized by UNIDIR, the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) and the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Hungary to the United Nations Office at Geneva. 7. In addition to the above, the fellows participated in 2011 in a one-day visit to Bern, organized by the Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland, during which they were briefed on Swiss foreign and security policies, with a focus on nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation, cluster munitions and related issues of international humanitarian law, as well as on the Geneva Declaration of Armed Violence and Development. A similar visit is scheduled during the 2012 programme. 8. While in Geneva, the fellows are also required to conduct research and to write the first draft of a paper on a topic of their choice relating to disarmament, nonproliferation and international security. Second segment 9. The second segment of the programme comprises study visits to three intergovernmental organizations: the CTBTO Preparatory Commission, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in The Hague. This second segment of the programme also includes study visits to Member States, upon their invitation. 10. During the visit to the CTBTO Preparatory Commission, the fellows participate in the Preparatory Commission's Capacity Development Initiative, a programme designed to inform and educate future generations of policy, legal and technical experts. 11. The study visit to IAEA comprises briefings on the Agency's safeguards system, the security of nuclear materials and radioactive sources and the IAEA illicit trafficking database. A visit to the Laboratory in the Department of Safeguards is also included. 12. At OPCW, the fellows are briefed on the work of the organization, its contributions to disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, as well as the origins and status of implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, its verification procedures, its implementation at the national level as well as on issues of international cooperation and assistance. 13. In 2011, the Governments of China, Germany and Japan continued the established practice of inviting participants in the fellowship programme to visit national institutions and to attend lectures given by their government officials. These country visits provide the fellows with an invaluable opportunity to become acquainted with the respective national foreign policies in the areas of international security through lectures, meetings with government officials and scholars and visits to existing relevant facilities. In 2012, the Governments of China, Germany and Japan have extended similar invitations. 14. The study visit to Germany in 2011 included briefings by representatives of the Federal Foreign Office and non-governmental organizations. The fellows also visited Nammo Buck GmbH in Pinnow, a plant used for the demilitarization of ammunition, projectiles, rockets, mines, grenades, fuses and pyrotechnical material. During the visit, the fellows were briefed on environmentally friendly recycling and disposal processes for conventional ammunition and explosive products. The study visit to Germany in 2012 will include similar activities. 15. The Government of Japan and the administrations of the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki continued to organize invaluable activities for the recipients of the disarmament fellowship in 2011. In Tokyo, the fellows were briefed by officers of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In Hiroshima, the fellows visited the Peace Memorial Museum, the Atomic Bomb Dome, and the National Peace Memorial Hall for the Atomic Bomb Victims. They were also briefed by the Mayor of Hiroshima and had the opportunity to listen to the testimony of a survivor of the atomic bombing. In Nagasaki, the fellows visited the Atomic Bomb Hypocentre and Museum, the Peace Memorial Hall and the Hill of Grace, in addition to meeting with survivors of the atomic bombings as well as scholars. The study visit to Japan in 2012 will include similar activities. 16. The study visit to China in 2011 included briefings by officers of the Department of Arms Control and Disarmament of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and by representatives of the China Arms Control and Disarmament Association, which coordinates academic and non-governmental research and activities regarding arms control and disarmament. The fellows also visited the China Institute of Atomic Energy. The study visit to China in 2012 will include similar activities. Third segment 17. The third segment of the programme is held at United Nations Headquarters in New York and is intended to familiarize the fellows with the mandate and activities of the Office for Disarmament Affairs and with the work of the First Committee of the General Assembly. This segment of the programme includes a series of lectures by senior staff of the Office for Disarmament Affairs, including the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, on the structure and responsibilities of the Office, as well as briefings by the Chairman of the First Committee and by members of delegations on items on the agenda of the Committee. The fellows regularly attend meetings of the First Committee of the General Assembly, and panel discussions organized by the Office for Disarmament Affairs and the NGO Committee on Disarmament, Peace and Security. 18. In addition, while in New York, the fellows participate in discussions moderated by the coordinator of the fellowship programme on selected disarmament topics, and take part in a practical exercise on preparing, submitting and taking action on draft resolutions for the First Committee of the General Assembly. The exercise includes a discussion of the drafts prepared by the fellows, the introduction of amendments and the process of taking action on draft resolutions. During this segment, the fellows are asked to finalize their research papers and to make short presentations on their main views. 19. At the end of the programme the fellows are awarded a certificate of participation by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs. III. Conclusion 20. Launched in 1979 as a follow-up to a decision of the General Assembly taken at its tenth special session, in 1978, the United Nations Programme of Fellowships on Disarmament is aimed at promoting expertise in disarmament in Member States, particularly in developing countries. During its 33 years of operation, the programme has trained 858 officials from 160 States. Many alumni hold positions of responsibility in the field of disarmament within their own Governments and their permanent missions to the United Nations. The large number of nominations for the programme received every year by the Office for Disarmament Affairs and the broad support for the biennial resolution on the United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and advisory services is a testimony of the undiminished interest of Governments in the programme. At the same time, the role of the programme in enhancing the capabilities of young diplomats for participation in arms control and disarmament deliberations and negotiations is recognized and appreciated by Member States. 21. The Secretary-General is pleased to note the contribution of the United Nations Programme of Fellowships on Disarmament towards a greater awareness of the importance of disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control. The programme continues to play a decisive role to facilitate a better understanding of the work of the Office for Disarmament Affairs and of the other institutions working in the areas of international disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control at the global level, as well as of the security concerns of Member States. In addition, the SecretaryGeneral is gratified to note that the number of women nominated has remained high during the current biennium. 22. The Secretary-General expresses his gratitude to all Member States and organizations that have supported the programme throughout the years, thereby contributing to its success. The Secretary-General extends his particular appreciation to the Governments of China, Germany, Japan and Switzerland for the continuation of their support to the programme. The Secretary-General also extends his grateful recognition to IAEA, OPCW and the CTBTO Preparatory Commission for their support to the programme. 