%%%HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|EMERGENCY RELIEF|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES|RECOMMENDATIONS|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|

Sixty-seventh session * A/67/150. Item 71 (a) of the provisional agenda* Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations, including special economic assistance: strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations Central Emergency Response Fund Report of the Secretary-General Summary During the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, the Emergency Relief Coordinator allocated $537.9 million from the Central Emergency Response Fund to implement life-saving activities in 50 countries and territories. Thirteen humanitarian agencies received funds directly from the Fund to address emergency needs. For only the second time in its history, the Fund received more than $459 million in contributions during the reporting period, and it exceeded the $450 million target set by the General Assembly. Following an independent five-year evaluation, the secretariat of the Fund developed and has been implementing a management response plan. The secretariat of the Fund has made significant progress in implementing the plan, which is based on the recommendations contained in the five-year evaluation, and it will continue focusing on achieving those goals. 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 66/119, in which the Assembly requested that the Secretary-General submit to it at its sixty-seventh session a report on the detailed use of the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF). The report covers activities from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. II. Overview of the Central Emergency Response Fund A. Funding commitments 2. During the reporting period, the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator approved grants totalling $537.9 million, which was a 57 per cent increase over the previous reporting period. The increase is due to more requests for rapid response allocations, including significant allocations to the Horn of Africa during the second half of 2011 and to the Sahel starting in November 2011. Of the $537.9 million, nearly 36 per cent was divided between the Horn of Africa and the Sahel. In addition, $103.5 million was allocated during the first round of the underfunded emergencies window for 2012 (see para. 11), allowing humanitarian partners to plan their 2012 activities strategically in 13 underfunded or forgotten crises. 3. The Fund allocated grants to programmes, funds and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, as well as to the International Organization for Migration (IOM). Grants disbursed during the period included $374.8 million from the Fund's rapid response window and $163.1 million from the underfunded emergencies window (see table 1). The Fund's allocations since 2006 have now exceeded $2.5 billion to 84 countries and one territory. Table 1 Central Emergency Response Fund allocations from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 Rapid response window Underfunded emergencies window Total Amount approved Number of recipient countries/ territories Number of projects fundeda Average project amount a Certain countries/territories received allocations from both CERF windows and have not been counted twice under "Total". 4. Humanitarian operations responding to conflict-related emergencies and internal strife, including refugee crises and internally displaced persons, received $244.3 million (more than 45 per cent of the total CERF funding) (see figure I). Of that amount, agencies in Africa were the biggest recipients, with $130.7 million. Asia followed with $59.4 million and the Middle East with $51.3 million. During the reporting period, CERF allocated $3 million to Latin America and the Caribbean. 5. Disaster-related emergencies received $293.5 million from the Fund's rapid response and underfunded windows. Climate-related emergencies, such as drought and floods, accounted for almost 45 per cent of total CERF funding. More than $153 million was allocated to drought emergencies, while $58.8 million was allocated to flood and storm emergencies and the earthquake in Turkey. Figure I Central Emergency Response Fund allocations by type of emergency and window from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 Abbreviation: IDPs -- internally displaced persons. 6. Geographically, CERF allocations focused primarily on Africa. From 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, it received more than two thirds, or $351.1 million, of the Fund's total funding for natural disaster-related and conflict-related emergencies. Asia followed with $107 million, of which almost half was for conflict-related emergencies, and the Middle East with $59.7 million that was primarily for conflict-related emergencies. Latin America and the Caribbean received nearly $20 million, mostly for natural disaster-related emergencies. 7. CERF provided the highest percentage of funding to emergency food interventions (24 per cent as compared with 27 per cent during the previous reporting period). The slight reduction was due to an increased share of allocations to health and nutrition, the multisector category, and water and sanitation. The health sector received 14.4 per cent as compared with 17 per cent during the previous reporting period. The health and nutrition sector received 13.5 per cent as compared with 10 per cent during the previous reporting period, followed by the multisector category (11.9 per cent as compared with 7 per cent), and water and sanitation (10.6 per cent as compared with 9 per cent). (See figure II.) 8. During the period, thirteen agencies received support from the Fund. The World Food Programme (WFP) received $160.2 million, or 29.8 per cent of CERF total funding (it received 33 per cent in the previous period). The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) received $141.2 million, or 26.2 per cent (it received 23 per cent in the previous period). The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) received $68.7 million, or 12.8 per cent (see figure III). 9. CERF has become one of the largest humanitarian funding sources for UNICEF, representing 11 per cent of its income for humanitarian assistance. The Central Emergency Response Fund's importance to UNHCR is also steadily increasing: in 2011, CERF ranked as its eleventh largest income source. CERF is the main humanitarian donor to the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO received 9.8 per cent of the Fund's total funding, which accounted for 41.6 per cent of WHO overall humanitarian funding for its country operations in 2011. CERF was the third largest contributor to the emergency operations of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, while CERF funding constituted 25 per cent of the United Nations Population Fund's (UNFPA) total humanitarian funding in 2011. CERF continues to be one of the primary humanitarian funding sources for UNFPA. Last year, the International Organization for Migration exceeded the cumulative $100 million mark of CERF funding with an approximate 30 per cent increase in funding, and activities in 2011, as compared with 2010. CERF ranks eighth among IOM contributors. Abbreviations: World Food Programme (WFP); United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF); Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); World Health Organization (WHO); Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO); International Organization for Migration (IOM); and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). * The category "Others" includes the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the United Nations Office for Project Services, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). 10. The Fund's underfunded emergencies window continued to facilitate responses to chronic crises. CERF provided $163.1 million through the first and second rounds of underfunded emergencies allocations and throughout the reporting period. CERF supported agencies in 19 countries through the underfunded window (see table 2). During the second underfunded emergencies round of 2011, CERF allocated $59.5 million to 10 countries to support 73 projects for nine agencies. 11. In 2012, the CERF secretariat prioritized the first underfunded round to provide additional funding early in the year to help resident coordinators and humanitarian coordinators and agencies to use the allocations strategically to plan their 2012 humanitarian activities, and to mobilize early contributions from other donors. Consequently, CERF allocated $103.5 million during the first round of 2012 to 13 countries to support 114 projects from 11 agencies (see para. 2). (United States dollars) Country or area Second round First round Central African Republic Chad Colombia Congo Côte d'Ivoire Democratic People's Republic of Korea Djibouti Eritrea Ethiopia Haiti Myanmar Nepal Niger Pakistan Philippines South Sudan Sri Lanka Syrian Arab Republic Zimbabwe 12. On the basis of the recommendation of the Central Emergency Response Fund Advisory Group and the findings of the five-year evaluation, the General Assembly adopted resolution 66/119, in which it decided to reduce the size of the loan element to $30 million. As at the end of 2011, $46.4 million had been transferred from the loan element to the grant element. The Fund holds $30 million in reserve in the loan account to provide financial support to agencies as they wait for donor pledges to be disbursed. Recipients must repay loans within one year. The Fund's loan mechanism held a balance of $30 million as at 30 June 2012. 13. CERF made two loans during the reporting period. In August 2011, it disbursed $5 million to UNICEF to respond to severe acute malnutrition in Somalia. In November, UNICEF repaid the loan in full. CERF made a second loan of $1.5 million to the United Nations Office for Project Services for mine action projects in Libya in October 2011. The CERF secretariat is in contact with the Office regarding repayment of the loan. In September 2012, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in the Sudan settled the outstanding balance of $1,016,036 on a loan made in August 2007 to that agency. B. Key results based on objectives 14. The General Assembly, in its resolution 60/124, established the Central Emergency Response Fund and specified its three main objectives: promoting early action and response to reduce loss of life, enhancing response to time-critical requirements and strengthening core elements of humanitarian response in underfunded crises. 1. Promoting early action and response 15. CERF uses the rapid response window to promote early action and response. Funds help support life-saving, humanitarian activities in the initial stages of a sudden-onset crisis. Funds may also help to respond to time-critical requirements or a significant deterioration in an existing emergency. During the reporting period, several CERF-supported countries benefited from CERF's promotion of early action and response. 16. CERF supported the response to the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic by allocating nearly $16.8 million in rapid response funds. CERF was important in helping agencies to provide a comprehensive response and assist more than 1.5 million people. UNDP financed two local non-governmental organizations and supported a third NGO with in-kind assistance to access some of the most adversely affected and displaced persons. Support from CERF enabled WFP to distribute food commodities in sufficient quantity and quality to women, men, girls and boys while operating in insecure conditions. The CERF grant allowed WFP to procure 685 metric tons of assorted food commodities (rice, canned meat, sugar and salt). With the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, WFP distributed 155 metric tons of CERFfunded commodities to 20,000 people. FAO used CERF funds to provide farmers with barley seeds and herders with animal feed. Hundreds of women-headed households received chickens and poultry feed. WHO used CERF funds to provide emergency health kits and life-saving drugs to the Ministry of Health's national emergency stores. WHO also worked closely with national health non-governmental organizations to ensure affected people had continuous access to emergency health-care services. In addition, WHO provided emergency preparedness training for 240 health professionals working in emergency departments. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) used CERF funds to equip its health centres with generators, water tanks and additional fuel so that vital services could continue. UNHCR distributed essential relief items and medicines to internally displaced persons in Damascus and surrounding suburbs, focusing on children, the elderly and other people with specific needs. In neighbouring countries, CERF funds helped UNHCR provide temporary protection and emergency shelter to 13,000 Syrian refugees in Turkey, 6,000 in Jordan and 25,000 in Lebanon. 17. During the present reporting period, over 200,000 refugees fled Mali for neighbouring countries owing to conflict in the northern part of the country. At the same time, over 158,000 people were internally displaced within Mali. Those population movements have placed enormous pressure on the Sahel region, which was already battling a severe food crisis. CERF responded by providing $22 million in rapid response grants in the first half of 2012 to humanitarian partners in Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania and Niger to help Malian refugees and internally displaced persons. Funds supported the humanitarian work of 10 agencies through 43 projects. 18. In Burkina Faso, CERF allocated close to $4 million to six United Nations agencies to deliver time-critical, basic emergency support to 25,000 refugees and 10,000 members of host communities. UNHCR used CERF funds to build a refugee camp and to provide multisectoral assistance, including shelter, water and sanitation facilities and non-food items. UNICEF ensured nutrition assistance by providing 9,000 children age 6 to 59 months with vitamin A supplements; 8,000 children age 12 to 59 months with de-worming treatment; 9,000 children age 6 to 59 months with high-energy biscuits; and 10,000 children age 0 to 59 months with screening for acute malnutrition. In Mauritania, eight United Nations agencies worked together to help 34,000 refugees after CERF allocated $5.5 million. The agencies included UNICEF, WFP, FAO, UNHCR, UNFPA, UNAIDS, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and WHO. In Niger, a CERF contribution of $4.9 million allowed UNHCR, UNICEF, WFP and WHO to provide life-saving assistance to 40,000 refugees who were also affected by the country's deteriorating food-insecurity situation. UNHCR used CERF funds to prepare a campsite and procure tents and other relief items for some 30,000 refugees who had arrived in Niger by mid-April 2012. 19. In Mali, CERF allocated $7.9 million to eight agencies to support 200,000 vulnerable internally displaced persons. UNHCR worked with IOM to deliver an integrated multisector response. CERF also funded a joint project between UNICEF, UNFPA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to mitigate and document gender-based violence cases, and to provide psychosocial support to 75,000 conflict-affected people, with special attention to vulnerable women and children. With CERF funding, FAO eased the food insecurity of 21,000 displaced people and their host families through an agricultural-input market approach. WFP used CERF funds to assist 79,450 internally displaced persons, including 37,000 children under age 5, through targeted food assistance and blanket supplementary feeding of children under age 2. WFP also organized critical common humanitarian services in air transportation and logistics to facilitate humanitarian workers' activities. Those measures helped to overcome delays and enhanced coordination of the emergency response, which had been limited owing to road insecurity and poor infrastructure in the country's remote areas. 20. In Ethiopia, a $4.6 million grant facilitated UNHCR protection of 30,000 new refugee arrivals in the Dollo Ado region. They received hot meals at the reception centre and core relief items once they had been registered in the camps. 2. Enhancing responses to time-critical requirements 21. In the Sahel, food insecurity and malnutrition presented CERF and the international humanitarian community with one of the biggest sets of challenges during the reporting period. On the basis of lessons learned from the Horn of Africa crisis in 2011, the CERF secretariat proactively contacted the region's United Nations humanitarian country teams beginning in November 2011 to tackle food insecurity and nutrition needs and prevent disease outbreaks. As a result, CERF allocated more than $89.2 million to countries in the region to address those requirements. CERF funding was also essential in ensuring the humanitarian responses for the region, which included Niger ($26.9 million), Burkina Faso (nearly $15 million), Mali ($11.2 million), Mauritania (nearly $9.5 million), Chad (more than $8.2 million), Senegal ($6.9 million), Cameroon ($6.8 million) and the Gambia ($4.8 million). 22. In Niger, CERF allocated $26.9 million to address food insecurity and the nutrition needs of an estimated 2 million people suffering from chronic food insecurity. The Fund's response enabled WFP to scale up its food-for-work and cash-for-work activities for an estimated 216,391 people. It also helped to create and restore community assets and improve the food consumption and food supplements of adversely affected people. CERF funds enabled FAO to assist 500,000 people through the distribution of goats, vaccines and de-worming drugs. UNICEF used CERF funds to procure ready-to-use therapeutic food and distribute it to more than 42,000 children under age 5 suffering from severe acute malnutrition. WHO used CERF funds to save the lives of the most vulnerable, especially children under age 5, by providing medicine and rapid diagnostic tests to manage and confirm outbreaks of such diseases as malaria, cholera and measles. 23. Owing to insufficient rainfall in Burkina Faso, agricultural output decreased significantly during the 2011 and 2012 agricultural seasons. More than 50 per cent of rural communities in Burkina Faso were at risk of food insecurity, affecting more than 2.8 million people. UNICEF used a CERF allocation of more than $1.6 million to purchase therapeutic food and essential drugs to treat 25,000 children under age 5 with severe acute malnutrition. UNICEF designed its support to help strengthen local capacities by providing treatment through the national health system and existing community health resources. More than $3.7 million in CERF funding enabled WFP to begin expanding the coverage of its activities. WFP will provide treatment for 70,500 moderately malnourished children under age 5 and monthly food distributions for 75,000 people. 24. Floods and drought have caused a high degree of crop failure in parts of Cameroon, leaving an estimated 5.5 million people with limited or no food for the lean season. WHO used nearly $2.8 million in CERF funding to help improve the management of malnutrition-related and associated conditions among children under age 5 and pregnant and nursing women. CERF funds enabled UNICEF to operate emergency nutrition responses to improve the nutrition status and reduce the risks of related diseases for children under age 5, and for pregnant and lactating women in affected regions. Through a CERF-supported intervention, FAO assisted cereal farmer households with seed distribution, and also provided sheep and goat producers with bags of cotton-seed cakes and vaccines for lambs and goats. 25. In Chad, approximately $3 million of CERF funds helped WFP to provide food and non-food items for supplementary feeding centres to treat 75,000 children age 6 to 59 months suffering from moderate acute malnutrition. Funding was also used to procure rations for 38,350 Sudanese refugees in camps in eastern Chad. 3. Strengthening core elements of humanitarian response in underfunded crises 26. The Fund's underfunded emergency window facilitates responses to chronic or ongoing emergencies receiving inadequate funding. In accordance with the Secretary-General's bulletin (ST/SGB/2010/5, para. 4.3), one third of the Fund's grant facility is annually assigned to underfunded emergencies. The present reporting period covers allocations made from the second underfunded round of 2011 and the first underfunded round of 2012. 27. The United Nations country team in South Sudan was the largest recipient of underfunded emergency funding: it received a total of nearly $31.5 million from both rounds. The humanitarian crisis in South Sudan was exacerbated by the high influx of refugees, growing numbers of internally displaced persons, and increased operational costs resulting from the reduction of humanitarian access and space, as well as shortages of basic commodities on the local market. CERF funding was essential in helping agencies to meet the increasing needs of people returning to South Sudan. Returnees' priority needs were shelter, non-food items, food security, land access, tools for agriculture and improved income-generating opportunities. A CERF grant to UNHCR enabled support to 65,000 returnees and host communities. CERF-supported activities included the construction of nearly 3,400 shelters for the most vulnerable households and the provision of basic relief items and services, including the implementation of quick-impact projects across five states. The Fund's support also facilitated the provision of additional water supply sources and transit services to way stations for returnees from South Sudan. IOM received funds to provide emergency non-food items and shelter materials to internally displaced persons, returnees and host community members. IOM and its implementing partners used CERF funding to construct three way stations. They also provided transportation assistance for approximately 10,000 returnees, emergency shelter support and non-food items, and they tracked displacement throughout the repatriation process. UNICEF used CERF funds to provide nutrition, health and protection for hundreds of thousands of children and pregnant and nursing women. UNICEF also implemented a water, sanitation and hygiene project designed to fill existing gaps in meeting the humanitarian needs of 400,000 people, including returnees at transit points and final destinations. C. Central Emergency Response Fund administration and management 28. As envisioned by the Secretary-General, in his report on improvement of the Central Emergency Revolving Fund (A/60/432), and as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 60/124, the CERF Advisory Group was established to provide expert guidance and advice to the Emergency Relief Coordinator on the Fund's use and impact. The Advisory Group also makes recommendations on replenishment of the Fund. 29. During the reporting period, the Advisory Group met in New York in October 2011 and in Geneva in May 2012. At the May meeting, members expressed their appreciation for the Fund's use during the previous period, especially in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel, and the continued professional management of the Fund. The group also acknowledged that the CERF secretariat was on course with implementing activities in the management response plan related to the five-year evaluation (see section V). The next meeting will be in Geneva on 30 and 31 October 2012. 30. The performance and accountability framework for CERF provides the formal structure for defining, managing and monitoring performance and accountability processes related to the Fund's operation. Developed in 2010, the framework includes a logic model based on the Fund's three main objectives, and also includes indicators to measure the Fund's performance. Among other things, the framework calls for three to five independent country-level reviews per year of the Fund's added value. In 2011, the CERF secretariat commissioned studies for the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Colombia, Ethiopia and Zimbabwe by independent humanitarian experts. The studies found that the timely provision of CERF funding had made an important contribution to the humanitarian response in the four countries. For example, the review of the Plurinational State of Bolivia noted that CERF was a highly important funding source for agencies and the Government, and it filled various gaps for numerous interventions for flood-affected people in 2010. Similarly, funding provided to Ethiopia through the underfunded emergencies window added value for recipient agencies by filling funding gaps, providing funding early in the year and complementing the country-level humanitarian response fund. CERF funding also enabled agencies to leverage funding from other donors, as it supports response capacity and is a straightforward funding mechanism that focuses on addressing gaps in meeting needs. 31. The CERF Advisory Group discussed the findings from the four country reviews at its meeting in November 2011. In 2012, the CERF secretariat commissioned independent, country-level reviews of the Fund's added value to humanitarian operations in the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia, Djibouti, Kenya and Somalia) and Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia and the Philippines. Fieldwork for the reviews started in May, and CERF expects the final reports by the third quarter of 2012. 32. In May 2012, the CERF secretariat reviewed its performance over the previous year, as measured against the performance and accountability framework indicators. Overall, CERF performed well in reference to the indicators. Areas identified for continued improvement or clarification included the quality of narrative reporting to CERF; consistency in levels of monitoring and evaluation of CERF-funded activities at the country level; and the Fund's dependency on country-level structures. It resulted in various partners' involvement in the CERF prioritization processes, and timely sub-granting arrangements between CERF recipient agencies and their implementing partners. 33. Starting in the third quarter of 2012, the CERF secretariat will conduct a formal review under the framework with the help of an independent humanitarian consultant. The outcome will be shared with the CERF Advisory Group and then made public. 34. Following concerns raised by the five-year evaluation and recommendations made by the CERF Advisory Group in October 2011, the CERF secretariat took steps to improve the quality and timeliness of reports from resident coordinators and humanitarian coordinators. Those measures included strengthened communications and follow-up with the field, an improved reporting template and a streamlined reviewing and editing process. Reports received during the reporting period showed a significant improvement in quality, from both programmatic and editorial perspectives, and in timeliness over the previous reporting period. The reports are critical for ensuring that CERF is accountable and transparent to donors, beneficiaries and other stakeholders. 35. During the reporting period, 44 per cent of final reports were received by the deadline, and 100 per cent were received within one month of the deadline. This was in contrast to the previous reporting period when 33 per cent of reports were received by the deadline, 52 per cent within 30 days, and the remaining 15 per cent up to three months later. All 45 reports of the resident coordinators and humanitarian coordinators were posted on the CERF website by the end of June 2012. In 2011, the first report was posted in June and the last in August. The quality of the final 2012 narrative reports improved remarkably during the current reporting period as compared with the previous period. The reports provided comprehensive information on the Fund's effectiveness, such as fast delivery of resources to beneficiaries, meeting time-critical needs, improving the humanitarian community's coordination and the forward disbursement of CERF funds to implementing partners. Most reports were well written and required minimal editorial changes. Reports are available from the redesigned CERF website (http://cerf.un.org). III. Funding levels 36. In 2011, more than $459 million was raised for CERF in pledged contributions, marking only the second time in the Fund's history that the $450 million annual target set by the General Assembly has been surpassed. During the CERF high-level pledging conference in November 2011, 45 Member States, observers and the regional Government of Flanders pledged $375 million to CERF for 2012, an increase of $16 million over pledges for 2011. The amount reflected donor funding increases from 17 Member States and included pledges from two new donors, Niger and Uruguay. CERF now has received support from 126 of the 193 Member States and observers since inception, as well as from private donors and the public. One third of the Fund's contributors have also received support from the Fund. As at 30 June 2012, CERF had received pledged contributions for 2012 totalling $399.3 million. IV. Management response to the five-year evaluation 37. In 2011, the independent five-year evaluation mandated by General Assembly resolution 63/139 provided Member States with a comprehensive overview of the Central Emergency Response Fund's activities from 2006 to 2011. The evaluation included the Fund's ability to meet its objectives, its administration, the needs-assessment process and the allocation criteria. It highlighted the Fund's strengths and weaknesses, and it provided 19 recommendations at the policy and operational levels to improve the Fund's effectiveness. The CERF secretariat developed a management response plan to follow up on the evaluation's recommendations. The plan was prepared in consultation with stakeholders inside and outside of the United Nations Secretariat, and it was then approved by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. V. Update on the management response plan 38. Before each meeting of the CERF Advisory Group, the CERF secretariat updates the management response plan to reflect the implementation status of follow-up actions and shares it with the Advisory Group. The most recent version of the plan is available from the CERF website (http://cerf.un.org). A. Recommendations to the Emergency Relief Coordinator 39. Recommendation 1. Where emergency response fund and/or common humanitarian fund pooled fund systems operate, integrate Central Emergency Response Fund planning, implementation and monitoring processes based on existing good-practice examples. The recommendation was accepted. The CERF secretariat will continue to review and provide inputs into corporate guidance on the emergency response fund and common humanitarian fund mechanisms. During the reporting period, new CERF guidelines were published, highlighting the use of country-level systems and structures. The annual resident coordinator/humanitarian coordinator country reports were successfully revised to capture how CERF processes were coordinated with country-level systems. Performance and accountability framework country reviews for 2012 were specifically designed to address the Fund's complementarity with other pooled funds. 40. Recommendation 2. Provide the resident coordinators and humanitarian coordinators with a formal mandate to monitor the implementation of all United Nations-managed pooled funds (including the Central Emergency Response Fund) by recipient agencies. The recommendation was partially accepted. In its initial response, the CERF secretariat noted that it interpreted the recommendation as highlighting the need for increased support to resident coordinators/humanitarian coordinators in exercising their monitoring function. Therefore, the CERF secretariat considered recommendation No. 8 as the main recommendation in reference to country-level monitoring of CERF-funded activities. The response to recommendation No. 2 is covered under recommendation No. 8 (see para. 46). 41. Recommendation 3. Develop a process for underfunded emergency envelopes that promotes more effective and efficient use of Central Response Fund funds. The recommendation was accepted. Independent humanitarian consultants are reviewing the underfunded emergencies window. The CERF secretariat expects the process to be completed by the third quarter of 2012. 42. Recommendation 4. Make membership of the Advisory Group of the Central Emergency Response Fund more representative of the humanitarian sector, including through appropriate representation of advisers with operational backgrounds in CERF recipient countries. The recommendation was accepted. The Fund continues to place great importance on ensuring diversity of the Advisory Group. An internal review of the selection process was conducted and the Emergency Relief Coordinator endorsed the results. The note verbale soliciting nominations for membership was accordingly revised, and placed special emphasis on gender and geographic diversity. A call for new nominations was made in June 2012. 43. Recommendation 5. Strengthen the funding base by promoting CERF to existing and potential new donors as an efficient, effective and accountable humanitarian funding mechanism. The recommendation was accepted. The Fund's membership has grown to 126 Member States and observers, regional Governments and the private sector. The CERF secretariat recognizes the importance of ensuring an expanded, more diverse donor base, and it has set about revising its resource mobilization strategy. A draft of the strategy will be shared with the CERF Advisory Group at its next meeting in October. The strategy will focus on four pillars: strengthening traditional Government partnerships, building and nurturing new relationships, targeting public messaging and integrating the internal strategy. 44. Recommendation 6. In the screening process for submissions relating to chronic emergencies, request information on how short-term funding provided by the Fund would support longer-term vulnerability-reduction programmes, which are usually government-led. The recommendation was partially accepted. The Fund will select funding applications and annual reports from a group of countries to assess whether their submissions demonstrate links with longer-term recovery and vulnerability-reduction efforts. On the basis of the findings, the CERF secretariat will determine, during the fourth quarter of 2012, whether the CERF application and reporting formats will be revised to facilitate a more systematic collection and analysis of that information. B. Recommendations to the Central Emergency Response Fund secretariat 45. Recommendation 7. Develop prioritization process guidance for United Nations resident coordinators and humanitarian coordinators and cluster coordinators. The recommendation was accepted. The CERF secretariat is preparing guidance that outlines the process for stakeholders involved in prioritizing country-level activities. The guidance will be based on a document review and consultations, as well as on the identification of case studies and good practices. It is expected to be completed by the end of 2012. The CERF secretariat is also establishing a humanitarian financing community of practice as an additional resource for field staff. 46. Recommendation 8. Strengthen Central Emergency Response Fund monitoring and learning systems at the country level to improve the Fund's impact. The recommendation was partially accepted. The CERF secretariat fully agreed with the importance of accountability and the need for monitoring and learning systems that help to maximize the Fund's impact. The template for the annual narrative reports on the use of CERF funds by the resident coordinator and humanitarian coordinator and the accompanying guidelines were revised to provide more useful and accurate feedback on results achieved. During the second half of 2012, the CERF secretariat will systematically promote country-level after-action reviews for CERF grants to enhance common learning among field-level partners and improve the quality of annual narrative reporting. The CERF secretariat has been involved in developing the new monitoring framework for common humanitarian funds that was finalized during the first quarter of 2012. The roll-out of the framework should help to strengthen monitoring of CERF-funded activities in countries with such funds. The piloting of emergency-wide monitoring systems under the Inter-Agency Standing Committee transformative agenda should also strengthen monitoring information available for CERF-funded activities in larger emergencies. To maximize benefits, CERF is exploring how best to harmonize its submission format with system-wide monitoring structures and indicators. 47. Recommendation 9. Commission, within one year, a study of the partnership arrangements of the different United Nations agencies with nongovernmental organization implementing partners. The recommendation was partially accepted. The CERF secretariat discussed the possibility of a study of partnership arrangements with CERF recipient agencies, but support was limited as a number of agencies have already taken steps to improve their partnership arrangements with implementing partners. The CERF secretariat is working with agencies bilaterally to secure more qualitative information on sub-granting procedures, and on the ways in which CERF funds fit into their broader implementation arrangements. That information will complement the quantitative information on the timeliness of sub-grants that was collected in the annual CERF resident coordinator/humanitarian coordinator reports. Initial data was reviewed and shared with the CERF Advisory Group in May 2012. 48. Recommendation 10. Better document and disseminate the reasoning behind allocation decisions. The recommendation was accepted. During the second underfunded emergencies round of 2011, CERF initiated efforts to better inform stakeholders of the allocation process. This included publishing a guidance note and documentation that explained the rationale for countries' selection or rejection. An independent review of the CERF underfunded process will be conducted in the second half of 2012. It will assess whether communication regarding the allocation decisions for underfunded emergencies will need improvement to ensure that relevant stakeholders understand the decisions. C. Recommendations to the Office of the Controller 49. Recommendation 11. Allocate a percentage of Central Emergency Response Fund funds from the 3 per cent United Nations Secretariat management fees to reinforce the monitoring capacity of the resident coordinators and humanitarian coordinators and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs at the country level. The response to this recommendation is pending. Discussions on this subject are ongoing between the Controller and CERF. 50. Recommendation 12. The Central Emergency Response Fund loan fund should be reduced to $30 million and the balance transferred to the grant window. The recommendation was accepted and has been implemented. Pursuant to the recommendation of the CERF Advisory Group, the General Assembly adopted resolution 66/119, in which the Assembly decided to reduce the Fund's loan element to $30 million and moved the balance ($46.4 million) to the grant element (see para. 25). D. Recommendations to donors 51. Recommendation 13: In at-risk countries where there are no alternate United Nations pooled fund mechanisms apart from the Central Emergency Response Fund, donors should support the establishment of an emergency response fund or other type of pooled funding that is directly accessible by nongovernmental organizations. The recommendation was partially accepted. Establishing a country-based pooled fund often makes an important contribution to the local humanitarian architecture. However, a detailed examination is still required on a case-by-case basis, as not all country contexts may be appropriate for country-based pooled funds. 52. Recommendation 14. Ensure that future evaluations look collectively at the Fund and other United Nations pooled fund mechanisms. The recommendation was accepted. The terms of reference for the 2012 country-level reviews under the CERF performance and accountability framework have been amended to take into account the interaction between CERF and country-based pooled funds. For those countries with pooled funds (Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia), CERF is carrying out country reviews within the performance and accountability framework in order to examine the pooled funds' complementarity with CERF. E. Recommendations to cluster lead agencies 53. Recommendation 15. Integrate performance measurement of United Nations-managed pooled funds into cluster performance systems. The recommendation was partially accepted. At the country level, the frameworks (e.g. terms of reference and guidance documents) for the individual funds clearly articulate the roles and responsibilities of key stakeholders in the pooled fund processes, including cluster leads and cluster members. The CERF secretariat is exploring the possibility of using the monitoring framework for common humanitarian funds and emergency relief funds to support the monitoring of CERF-funded activities in countries with such funds. CERF will also liaise with the Inter-Agency Standing Committee subworking group on humanitarian financing to explore the closer integration of monitoring frameworks at the country level. 54. Recommendation 16. Disseminate and promote good practice examples. The recommendation was partially accepted. The CERF secretariat systematically identifies and disseminates good practices from submitted CERF proposals and annual resident coordinator/humanitarian coordinator reports. Those practices inform the development of guidance materials and help to improve training modules. They will also be a resource for the proposed community of practice. F. Recommendations to the agencies 55. Recommendation 17. Conduct an evaluation of agency use of Central Emergency Response Fund funds within 18 months to determine what internal factors, including partnership policies and practices, influence the effectiveness of the Fund's projects. The recommendation was partially accepted. CERF is systematically monitoring and reviewing non-CERF-specific evaluations for countries or emergencies of relevance. CERF-related findings are recorded and followed up as appropriate. The CERF secretariat is also liaising with agencies regarding the possible inclusion of standard CERF-specific questions for evaluations of selected projects implemented with CERF funds. As a trial, FAO included a number of CERF-specific questions in a regular country evaluation (Sri Lanka) conducted in the first half of 2012. CERF and FAO will assess the outcome in the second half of 2012. It may serve as the basis for similar future agreements with other agencies. IOM is evaluating its CERF-funded activities, and the results are expected by the end of 2012. WFP has also expressed interest in conducting such a review as part of a broader evaluation planned for 2013. 56. Recommendation 18. Ensure the development and implementation of emergency procedures for disbursing funds to implementing partners. The recommendation was partially accepted. The CERF secretariat recognizes the importance of rapid onward disbursement of funds to non-governmental organization implementing partners by United Nations agencies, and it will support agency efforts to increase the speed of such transfers. Sub-granting of CERF funds is under the purview of the recipient United Nations agencies, and the CERF secretariat does not have any direct oversight of this. However, the CERF Advisory Group and the CERF secretariat have worked closely with agencies on the issue. Under the revised template for the resident coordinator/humanitarian coordinator reports on the use of CERF funds in 2011, agencies were requested to list sub-grants to governmental implementing partners, as well as the start date of implementing partners' activities. The level of reporting on implementing sub-grants has improved significantly. Details on more than 600 sub-grants were reported in the 2011 resident coordinator/humanitarian coordinator country reports, which are up from fewer than 120 in 2010. Realizing that the transfer of funds is not a sufficient representation of implementation timeliness, the CERF secretariat has worked closely with agencies to understand their internal sub-granting processes to better capture how they link with programme implementation. 57. Recommendation 19. United Nations agencies that do not use internal advance mechanisms in conjunction with Central Emergency Response Fund funding should establish interactivity and complementarities between these and the Fund, in order to speed up the start-up of projects. The recommendation was partially accepted. The CERF secretariat has developed a concept note on using the CERF loan element to facilitate agency internal advances. It has shared the concept note with agencies. UNICEF, UNHCR and WHO have provided feedback. Preliminary responses indicate that the proposed mechanism would be of limited use to the larger agencies since they have their own internal loan mechanisms. The CERF secretariat will conduct additional consultations with partners and, on the basis of their responses, decide how best to proceed. VI. Conclusions 58. During the present reporting period, CERF demonstrated its effectiveness in facilitating emergency response. The Fund successfully fulfilled its three main objectives. Following lessons learned from the Horn of Africa response, CERF proactively increased funding allocations in the first half of 2012 at the onset of the Sahel crisis. This strategy helped to limit the effects of the crisis on beneficiaries. Independent country reviews were conducted under the CERF performance and accountability framework and reaffirmed the Fund's added value in supporting timely humanitarian responses and saving lives. 59. CERF has built on the findings of the five-year evaluation and, under the Emergency Relief Coordinator's leadership, developed a management response plan as the basis for action on the report's recommendations. Progress has been made on many of the follow-up actions. The CERF secretariat will continue to focus on fulfilling the objectives of the management response plan as efficiently and effectively as possible. 60. Accountability and transparency have improved following the revision of the resident coordinator/humanitarian coordinator narrative reporting process and format. The 2012 reports were submitted in the revised format and, in addition to measurable quality improvements, more reports were submitted on time. The revisions ultimately strengthened the Fund's transparency to donors, humanitarian partners and beneficiaries. CERF will continue to review and make further changes to improve the reporting process and format. 61. Despite a global economic downturn and diminishing donor budgets, CERF received more than $459 million in contributions during the reporting period, marking only the second time in its history that CERF surpassed the $450 million target set by the General Assembly. The global economy continues to perform negatively, which makes resource mobilization difficult. However, CERF remains optimistic that it will receive significant funding during the next reporting period. It will continue seeking ways to increase and broaden support from Member States, private donors and the public. Annex I Central Emergency Response Fund grants: interim statement of income and expenditure for the eighteen-month period from 1 January 2011 to 30 June 2012 1 January 2011- 31 December 2011 1 January 2012- 30 June 2012 Income Voluntary contributions Allocations from other fundsa Interest income Other/miscellaneous incomeb Total income Expenditure Other Programme support costs (implementing partners) Total direct expenditure Programme support costs (United Nations) Total expenditure Excess (shortfall) of income over expenditure Prior period adjustmentsc Net excess (shortfall) of income over expenditure Transfers (to) from other fundsd Reserves and fund balances, beginning of period Reserves and fund balances, end of period Notes: a Represents allocations from the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships. b Includes gain on fluctuation on exchange rates of $5,509,333 offset by adjustments to prior period savings of $283,954. c Represents adjustments to prior biennium expenditures reported by implementing partners. d Represents transfers from the loan component of the Central Emergency Response Fund in accordance with General Assembly resolution 66/119 of 15 December 2011. Pledged contributions to the Central Emergency Response Fund, grant element, 1 January 2011 to 30 June 2012a Contributor Pledged contributions Member States and observers Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Darussalam Canada Chile China Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Guyana Hungary India Indonesia Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Kuwait Lao People's Democratic Republic Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malaysia Maldives Mexico Monaco Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Namibia Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria Norway Peru Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Korea Republic of Moldova Romania Russian Federation Saint Lucia San Marino Serbia Singapore Slovenia South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Tajikistan Thailand Turkey United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Uruguay Viet Nam Holy See Sovereign Military Order of Malta Total, Member States and observers Others Government of Flanders (Belgium) Private donations outside United Nations Foundation (under $50,000) Private donations through United Nations Foundation (under $50,000) Total, others Note: a Contributions may differ from the originally recorded pledges owing to fluctuations in exchange rates. Total grants disbursed from the Central Emergency Response Fund, 1 January 2011 to 30 June 2012 Rapid Response Underfunded Total disbursement Benin Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo El Salvador Gambia Ghana Guatemala Guinea Iran (Islamic Republic of) Jordan Kenya Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Mali Mauritania Nicaragua Rwanda Senegal Somalia Sudan Togo Tunisia Yemen Occupied Palestinian Territory Note: The 2012 "underfunded" figures include disbursements from the first round only. Central Emergency Response Fund loans: interim statement of income and expenditure for the eighteen-month period from 1 January 2011 to 30 June 2012 Prior period adjustmentsa Transfers (to) from other fundsb a Represents a write-off of the balance on a loan to WHO in 2004. b Represents a transfer to the grant element of the Central Emergency Response Fund in accordance with General Assembly resolution 66/119 of 15 December 2011. Central Emergency Response Fund loans, 1 January 2011 to 30 June 2012 Agency Country/region Year of disbursement Amount Outstanding loans as at 1 January 2011 WHO Chad/Sudan UNDP OCHA OCHA regional/country offices Loans disbursed, 1 January 2011-30 June 2012 UNOPS UNICEF Loans repaid, 1 January 2011-30 June 2012 Loans written off by the Office of the Controller of the United Nations, 1 January 2011-30 June 2012 Outstanding loans as at 30 June 2012 Abbreviations: WHO -- World Health Organization; UNDP -- United Nations Development Programme; OCHA -- Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; UNOPS -- United Nations Office for Project Services; UNICEF -- United Nations Children's Fund. 