%%%SUPPORT SERVICES|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS|

Sixty-seventh session Agenda item 74 Report of the International Criminal Court Expenses incurred and reimbursements received by the United Nations in connection with assistance provided to the International Criminal Court Report of the Secretary-General Addendum Summary The present addendum is submitted pursuant to paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 66/262, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to include, in his report submitted pursuant to paragraph 11 of that resolution, information relevant to the implementation of article 3 of the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and the International Criminal Court. provides as follows: The United Nations and the Court agree that, with a view to facilitating the effective discharge of their respective responsibilities, they shall cooperate closely, whenever appropriate, with each other and consult each other on matters of mutual interest pursuant to the provisions of the present Agreement and in conformity with the respective provisions of the Charter and the Statute. 2. During the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, the United Nations cooperated extensively with the Court pursuant to the provisions of the Relationship Agreement. 3. In the field of institutional relations, addressed in chapter II of the Relationship Agreement, the United Nations provided to the Court a range of services and facilities, including reimbursable loans; satellite communications services; access to the United Nations System Electronic Information Acquisitions Consortium; field security services; rental of premises and related services, including provision of supplies and communication; air and ground transportation services for Court personnel and equipment; provision of laissez-passer and certificates; conference services for the High-level Committee on Management task force meeting for the biennium 2012-2013; and training services, including access to language proficiency examinations for Court staff members. Pursuant to a memorandum of understanding concluded for the purpose, the Organization also provided conference services and granted access to its premises in New York for the tenth session of the Assembly of States Parties, between 12 and 21 December 2011. These services were all provided on a reimbursable basis, in accordance with the Relationship Agreement. 4. In the field of cooperation and judicial assistance, addressed in chapter III of the Relationship Agreement, the Organization provided extensive assistance to the Court in the period under review, particularly in the form of broad access to the Organization's records and archives and the making available of a number of United Nations personnel for interview by the Prosecution in connection with certain situations before the Court and certain situations under preliminary examination by the Prosecutor. No requests for testimony by United Nations personnel were received during the reporting period. A memorandum of understanding for cooperation between the Prosecutor and the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire was concluded and signed on 23 January 2012. A Court-wide memorandum of understanding with the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire, which would supersede the memorandum of understanding with the Prosecutor, is currently under negotiation. During the reporting period, the Secretary-General transmitted to the Security Council the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber I of 4 May 2012, inviting the Council to submit its observations on the application of the Government of Libya to the Court challenging the admissibility before the Court of the case against Saif Al-Islam Gaddafi. 5. In addition to cooperation extended by the United Nations to the Court pursuant to the provisions of the Relationship Agreement, officials of the United Nations have been advised to limit contacts with persons who are the subject of arrest warrants issued by the Court to those that are strictly required for carrying out essential United Nations-mandated activities. Where this advice has not been followed, the official concerned has been reminded of his or her responsibilities. 