%%%ISRAEL|LEBANON|AIRSPACE|AIRCRAFT|TERRITORIAL SEA|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|

General Assembly Sixty-seventh session Agenda item 36 The situation in the Middle East Security Council Sixty-seventh year Identical letters dated 28 November 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I transmit to you herewith a statistical summary of Israeli violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) committed during the month of October 2012 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as an official document of the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 63, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Nawaf Salam Ambassador Permanent Representative Land violations Date Time Nature of violation 9 October 2012 The Israeli enemy installed a surveillance camera on an earthen berm at their post opposite the Lebanese Army post in Maysat town. The camera was directed towards Lebanese territory. 14 October 2012 Opposite the Lebanese Army post of Mays al-Jabal, the Israeli enemy erected a pole some three metres tall, bearing a camera pointing towards Lebanese territory. An Israeli enemy JCB digger crossed the technical fence opposite the Lebanese Army observation post of Wazzani and proceeded some four metres. Israeli enemy soldiers at the Ruwaysat al-Alam post directed binoculars towards Lebanese territory. An Israeli enemy JCB digger crossed the technical fence opposite the Lebanese Army post of Maysat and proceeded some four metres. Five Israeli enemy soldiers crossed the technical fence opposite the Lebanese Army observation post of Wazzani and proceeded some 15 metres. Four Israeli enemy crossed the technical fence opposite the Lebanese Army post of Maysat and proceeded some 25 metres. Three Israeli enemy crossed the technical fence opposite the Lebanese Army post of Maysat and proceeded some 25 metres. Two Israeli enemy soldiers crossed the technical fence opposite the Lebanese Army observation post of Wazzani and proceeded some 25 metres. 15 October 2012 Two Israeli enemy soldiers crossed the technical fence opposite the Lebanese Army observation post of Wazzani and proceeded two metres. Two Israeli enemy soldiers crossed the technical fence opposite the Lebanese Army observation post of Wazzani and proceeded some three metres. 16 October 2012 Opposite the Abbasiyah Gate inside the area with regard to which Lebanon maintains a claim, near the position of the Spanish unit (28-4), a Poclain excavator belonging to the Israeli enemy, accompanied by a patrol comprising five Humvee vehicles, extended its boom over the technical fence and moved four cement blocks 1.5 metres into Lebanese territory. After cutting some branches off a eucalyptus tree inside Lebanese territory, the excavator moved 200 metres to the east and once again extended its boom over the technical fence and carried out excavations in the territory with regard to which Lebanon maintains a claim. A 25-person enemy force on foot conducted a training exercise on the outskirts of Kafr Shuba-Saddanah, inside the area with regard to which Lebanon maintains a claim. In the course of that exercise, force members deployed over a wide area and took up combat positions. Seven members of the force then crossed the Blue Line and proceeded some 8 metres towards the liberated area. 18 October 2012 From its Zar`it barracks, the Israeli enemy directed a searchlight for 15 minutes towards the Ramiya-Marwahin road inside Lebanese territory. 19 October 2012 From its Zar`it barracks, the Israeli enemy directed a searchlight towards Lebanese territory for several successive periods. 20 October 2012 Five Israeli enemy soldiers observed Lebanese territory from the occupied part of Ghajar town. From its Zar`it barracks, the Israeli enemy directed a searchlight for 7 minutes towards the road Ramiya-Marwahin inside Lebanese territory. 21 October 2012 While cleaning waterways opposite Wazzani town, the Israeli Army brought a Poclain excavator and a Hummer vehicle. The excavator then moved its boom and uprooted a tree along the technical fence in the area to which Lebanon maintains a claim. 22 October 2012 Ten Israeli enemy soldiers at the post south of Abbasiyah opened a gate in the technical fence, lit lamps and directed them towards Lebanese territory. The Israeli enemy directed a searchlight for two minutes from the Zar`it barracks towards the Marwahin-Ramiya road inside Lebanese territory. The Israeli enemy directed a searchlight and called out for two minutes from the Zar`it barracks towards the Marwahin-Ramiya road inside Lebanese territory. 23 October 2012 Three Israeli enemy soldiers at the Shaykh Abbad position opposite Hula town took pictures of Lebanese territory. Israeli enemy forces used a winch to remove the wire fence from around the radar on the Western side, some 20 metres inside the occupied Shab`a Farms. An Israeli enemy patrol loaded their weapons and trained them on a Lebanese civilian near the wall at Kafr Killa town. The Israeli enemy at the Jabal al-Summaqah post directed a searchlight towards the Lebanese Army position of Hasan-2 for two seconds on two successive occasions. 26 October 2012 The Israeli enemy directed a searchlight from the Zar`it barracks towards the Marwahin-Ramiya road. 29 October 2012 While maintaining the technical fence at the Metullah settlement opposite the Khiyam plain, members of an Israeli enemy patrol trained their weapons on two Lebanese civilians who were grazing their livestock on the plain, inside Lebanese territory. Four Israeli enemy Merkava tanks were sighted in the occupied Shab`a Farms. The crew fired medium weapons into the air. 31 October 2012 An Israeli enemy patrol near Birkat al-Naqqar, opposite the occupied Shab`a Farms, abducted the shepherd Isma`il Nab`ah and took him into occupied Palestinian territory. He was released on 1 November 2012 at 1100 hours. Sea violations 6 October 2012 An Israeli enemy launch directed a searchlight towards a Lebanese Army vessel in Lebanese territorial waters off Ra's al-Naqurah. 10 October 2012 An Israeli enemy launch directed a searchlight for 30 seconds towards Lebanese territorial waters at the line of buoys. An Israeli enemy launch directed a searchlight for 20 seconds towards the position of Ra's al-Naqurah inside Lebanese territory. Air violations Nature of violations 3 October 2012 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over the South before leaving at 1850 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1140 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. 4 October 2012 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over the South, Riyaq and Ba`albak before leaving at 1300 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1800 hours over Rumaysh. 7 October 2012 Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1110 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 0800 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy warplane entered Lebanese airspace, circling over the South before leaving at 0800 hours. 11 October 2012 Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They proceeded towards the North before leaving at 1215 hours over the sea off Tripoli towards Turkey. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea to the west of Shikka. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1410 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the occupied Shab`a farms. They circled over the South, the Shuf and the Western Bekaa before leaving at 1125 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Aytarun. They circled over the South and the Western Bekaa before leaving at 1140 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1630 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over the Bekaa and the South before leaving at 1810 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace, circling over the South before leaving at 1105 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the Bekaa, Beirut and the South before leaving at 2035 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace, circling over the South before leaving at 1335 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South, Riyaq and Ba`albak before leaving at 1730 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace, circling over the South before leaving at 1130 hours. An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace, circling over the South before leaving at 1150 hours. An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace, circling over the South before leaving at 1230 hours. 17 October 2012 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut, its suburbs and the South before leaving at 1830 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 2200 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1325 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving on 18 October at 0615 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1225 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1920 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 0950 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1240 hours over Aytarun. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1530 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1600 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1825 hours over Naqurah. Eight Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all areas of Lebanon before leaving at 1230 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. 1 October 2012 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over the South before leaving at 2225 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy warplane violated Lebanese airspace, circling over the South before leaving at 1505 hours. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 2120 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 2015 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1400 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut, Jubayl and the South before leaving at 2300 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over the South before leaving at 1940 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1640 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1145 hours over the sea to the west of Naqurah. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1125 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea to the west of Tyre. It circled over the sea off Tyre and Beirut before leaving at 1340 hours over the sea to the west of Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut and the South before leaving on 24 October at 0230 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South and the Western Bekaa before leaving on 24 October at 2020 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. 24 October 2012 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over the South and Beirut and its suburbs before leaving on 25 October at 0615 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1900 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over the South before leaving on 25 October at 0615 hours over Rumaysh. 25 October 2012 Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1215 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. 28 October 2012 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over the Bekaa before leaving at 1600 hours over Rumaysh. 29 October at 0620 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over Ba`albak and Hirmil before leaving at 29 October at 0650 hours over Kafr Killa. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1110 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. 30 October at 0115 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, circling over the towns of Kafr Shuba, Hilta and Habbariyah. At 2005 hours, an unidentified bright object was seen descending from the sky on the outskirts of Habbariyah town. Its light was extinguished on impact with the ground. 30 October 2012 Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over Beirut and the South before leaving at 1040 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. 