%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SUPPORT SERVICES|OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES|PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|INFORMATION MANAGEMENT|

Sixty-seventh session Agenda items 54 and 146 Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Third annual progress report on the implementation of the global field support strategy Report of the Secretary-General Summary In his report on the global field support strategy (A/64/633), the Secretary-General presented a comprehensive organizational change initiative aimed at improving service delivery to United Nations field missions. The goal of the strategy is to establish, over a five-year period, a more client-oriented service delivery model capable of meeting the following objectives: (a) Expedited and improved service delivery to the field; (b) Improved support to peacekeeping and peacemaking mandate delivery; (c) Strengthened resource stewardship, efficiencies and economies of scale; (d) Improved staff safety, security and quality of life; (e) Strengthened accountability. The General Assembly, in its resolution 64/269, requested that the Secretary-General submit an annual progress report on the implementation of the global field support strategy. Recalling paragraph 194 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/66/718) and paragraph 203 of the report of the Board of Auditors on United Nations peacekeeping operations (A/66/5 (Vol. II)), the Assembly, in resolution 66/264, further requested that the Secretary-General submit to the General Assembly his all-encompassing end-state vision for the global field support strategy. The present report presents the vision of the Secretary-General for the end state and outlines how the pillars of the global field support strategy (human resources, finance, modularization/supply chain and service centres) will transform support services at all four levels: United Nations Headquarters, the Global Service Centre, the Regional Service Centre and the missions. It further highlights progress achieved since the issuance of the last progress report of the Secretary-General (A/66/591 and Add.1) and identifies critical next steps towards attaining the desired end state. It lays out the path towards improved support to deployed personnel in the field as well as to Headquarters partners, including the Department of Peacekeeping Operations -- with whom the Department of Field Support shares specific services in support of United Nations peacekeeping -- and other institutional partners such as the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Management. The report reflects that, midway towards implementation, the global field support strategy has already yielded substantial results, including with respect to improvements in rapid mission start-up, process streamlining, efficiency gains and programme management and oversight. In response to the request of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/66/718, paras. 189 and 191) that the Secretariat consider alternative arrangements to improve the reporting process on the global field support strategy and facilitate the decision-making process of the General Assembly through accurate, complete and transparent reporting, the Secretariat will address the requests of the Assembly in two separate reports: (a) the third progress report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the global field support strategy, and (b) dedicated annexes to the report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014. The intention of the two-step process is to avoid duplication and redundancy and to facilitate access to relevant information by the committees of the General Assembly by separating the reporting requirements related to the high-level strategic end-state vision of the global field support strategy from the financial details pertaining to its implementation. Page End-state vision for the global field support strategy Headquarters Global Service Centre Regional Service Centre Field missions Progress achieved Next steps Requests to the General Assembly Conclusion 1. The world in which the United Nations has operated for most of its history -- and which continues to shape its operations -- has undergone significant transformation. The Secretariat, too, must change with the times. It must adapt, evolve and proactively respond to a future for United Nations field missions dominated by three overarching realities. 2. First, United Nations peacekeeping and political missions are growing more complicated, difficult and dangerous. Uniformed and civilian personnel are shouldering an immense burden as they implement increasingly diverse and complex mandates, necessitating a field support system that is flexible and responsive to clients' evolving needs. Today, the speed of deployment as well as the quality and effectiveness of logistical support provided to those serving in the field have become more and more critical to a mission's success. 3. Second, global economic uncertainty has placed a new premium on pursuing efficiency and cost-effectiveness in field operations. During these uncertain times, people and governments everywhere are looking to the United Nations to do more -- especially in support of international peace and security. In executing the mandates set by the Member States, the Secretariat must optimize field support to meet expectations while using proportionally fewer resources. 4. Third, there are ample -- and as-yet-untapped -- opportunities for improved specialization and economies of scale. In the past, each field mission was essentially "built from scratch" and functioned autonomously, with its own administrative, logistical and budgetary functions. By viewing United Nations operations as global in scope, comparative advantages and economies of scale across the full spectrum of peacekeeping and political operations can be harnessed to provide better and more efficient service to those in the field and to Secretariat partners, including the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs at Headquarters (see figure I). Figure I Specialization leverages comparative advantage 5. The Secretariat, in close consultation with Member States, has developed the global field support strategy to respond to those realities. The global field support strategy is a common sense global solution to a global need, drawing on lessons learned over years of field experience. Its vision is linked closely to and aligned with other reform efforts, including the "New Horizon" peacekeeping reform initiative, the enterprise resource planning project (Umoja), the introduction of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) and Inspira and human resources reform. Its goal is to deliver the services and resources that field missions and personnel need to operate effectively -- and to do so faster, at lower cost and at the highest standards of quality. 6. That is the core of the global field support strategy: to capitalize on potential synergies and economies of scale to deliver better and timelier support; to reduce or eliminate waste, duplication and bottlenecks in logistical, administrative and financial support services; and thereby to enable missions to carry out their mandates effectively. As such, the Secretariat seeks to become a service provider par excellence, measured by its ability to consult widely and provide uniformed personnel and civilian staff with what they need, when they need it, at the optimal cost. 7. Midway into this effort, notable progress has been made. Previously, functions were divided among the Secretariat in New York and various missions, often with considerable overlap. Now they are being concentrated where they best belong. Namely: :: Strategic support is being reinforced at the Headquarters level. That includes engaging with Member States and Secretariat partners, including the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of Management, providing planning support and guidance to the field, and acting as an oversight and monitoring body. :: Operational and transactional support is being provided at the Global Service Centre in Brindisi, Italy, and Valencia, Spain, and at the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe, Uganda. The goal is to move tasks that previously were carried out at Headquarters closer to those they serve, while moving nonlocation-specific tasks previously housed in the missions to less volatile and costly locations. :: Field missions are being enabled to concentrate on operational imperatives in support of effective mandate implementation. 8. The global field support strategy represents a transformative change. Its implementation has already brought tangible benefits to the Organization, including its Secretariat partners and the uniformed and civilian personnel deployed in support of conflict-affected countries and their populations. For example, in Libya, applying the global field support strategy at the start of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and relying on the services of the Global Service Centre enabled rapid mission start-up and resulted in almost $1 million in annual efficiency savings. Deploying troops across Africa has been made more efficient by centralizing the management of United Nations aircraft in the Regional Service Centre, resulting in timelier and more effective rotation support to troop- and police-contributing countries, as well as $102.4 million in savings between January 2010 and the end of June 2012. 9. The General Assembly, in its resolution 64/269, requested an annual report for each of the five years of the strategy's implementation to 30 June 2015. The first progress report (A/65/643) set out the governance and management arrangements established to respond to mandated intergovernmental reporting and consultation requirements and to address the needs of field missions and stakeholders. The most recent report (A/66/591 and Add.1) described results achieved during the first year of the implementation timeline of the strategy. 10. In setting forth the vision for the way ahead, the present report, building on the previous reports, explains how the operationalization of the four pillars will affect service delivery at each level: at United Nations Headquarters, at the Global Service Centre, at the Regional Service Centre and within the missions. This approach seeks to provide a better understanding of the end-state vision and practical implementation of the strategy as a whole. The previous reports have focused on operational improvements within the four pillars of the global field support strategy: human resources, finance, modularization/supply chain and service centres (see figure II). Those pillars remain at the heart of the strategy and are reflected in the articulation of the vision, progress and next steps at each service level outlined in the present report. With 2015 nearing, however, it is necessary to more closely define the tangible impact of the global field support strategy and the practical changes that are anticipated in business workflow across all levels of field support, including Headquarters, the service centres and the field. Figure II Four pillars of the global field support strategy 11. The articulation of the end-state vision for the strategy at each of the four levels represents an effort to ensure that Member States and United Nations system clients and partners have a clear idea of what the Secretariat is doing and why and to explain how operationalization of the strategy in all its aspects will ensure the realization of the core objectives of: A. Headquarters 12. By 2015, the Secretariat's role in field support will be streamlined (see figure III). While the four divisions of the Department of Field Support (Field Personnel, Field Budget and Finance, Logistics Support and Information and Communications Technology) will remain in place, the Secretariat will refocus available resources on the comparative advantages of Headquarters, namely: (a) Engaging with Member States and Secretariat clients and partners to improve two-way communication and maintain full transparency and appropriate support to the deployment of missions and personnel; (b) Providing planning and relevant guidance, including templates and standard operating procedures, to service centres and the field, with a view to enabling the quick and efficient roll out of operations and leveraging best practices and lessons learned from previous experience with the support of the Division of Policy, Evaluation and Training; (c) Providing oversight and monitoring performance of support services, as well as managing change, so as to rapidly identify and respond to emerging issues. Figure III Reprofiling of Headquarters activities 13. Practically, the Field Personnel Division will oversee and ensure the ongoing implementation of the human resources framework pillar of the global field support strategy and other reforms. The envisioned end state will be the timely recruitment and deployment of personnel in response to mission requirements, drawing on rosters of cleared candidates, as well as improved field workforce planning. The Field Budget and Finance Division will be responsible for implementing and leading the oversight of a strategic resource management framework for field operations. That will include implementing the financial framework pillar of the strategy in support of effective mission budget planning and implementation. The Information and Communications Technology Division will act as a key strategic enabler for the implementation of the global field support strategy and other Secretariat-wide initiatives, including Umoja. Finally, the Logistics Support Division will be responsible for strategic planning, oversight and technical advice to Member States, clients and partners for all matters related to logistics and the supply chain. That includes all aspects of modularization, working closely with the Procurement Division of the Department of Management to establish specific global contracts that directly affect Member States and working with the integrated operational teams of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the focal points for special political missions of the Department of Political Affairs to ensure the effective and efficient delivery of logistics support to field operations. 14. As noted in the second progress report (A/66/591), the support model of the global field support strategy does not change the reporting and collaboration frameworks of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs, but rather is designed to strengthen the relationships between the Department of Field Support and those departments in delivering improved service to the field in support of mission mandates. The integrated operational teams will continue to deliver integrated operational (including political) guidance and support to field missions. The headquarters of the Department of Field Support will work closely with and continue to provide support to the integrated operational teams. Figure IV End-state vision for the global field support strategy and pillars 15. As the operational arm of the Department of Field Support, the Global Service Centre will provide global information and communications technology, logistics and supply chain operational management and enabling support services throughout the life cycle of field missions. Integrating operational support services at the Centre will enable the streamlining and specialization of functions in support of faster and more effective responses to mission needs. In the end-state vision, the modularization pillar of the global field support strategy will be integrated into a holistic concept of the supply chain that encompasses all of the logistics activities of the Department of Field Support (see figure IV). While the modularization concept focused on only a narrow part of mission support through the deployment of predefined modules and service packages, the holistic approach reflects the full spectrum of logistics support to missions from start-up planning and preparation to liquidation (see figure V). In practical terms, implementation of the supply chain management concept as part of the end-state vision for the global field support strategy means that the Secretariat will: :: Be better able to identify and anticipate clients' needs. That includes planning on a global scale and "rightsizing" resources to the requirements at hand to meet the evolving field support requirements of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (including civilian capacity; military; police; justice; corrections; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and mine action) and the Department of Political Affairs. :: More effectively source equipment and services. Revised global contracts will support the rapid sourcing of equipment through the Procurement Division, as well as the matching and standardizing of new resources with global supply chain requirements. :: Improve global asset management. That entails the efficient management of strategic deployment stocks and other reserves, eliminating waste and utilizing a global database for tracking. :: Optimize cargo and freight from centralized locations, allowing more rapid delivery of supplies and support to in-mission set-up based on individual needs. :: Backstop missions, ensuring connectivity (through the primary and secondary active telecommunications hubs in Brindisi and Valencia) and ongoing support. :: Complete the life cycle by ensuring proper liquidation and disposal and maximizing possible benefits from redeploying unused equipment to where it is needed, on a global scale. Figure V Integrated supply chain 16. In the end state, as noted in the second progress report (ibid., sect. VI), and in full compliance with paragraph 87 of resolution 65/289, the Global Service Centre will have evolved from a logistics base, focused primarily on transportation and distribution services, to a holistic and integrated operational centre for information and communications technology, logistics and the supply chain. With specialization and rightsourcing as guiding principles, the Centre will have a central role in the operational management of the supply chain under the strategic direction of the headquarters of the Department of Field Support. Owing to the critical nature of the supply chain in improving the speed and predictability of deployment, the Global Service Centre will become a hub for global supply chain management in close consultation with the Procurement Division of the Department of Management in New York. 17. One important element of the Department of Field Support supply chain -- modularization -- provides scalable packages to missions in start-up or expansion phases as well as safer, more secure and better living and working conditions for civilian and uniformed personnel. It improves resource management while also reducing the mission's environmental impact. The Global Service Centre will assist start-up missions in planning and building their field camps, bases and team sites using standardized designs, materials and equipment, deployed together with the necessary enabling capacity. It may also facilitate the rapid delivery of structural requirements essential to the provision of immediate security, including the construction of modular police stations, corrections facilities and demobilization sites. C. Regional Service Centre 18. The Regional Service Centre will continue to provide shared services to participating missions. At present, Entebbe routinely supports eight field missions in East Africa -- four led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)), three led by the Department of Political Affairs (the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA), the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB), and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia) and one led by the Department of Field Support (the United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA)). The goal is to move transactional non-location-dependent administrative functions to the Regional Service Centre from field missions. That includes transactional elements of human resources, finance, multimodal movement and control, personnel and cargo transport, and information and communications technology support. Centralizing those functions means they can be carried out more effectively because of process integration, specialization, standardization and re-engineering. That will create efficiencies in terms of scale and reduce errors, resulting in overall improved service in the end state of the global field support strategy. Integration and specialization will also allow for greater focus on staff capacity-building, including for national staff in the service centre. Figure VI Reduced footprint impact on quality of life and cost 19. Posting staff in service centres, which are family locations, rather than in high-risk mission environments will help reduce turnover, raise productivity and increase quality of life while at the same time moderating costs associated with deploying in volatile locations (see figure VI). The standardization of processes and the reduction of tasks associated with moving staff to the Regional Service Centre will also improve performance, as service section managers are given more time to manage and work on more consistent systems. 20. Standardization will be further enhanced with the deployment of system-wide initiatives, including Umoja and Inspira. More accurate and reliable asset and financial management will equip field service Chiefs with the ability to mitigate risk, reduce inefficiencies and plan and manage on the basis of timely and accurate data and shared services with other missions. Integrating at the level of the Regional Service Centre will ensure that there is oversight by experienced staff, increasing compliance with United Nations rules and regulations. 21. A Regional Service Centre is funded entirely from the budgets of the field missions. For the period leading up to 2015, the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe will remain the immediate focus for the integration of transactional support. Additional Regional Service Centres will be considered only once operations at Entebbe are firmly established and the Secretariat has drawn on lessons learned. Any proposals in that regard will be submitted to the General Assembly in accordance with paragraph 58 of resolution 66/264 and the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (see A/66/718, para. 278) in due course. The Regional Service Centre will continue, in accordance with the decision of the Assembly in its resolution 64/269, to respect the principle pf separate financial arrangements for missions and to ensure that its resources and the volume of its activities are scalable, reflecting the start-up, expansion, drawdown or closure of the field missions served. D. Field missions 22. While the global field support strategy encompasses change at all levels, its greatest impact will be felt by its primary beneficiaries: the field missions of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs and the uniformed and civilian personnel who serve on the ground. The ultimate test of the global field support strategy is client satisfaction. By 2015, implementation of the strategy will relieve field missions of much of their transactional burden. As a result, from mission start-up to mission drawdown, field missions will be better able to implement their mandates (see figure VII). Figure VII Focus on core business 23. Under the global field support strategy, missions will focus primarily on substantive engagement, namely, serving host populations and providing strategic advice to senior mission leadership on effective mandate implementation. Support functions that are not location dependent will be moved to the Regional Service Centre. Those field support functions that remain on the ground will concentrate on the vital roles of guaranteeing essential services to uniformed and civilian personnel such as security, medical support and evacuation; recruiting and managing local staff and leveraging local suppliers; providing in-theatre information and communications technology support; and strengthening local capacity-building to enable national staff to better serve the mission and the host State long after the United Nations leaves. 24. Missions will be deployed more rapidly to the field owing to the use of predefined service packages, standard funding models and streamlined recruiting practices. Because the first days following a mandate of the Security Council are the most sensitive, the timely arrival of the right personnel and resources can have a significant positive impact on a peacekeeping or political operation. Leveraging shared services at the regional and global levels will support closer alignment between the establishment of infrastructure and the deployment of personnel, as well as the reliability of logistics support throughout the life cycle of the mission. Future application of the standard funding model will be in line with a decision of the General Assembly on the assessment of its application in the context of UNMISS in accordance with the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (see A/66/718, para. 218), as endorsed by the General Assembly. 25. Missions will also have a lighter footprint as a result of the movement of nonlocation-specific support functions such as human resources and finance outside of the mission area, allowing more flexibility to adapt to emerging challenges faced in implementing the mandate. That will enhance the safety of staff by ensuring that no one is in harm's way unnecessarily and allowing for a more nimble organizational response to emergencies. 26. When the global field support strategy changes are fully implemented, staff and managers in the field will benefit from a number of improvements in terms of human resources support and improved workforce planning. Field staff will have their benefits and entitlements processed more rapidly and reliably by specialized staff. They will also have better access to career counselling and planning from human resources staff in missions in close consultation with the Office of Human Resources Management. Managers will find that vacancies are easier to fill since they will be able to draw on, with the support of Inspira and the Office of Human Resources Management, rosters of cleared candidates and benefit from greater emphasis on the advance identification of staffing needs. 27. The mission support component for larger missions will be reconfigured, within existing resources. A Director and a Deputy Director of Mission Support will allow for greater coherence of administrative and support functions on the ground. That will allow more to be done with fewer resources. II. Progress achieved 28. A considerable amount of effort was exerted towards operationalizing the performance management framework at the departmental level. While the record so far is encouraging, more still needs to be done. In 2013, in response to the direction provided by the General Assembly, the Secretariat will continue the ongoing effort to further refine and strengthen the global field support strategy performance management framework, including finalizing, by the end of March, benchmarks and key performance indicators for all aspects of the strategy, including its four pillars. 29. At Headquarters, important strides have been made towards refining the strategic support structure necessary for the implementation of the global field support strategy. Engagement with Member States and institutional partners as part of the strategy's governance structure remains a vital aspect of the work of the Secretariat, as does the provision of guidance and planning support to the field. At the same time, steps have been taken to improve the oversight and monitoring role of Headquarters through the implementation of the global field support strategy performance and risk management strategies. The refocusing of Headquarters away from certain operational functions to a more strategic role is well under way, in close cooperation with partner departments. An initial eight posts were transferred from Headquarters to the Global Service Centre during 2011 and 2012 in the areas of information and communications technology asset management, financial systems technical support, global education grant processing and field contract management. Another 23 posts were later transferred in 2012 and reprofiled from Headquarters to the Global Service Centre in the areas of global asset and material management for engineering, surface transport and supply; mission operational support; management of the strategic deployment stocks; and mission liquidation. Programme management and oversight 30. As recognized by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/66/718, para. 190), realization of the end-state vision for the global field support strategy is underpinned by inclusive governance structures and by a comprehensive framework for accountability and performance management. The framework measures service delivery against targets using standardized processes, key performance indicators and data derived from new technologies and systems (e.g., Umoja, IPSAS). Existing reporting and collaborative frameworks (see A/64/633, para. 24) have and will remain unchanged, and unity of command will be preserved in accordance with paragraph 14 of resolution 61/279 and paragraph 5 of resolution 64/269 and existing departmental policy on command and control. 31. At Headquarters, governance mechanisms for the global field support strategy continue to operate in line with existing terms of reference, which are reviewed and updated periodically. As noted in the second progress report (A/66/591), the Department of Field Support manages two governance mechanisms for the strategy: the Steering Committee (composed of partner department and field representatives) and the Client Board (composed of uniformed and civilian representatives from Headquarters and the field). Both serve as advisory bodies to the Department of Field Support senior leadership on the implementation of the strategy. The Department of Field Support also receives guidance from the Secretary-General's Management Committee. In 2012, the Steering Committee met quarterly and provided advice on implementation, focusing on issues that included alignment with Secretariat initiatives, project management and performance measurement. The Client Board is being expanded to incorporate more broadly client perspectives into the governance of the global field support strategy (see figure VIII). Figure VIII Composition and objectives of the Client Board Abbreviations: DFS, Department of Field Support; DPKO, Department of Peacekeeping Operations; DPA, Department of Political Affairs; DM, Department of Management; CITO, Chief Information Technology Officer. 32. The Secretariat has finalized the strategic implementation plan needed to manage the global field support strategy. The plan includes a web-based tracking tool to enhance oversight and progress monitoring, including the identification of issues of concern and corrective actions to be taken by the Secretariat's senior leaders. 33. In addition, the performance management framework, a change management and communication strategy, a risk management strategy and a supply chain strategy have been reviewed and are being updated in the current financial cycle. While the performance framework is not yet complete, the Secretariat has made progress towards further developing and complementing the initial benchmarks and performance standards reported in the second progress report (ibid.). Additional performance indicators requested by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/66/718, para. 198) are under development and will be shared with the Member States upon their scheduled completion at the end of March 2013. For example, the Field Personnel Division, working in close collaboration with the Office of Human Resources Management, has outlined a framework for key performance indicators covering the staffing and human resources administrative functions. Key performance indicators covering a wide range of service desk management measures are already in place in the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe, as noted in the second progress report, enabling improved reporting on client-oriented response times, resource allocation and opportunities for business process improvement. Once complete, the system will serve as a model for all functional areas of the Department of Field Support, including service centres, providing a common framework and standardized methods to assess progress in each service delivery area. Overview of the evaluation on the use of the standardized funding model in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan 34. The General Assembly, in its resolution 66/243, requested a lessons-learned review to be conducted in the context of the first application of the standard funding model to the UNMISS budget for 2011/12. The review included an assessment of whether the model had achieved its primary objectives of fiscal discipline, streamlined processes, legislative transparency and flexibility; a review of legislative guidance from the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, the Fifth Committee and the Board of Auditors; and a survey of key stakeholders. 35. It concluded that, on balance, the standard funding model has been a successful tool in supporting the start-up of missions. The achievements included: :: Promoting fiscal discipline by contributing to the minimization of the underutilization of approved budgets. A budget implementation rate of 99.9 per cent was achieved for UNMISS for the 2011/12 period in the context of operations, which included significant transfers of personnel, assets and aircraft from the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), critical mandated tasks such as the incorporation of mine action and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into the workplan and unforeseen challenges such as the crisis in Jonglei State. It represents a significant improvement over traditional start-up budget implementation rates. :: Enhancing legislative discipline and transparency and supporting enhanced legislative oversight during the dynamic first year of start-up operations by presenting a budget built on an agreed set of standard realistic parameters. :: Facilitating operational flexibility for mission leadership by not requiring them to spend time on preparing a full budget submission. 36. The review also concluded that there are opportunities for further strengthening the framework. Proposed revisions include: :: The development of an electronic application to provide greater flexibility and responsiveness to key mission-specific resourcing drivers such as the mandated number of traps, the impact of nearby drawing down missions, the configuration of the aviation fleet and the inclusion of specific mandated programmatic activities. :: The inclusion of an initial civilian capacity of general temporary assistance positions to address issues raised by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its reports (see A/65/743 and A/66/592). It will further enhance oversight and transparency and ensure the pre-eminence of the General Assembly by presenting a full staffing table in the second-year budget for its consideration without prejudice to the initial capacity temporarily approved, and it will support the commitment of the Secretary-General to civilian capacities by better providing the flexibility needed in the early mission stages. It would also allow senior mission leadership, with support and guidance from the Department of Field Support and the Department of Management, to work on staffing structures and functional analysis of posts without having to include it in the budget until the second-year submission. :: The incorporation of updated costs, global field support strategy initiatives and implementation of the technical observations of the Board of Auditors. 37. The review found that the standard funding model had been partially successful in achieving the objective of streamlining budget processes, in that 112 days elapsed from the time of the establishment of the Mission to the presentation of a budget for legislative review. While that represents some progress over previous start-ups, the target of a 90-day timeline for the presentation of a budget was not met. The delay was due, in part, to the time taken to prepare detailed, voluminous staffing justifications. By comparison, the budget document for UNMISS for the 2012/13 period was 37 per cent shorter than that for the 2011/12 period, which was developed using the standard funding model. 38. The majority of key stakeholders surveyed were of the view that the model enabled an enhanced focus on results-based budgeting and the staffing element of the budget and greater capacity to focus on critical operational tasks. 39. As noted, efforts are under way within the Secretariat to address the present challenges through proposed improvements to the standard funding model. The issues of the length of the budget report and the time taken to issue it will be improved by including a standard civilian capacity in the model, as that will further streamline the budget development process. Processes, speed and quality of support 40. Within the divisions at Headquarters, a number of tangible elements of progress were also achieved, in particular as they related to the streamlining of processes and the speed and quality of support in line with the envisioned end state for the human resources pillar. Achievements included the following: :: Roster-based recruitment has added thousands of qualified candidates to rosters over the past two years. The number of rostered candidates currently exceeds 12,000. In 2012, nearly 3,000 more were added. :: To further develop succession and talent management capacities, the Department of Field Support, together with eCornell, have started a certification programme for human resources practitioners. To date, more than 200 staff have been certified. The number of staff enrolled increased from 300 to more than 800 during 2012. :: The use of detailed analytical reports within the Field Personnel Division continues to better inform staffing operations. The recruitment section, for example, has begun to use analytical data to better target its recruitment and rostering efforts. Such reporting will be used next to inform mobility and gender initiatives. B. Global Service Centre Supply chain management 41. Building on previous analysis, the Department of Field Support, in August 2012, commenced a formal process of developing a comprehensive supply chain management strategy aimed at the effective, responsive and efficient provision of goods and services required for mandate implementation. The effort was undertaken by a multidisciplinary team of key stakeholders using an established model that blends strategic scenario planning and guidance and provides a foundation for converting the resulting vision into operational concepts. It reflects the growing supply chain orientation of the Department of Field Support and seeks to provide a departmental road map for the next decade that will guide ongoing efforts to improve supply chain management. 42. This supply chain management concept is an example of how the United Nations is adopting best practices to modernize its support to peacekeeping and political missions with a particular emphasis on "rightsizing" and "rightsourcing". "Rightsourcing" is a strategic methodology employed to match the supply of assets, resources and services to actual needs. It is a proven approach that reduces waste, drives efficiency and creates better value. In doing so, it builds agility into the service delivery model, helping the United Nations to better meet complex and changing client needs through a global network of suppliers. 43. As part of the concept, Headquarters will be responsible for establishing overall strategic goals for the entire supply chain and promulgating those goals through the use of a robust performance management framework. The Global Service Centre will manage the global supply chain, consolidating acquisitions, maintaining assets and responding to contingencies. Standing capacities for goods and services will complement the modularization initiative and will include personnel, goods and services required for basic field operations. The acquisition of goods and services will take advantage of synergies and economies of scale throughout the supply chain, ensuring a match to actual demand. The Regional Service Centre will aid the Global Service Centre in overall management, including shared service delivery and regional coordination. All supply chain activities will be underpinned by a global information management system that fully integrates all supply chain activities, provides analytical tools and management information to all levels of the supply chain and enables the global management of inventory. Nothing in the supply chain concept changes the roles and responsibilities of Secretariat partners, including the Department of Management and the Procurement Division. Global Service Centre process streamlining and reprofiling 44. Considerable progress has been made in terms of improvements to rapid deployment and service delivery to the field, as well as in cost savings and process streamlining at the Global Service Centre, as set out below. :: During the early deployment of UNSMIL in Libya, the Global Service Centre was able to rapidly deploy 36 vehicles and communications equipment and provide 54 technical staff as part of mission support teams to provide crucial support on the ground. The Global Service Centre continues to host UNSMIL-embedded staff, providing a combination of back-office and in-mission technical support. The Global Service Centre delivered almost $1 million in annual efficiency savings by providing mission start-up support in Libya. :: Modularization designs for 1,000-, 200- and 50-person camps were completed in support of future deployment needs. That has translated directly into enhanced rapid-deployment capability; UNSOA (Mogadishu) has built three modular camps: a 1,000-person camp and two 850-person camps. Previously envisioned pilots of modules as part of the UNMISS start-up in South Sudan were not carried out as a result of regional redistribution of assets from liquidated UNMIS and MINURCAT missions. :: Overall, mission support teams from the Global Service Centre performed logistics, administrative and communication and information technology service functions in response to service requests from 12 missions during the past year, deploying more than 100 personnel. :: Valencia and Brindisi became fully operational telecommunications hubs. :: A review of the composition of strategic deployment stocks by staff from the Global Service Centre, the Information and Communications Technology Division and the Logistics Support Division led to a reduction of holdings, allowing the application of $50 million in savings to the resources required for the United Nations Logistics Base for the financial period 2012/13, in accordance with the request of the General Assembly in paragraph 8 (a) of its resolution 66/266. :: Field central review bodies can now process a case in an average of 35 days, approximately half the number of days (68) that same process took in 2010. 45. To enhance field service delivery, the Global Service Centre consolidated and streamlined functions under its three services: the Logistics Service, the Base Support Service and the Communication and Information Technology Service. The above-mentioned transfer of functions and resources from Headquarters to the Global Service Centre in areas such as strategic deployment stocks and asset management is currently being documented, with the aim of establishing initial benchmarks and streamlining processes to enhance delivery of future services to field clients. The Global Service Centre continues to contribute to the enhancement of global asset management and the improvement of the overall global supply chain through the implementation of centralized warehousing, which has improved the utilization of space (including allowing for the closure of temporary structures), inventory holdings, stock turnover and the use of human resources. Centralized warehousing and maintenance have been strengthened through the transfer of strategic deployment stocks management from Headquarters to the Global Service Centre. Those adjustments, coupled with the reduction in holdings, support the streamlining of processes and more rapid deployment capability for mission start-up and sustainment. 46. Though not a direct result of the implementation of the global field support strategy, support for information and communications technology has been enhanced by the completion of the Valencia facility as the telecommunications hub. That enabled the creation of an information and communications technology multi-site hub (together with Brindisi) for the Department of Field Support, providing high quality information and communications technology services to field operations. The information and communications technology infrastructure and network at the Global Service Centre will play a paramount role in delivering Umoja to both field and Secretariat users; Umoja and the enterprise data centres have been deployed in Valencia and Brindisi. The enterprise data centres are hosting Secretariat-wide critical software systems such as the United Nations customer relationship management system (iNeed), the Unified Communications Connection, the Fuel Management System, the automated Headquarters Committee on Contracts and other systems. 47. During the reporting period, the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe made progress in implementing the elements of the global field support strategy related to shared transportation, financing and human resources services. The approach used for the assessment and movement of mission functions has ensured continual progress in service delivery in those areas throughout the reporting period. Details on the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe will be provided in an annex to the report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014. Transportation 48. As previously reported, a Transportation and Movements Integrated Control Centre was created within the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe to provide integrated and optimized transportation and movement services in Central and East Africa. The Centre is eventually expected to coordinate regional efforts for airfield infrastructure, including ground support equipment, leading to safe operations and quick turnarounds. An approved governance and operational framework clearly defines the roles and relationships of Headquarters, the Global Service Centre, the Regional Service Centre and missions, and serves as a platform for decision-making, reporting, integrated workshops and the coordination of activities of the Transportation and Movements Integrated Control Centre. 49. The Transportation and Movements Integrated Control Centre continues to successfully facilitate the reconfiguration and sharing of the regional air fleet and manages the execution of troop rotation tasks for the client missions, delivering improved service in both of these areas as well as savings (see figure IX). It continues to coordinate regional efforts for airfield infrastructure, including ground support equipment, leading to safer operations and quicker turnarounds. A direct benefit to troop-contributing countries has been service that is more responsive to client needs and flexible in scheduling the newly established long-term charter aircraft. For example, a flight date change that previously resulted in significant cost to the Organization can now be coordinated by the Transportation and Movements Integrated Control Centre. The holistic operational oversight of charter and mission assigned aircraft by the Centre also allows troop-contributing countries to rapidly deploy to any environment. Since 2010, efficiencies have included a fleet reduction of 24 aircraft and cost savings of $102.4 million for the period from the establishment of the Centre in January 2010 to the end of June 2012. 50. Over the past year, in collaboration with Headquarters and the field, the Transportation and Movements Integrated Control Centre enhanced its services to client missions through the implementation of field support suite applications such as e-Ticketing and the Flight Operations Management application. The former application provides accurate and real-time manifest data as well as streamlined boarding procedures; the latter captures utilization cost and efficiency data and streamlines tasking and reporting on the use of aircraft leased by the United Nations. The Centre is also working with missions to plan and execute the multimodal movement of cargo and passengers by conducting technical analysis to determine feasible and cost-effective options to perform the task with the most suitable and economical assets. 51. Progress in aviation efficiency has also been achieved through the recent establishment of the long-term global contract to conduct troop movements using a long-range aircraft (Boeing 767 ER). The first flight was launched on 16 September 2012. The aircraft is dedicated to United Nations military and police personnel movements worldwide and its use will result in substantial efficiencies, greater flexibility, more comfortable service and reduced travel times for uniformed personnel owing to fewer technical stops. The new arrangement has already demonstrated improved flexibility in responding to urgent operational requirements and rescheduling needs due to unforeseen circumstances, such as a shift in the security situation. The availability of a long-term service agreement also eliminates previous time delays of, on average, three to four weeks to prepare bids and contracts for this type of transport. Data are being collected from customer satisfaction surveys to further ascertain the level of service under the new arrangement. Between 16 September and the end of November 2012, the United Nations has achieved $1.6 million in cost savings through the use of the long-range aircraft, primarily owing to reduction in empty legs. Finance and human resources 52. In October 2011, the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe completed an initial assessment of the finance and human resources functions. The client missions subsequently transferred 160 posts as at 1 July 2012, which enabled the Regional Service Centre to create the initial framework for the two functions. For the fiscal year 2013/14, a further 123 posts for finance and human resources were identified for transfer from the missions to the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe, following a second assessment to align the shared service operation of the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe to the Umoja model and to implement Inspira as part of increased delegation of authority to missions. A client help desk was established to address a broad array of queries, provide status updates and resolve any client support issues that arose as part of the transition process. Savings and productivity gains are attributed to the consolidation of functions in the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe, enabling the extension of services to the special political missions of BINUCA and BNUB. 53. In addition to transferring functions, the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe has also begun to streamline and re-engineer them in coordination with Umoja. The Regional Service Centre at Entebbe has also finalized benchmarks and key performance indicators that ensure existing and re-engineered services are monitored and further improved, drawing on lessons learned. The Centre has engaged experts in Lean Six Sigma methodology to review individual service lines, identify bottlenecks and opportunities for process improvement and monitor the near-term implementation of solutions. 54. One of the first processes to be reviewed has been the payment of assignment grants to newly appointed staff. A multifunctional team of Regional Service Centre staff members worked under the guidance of the Lean Six Sigma consultants to identify efficiencies and reduce the time taken to process and pay the assignment grant from an average of 30 workdays to 5. Those process changes are currently being implemented. The improvement in efficiency can be immediately felt in two ways: the staff member receiving the benefit can become fully engaged and productive in his or her role much sooner, and processing staff have additional capacity available for professional development and specialization activities, as well as for further process improvements. The processing of claims for education grants, which has been managed by both the Regional Service Centre and the Global Service Centre, has also produced important efficiencies, and the average processing time has been reduced from seven weeks to four. 55. The implementation of the global field support strategy has resulted in increased functional integration, resource efficiency and process streamlining in field operations, enabling effective mandate implementation. Missions have received increased access to support services from the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe and the Global Service Centre, and eight missions to date have benefited from Regional Service Centre at Entebbe services for administrative, logistics and Communication and Information Technology Service support functions. 56. The global field support strategy has acted as a driver in the implementation of resource efficiency projects. Aligned to the Secretariat-wide priority to ensure that field operations become increasingly cost-effective, the submissions for the 2013/14 budgets of the field missions reflect the concerted effort to improve value for money. Likewise, existing standards for assessing equipment, vehicle and information and communications technology needs are under comprehensive review, as are standard resourcing allocations. Missions are closely involved in identifying and sustaining improved resourcing practices, supported by the resource efficiency group, in areas such as vehicle and computer allocations, United Nations aircraft passenger utilization rates, mission infrastructure and fuel consumption. Examples of progress follow: :: The UNSMIL start-up in Libya established an important precedent as the first mission to achieve a lighter footprint by applying global field support strategy principles. It deployed fewer support staff than substantive staff, providing remote support from the Global Service Centre as mission support teams rapidly deployed to Tripoli in the early days of the mandate. :: Inter-mission cooperation has become an increasingly regular practice within the framework of the global field support strategy, presenting opportunities for synergies between missions. That includes use of the United Nations Mission in Liberia's B-737 aircraft by other missions in the region in support of troop rotations and operational requirements such as evacuation, as well as cooperation in such areas as finance and general supply. :: Through application of the standard funding model, UNMISS demonstrated greater fiscal discipline in a complex and dynamic operational first-year environment. :: Critical support to both the United Nations Operation in Cte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) was made possible through increasingly responsive financing mechanisms. In the case of UNOCI, the Secretariat, with the concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, entered into commitments in the amount of $85.3 million to support the Mission's response to the crisis in Cte d'Ivoire in December 2010, while $8.6 million was drawn from the strategic deployment stocks to support the rapid start-up of UNSMIS in April 2012. :: Quick deployments of equipment supported mission start-up in the Syrian Arab Republic. A total of 12 armoured vehicles and 100 other vehicles were transferred from Brindisi with the support of Member States, the first vehicles arriving on the ground in Damascus within hours of the authorization by the Security Council of UNSMIS. The Mission was able to achieve full operational capacity within one month. In April 2012, UNMISS piloted an integrated supply chain approach based on process mapping, the linking of activities and reducing duplications. The Mission integrated various sections into one organization based on the cycle of inventory management, thus improving accountability and tracking and reducing inventory and stock losses. :: In missions served by the Regional Service Centre, the role of the Chief Human Resources Officer now better reflects the more strategic aspects of the human resources framework of the global field support strategy. With many transactional processes now transferred to the Regional Service Centre, the Chief Human Resources Officer provides strategic advice to the senior leadership team and hiring managers on human resources planning and management, policy implementation and monitoring in order to ensure that the department supports the mission's strategy and is responsive to evolving changes in the mandate. Concurrently, the Chief Human Resources Officer advises staff on career development and staff-management relations. Figure X Dashboard of progress achieved III. Next steps 57. Despite these achievements, more remains to be done (see figure X). Implementation of the global field support strategy will continue to focus on: (a) enhancing oversight and performance management, including the finalization of benchmarks and key performance indicators; (b) ensuring that governance mechanisms operate in a timely and effective manner; (c) intensifying communications and outreach to all internal and external stakeholders; (d) monitoring implementation progress and addressing and resolving challenges; and (e) aligning the global field support strategy with Umoja and IPSAS. 58. Consideration for further Regional Service Centres beyond the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe -- those in the Middle East and West Africa -- will occur once the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe is assessed as fully operational. Simultaneously, and in the context of supply chain implementation, the Department of Field Support will review how best to support those field missions which are not connected to any Regional Service Centre, with the aim of presenting the results in the next progress report of the global field support strategy. 59. Until then, missions in the Middle East and Western Africa will continue to develop inter-mission cooperation and explore possibilities to leverage the experiences of the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe and the Kuwait Joint Support Office, which is not a regional service centre but provides back-office functions to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq. The Global Field Support Strategy Team will support streamlining and process re-engineering efforts through remote and on-site consultation and the provision of tools and techniques. The development of standardized processes will be beneficial to those missions, as it will facilitate a smooth transition to Umoja. Programme management of the global field support strategy 60. As with any major transformational exercise, significant effort must be devoted to transitioning the Department of Field Support Headquarters role from a mix of transactional and policy responsibilities to one focusing primarily on interfacing with Member States, strategy, policy and oversight. It will necessitate a reprofiling and streamlining of existing Headquarters functions, which has been and will continue to be carried out in close consultation with Member States and Secretariat partners. Managing the transition will require categorizing the effort as a priority and drawing upon expertise and skills located throughout the Department. In addition to identifying the unique role and added value provided by Headquarters, specific change management tools, techniques and training will be needed. Specific training requirements relating to the implementation of the global field support strategy will need to be identified as part of the change management, taking into account other Organization-wide administrative and management reform processes. 61. In the coming year, the governance mechanism of the global field support strategy will be further strengthened. Regular Steering Committee meetings will enable the provision of more cogent guidance to the initiative and better client input from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs and field missions. In addition, timely follow-up on the Steering Committee decisions will further strengthen accountability and ensure that challenges are addressed appropriately. Broader participation in the governance process will be achieved through the inclusion of the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe on the Steering Committee and the expansion of the Client Board to include the representation of the civilian component from peacekeeping and special political missions. More timely and accurate data should result from Umoja and IPSAS deployments. Umoja has designated the Department of Field Support as the pilot department in which the Umoja deployment will be field tested. 62. As part of the global field support strategy implementation plan, the Department of Field Support will implement the structured change management strategy, which incorporates knowledge of the current environment, familiarity with change management tools and techniques and a solid engagement plan. The change management strategy helps the Department of Field Support move from its current state to its desired future state by supporting all levels of the Organization in transitioning to new ways of working, soliciting feedback from Headquarters and field staff and providing timely solutions to implementation challenges. Progress towards achieving the desired end state will be measured continuously throughout the remainder of the initiative. That will ensure that changes in organizational culture -- for example, developing stronger client orientation, creating synergies through integration of staff from multiple missions and managing through performance measurements based on data -- are all properly managed. 63. Risk is an ever-present factor in the support of field operations, whether in the execution of routine transactional processes or in the management of functional programmes and projects. The risk management framework of the global field support strategy is guiding implementation towards the end state by supporting risk-based decision-making. The goal of the risk management framework is to provide a means for taking into account the anticipated impact of uncertainty by developing practical options for constructive countermeasures. Risk profiles and the implementation plan will be updated as required to ensure dynamic risk tracking and effective mitigation. 64. Successful implementation of the global field support strategy is measured through a holistic and standardized approach to performance management. The strategy's performance management framework helps Headquarters, the Global Service Centre, the Regional Service Centre and field missions to define clear goals, which form the basis for design and implementation of key performance indicators. Development of a comprehensive performance management framework for all levels of the strategy is a complex undertaking. The Secretariat continues to work on expediting the introduction of key performance indicators in line with the recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (see A/66/718, paras. 198-200) and the Board of Auditors (see A/66/5 (Vol. II), para. 208). As progress on the strategy advances towards 2015, substantial performance data will be collected and analysed using dashboards integrated with Umoja to support consistent and transparent monitoring and reporting. Initial key performance indicators related to the modularization pillar were presented in the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the global field support strategy (A/66/591). Those indicators are being reviewed in line with the development of a broader supply chain concept and will be refined accordingly. Key performance indicators for the remaining elements of the strategy are currently being revised and will be shared with Member States once completed, by the end of March. More detailed reporting on the key performance indicators related to the Regional Service Centre is provided in an annex to the report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014. 65. With respect to the standard funding model, a set of key performance indicators has been identified for the core objectives of fiscal discipline, enhanced legislative transparency, streamlined processes and flexibility. They include increasing the implementation rate of expenditure against apportionment for the first budget period to 99.9 per cent, having a standard model approved that can be used as the basis of a budget report for start-up missions rather than a variety of financing mechanisms presented to the General Assembly on an ad hoc basis, attaining a target of 90 days between mandate approval and issuance of the budget report of the Secretary-General, reducing the volume of the first submitted budget report, aligning the number and value of deployments in the first year of operations and reducing the variances between actual expenditures and allotted amount by class. 66. Within the human resources management scorecard system, a number of operational indicators have been published and are being used by field missions for self-monitoring, and include such indicators as temporary appointments lasting more than 729 days, the employment of staff who are over retirement age, staff members earning a special post allowance for more than two years, the timely completion of performance appraisals, the management of staffing table problems and excessive leave balance. As the Secretariat moves towards the 2015 end state of the global field support strategy, data on those and related indicators will be collected to provide improved oversight and implementation of the human resources pillar. 67. As a comprehensive reform initiative, the global field support strategy proposes organizational changes that affect each of its stakeholders in different ways. Its communication strategy forms part of the broader engagement strategy and identifies the party responsible for delivering a set of key messages to each target audience at all levels. Communication will be accomplished through regular consultations and periodic informal briefings with Member States and through close coordination with institutional partners and staff on specific areas of interest. In addition, the Department of Field Support will draw on communication tools such as iSeek articles, presentations to senior management meetings, online surveys, focus groups and field visits to update the Secretariat on progress and seek feedback from stakeholders on implementation issues. Internal restructuring 68. The revised plan of the Field Personnel Division for 2013-2014 does not propose any functions for transfer. Instead, it separates transactional functions (e.g., the processing of entitlements) from the prevailing Headquarters role while remaining in New York, enabling possible relocation at a later stage. The oversight and guidance functions would have greater emphasis on strategic elements of the human resources framework, such as field workforce planning, monitoring, the provision and consistent application of guidance, the development of a cadre of human resources professionals and career support for staff in transitioning missions in close consultation with the Office of Human Resources Management. Further, a new Organizational Performance Measurement Unit and Field Human Resources Strategy Service would use existing resources to form units devoted to workforce planning and information management and the development of human resources capacity in the field, which are priority areas of the strategy's human resources framework. 69. Moving forward, the Field Budget and Finance Division will focus on strategic reserve allocation and ensuring mission resources/budgets align with mission strategic priorities. In this regard, it will continue its efforts to implement the strategic resource management framework. Significant effort will be placed within the Division upon the wider effort of the Department of Field Support to support the implementation of both IPSAS and Umoja, recognizing the challenges and opportunities that will arise from being the first of the Secretariat entities to implement those critical enablers. The Information and Communications Technology Division, using technology and software to leverage the global field support strategy, will fulfil a dual role of continuing support to field operations drawing on common services and infrastructure while simultaneously coordinating and supporting the progressive roll-out of Umoja. The Logistics Support Division will realign, taking into account the need to manage logistics and the global supply chain to ensure optimal support to Member States and Secretariat partners, planning and policy and oversight, risk and performance management. Synchronization with Umoja, the International Public Sector Accounting Standards and Inspira 70. In 2015, Umoja, IPSAS and Inspira will be in their second year of implementation, and benefits are expected as a result of joint planning and synchronization. The availability of reliable data made possible by IPSAS and Umoja will transform the Secretariat's ability to better manage on the basis of the clear visibility of assets. Systems will be integrated into the Department-wide performance management framework and employ specific goals, baselines, targets and key performance indicators. IPSAS and Umoja will continue to participate in the Steering Committee as standing members, enabling consistency and accountability by aligning the global field support strategy, IPSAS and Umoja in the support of integrated and standardized information and timely and accurate data. 71. Next steps in the development of the Global Service Centre will concentrate on finalizing a supply chain/modularization programme, including the refinement of camp designs, the development of designs for policing, corrections and justice facilities as well as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration sites; the enhancement of mission support teams; the training of mission personnel in programme and project management; and the identification of enabling capacities to meet the support needs of missions and deployed personnel throughout the mission life cycle. Global asset management and the composition of the strategic deployment stocks also will be refined further to support modularization and rapid service delivery to missions, including the development of mission personnel to sustain the initiative. Systems contracts will be reviewed and aligned to supply chain needs and modularization, including for enabling capacities. 72. The Global Service Centre will continue to reprofile and re-engineer its processes and functions to embed the global integrated supply chain, including a global asset source identification (clearing house) function. That includes a global geo-data information capacity. 73. The report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions of 29 April 2010 (A/64/660) listed services to be considered for transfer from field operations to the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe, covering finance and budget, human resources, back-office logistics, information technology and communications. The Regional Service Centre at Entebbe based its assessment of the movement of possible functions on that report. Before June 2015, the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe will transfer the transaction-processing components of financial and human resource services and provide those services to all of its client missions while conducting complementary activities to improve service delivery. 74. Education grant processing has yielded efficiency gains at both the Regional Service Centre and the Global Service Centre, and the Secretariat will examine options for the consolidation of this global function at the appropriate location in line with the completed cost-benefit analysis. The Transportation and Movements Integrated Control Centre will expand further to facilitate multimodal movement optimization within the framework of a global supply chain strategy. Other back-office logistics functions will include specification writing and technical evaluations. Information technology and communications activities, telephone billing, network management and help desk services should be operational in the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe during the financial period 2013/14. 75. In 2013, the support side of field operations will focus on Umoja and IPSAS preparation and implementation, and on taking steps towards the end-state vision for the global field support strategy. In 2013, Umoja will be rolled out at the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) as part of the pre-implementation process. Mission support plans will be reviewed to incorporate strategy objectives into specific operational outputs, such as process streamlining, functional integration or structural realignment. 76. Missions served by the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe will complete planned human resources and finance transfers, continue to pursue efficiencies through the Transportation and Movements Integrated Control Centre and make adjustments to remaining administrative functions. The Chief Human Resources Officer and Chief Budget Officer functions will remain in missions. Field operations without a Regional Service Centre will distinguish strategic and advisory functions from transactional functions within the integrated framework adopted by senior mission management towards the end state of the strategy. 77. As part of moving towards the end state of the global field support strategy, a more substantive focus on field missions has begun, and includes proposals before the General Assembly, in the context of the budget submissions for 2013/14, to merge the now-separate finance and budget functions in several missions (the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, UNIFIL and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti) in order to better align resource management and accounting processes. Encouraged and supported by Headquarters, missions will more actively pursue inter-mission cooperation while special political missions will experience more directly the benefits of the global field support strategy. IV. Requests to the General Assembly 78. In order to implement fully the end-state vision of the global field support strategy by 1 July 2015, the General Assembly is requested to: (a) Take note of the present report; (b) Take note of the lessons learned from the application of the standard funding model in the context of UNMISS and endorse the proposed revisions and improvements to the standard funding model reflected in paragraph 36 above. V. Conclusion 79. Challenges ranging from complex -- often volatile -- operational environments to increased demand for specialized capabilities, and the simultaneous need for greater organizational flexibility, are likely to be at least as compelling in 2015 as they are in 2012. The Organization must be prepared to confront those challenges and deliver real value for the Member States. The global field support strategy is one of the important efforts by the Secretariat -- together with Member States and Secretariat partners -- to meet those challenges in a dynamic way. Introducing sustainable changes to the structures, functions and processes throughout the Department of Field Support will require a range of tools and flexible response options if the United Nations is going to meet the expectations placed on the fulfilment of political and peacekeeping mandates by the full range of all stakeholders. It is for those reasons that the Secretariat is committed to the integrated global service delivery model of the global field support strategy. The model will reach the objectives put forth at the strategy's inception. Together, those changes will yield improved service delivery and client orientation; more synergies across missions; better use of data and information to track, measure and monitor performance; a lighter mission support footprint; efficient use of resources and increased accountability; and a more strategic Headquarters. 80. United Nations peacekeeping and political missions are entrusted with tremendous responsibilities by the Member States and high hopes by the peoples the United Nations aspires to serve. Those missions need better capabilities and services; the people they are serving require it, the Member States expect it and the Secretariat is committed to providing it. The global field support strategy is the delivery mechanism for those improved services. It provides the framework in which the United Nations rises to those challenges in a fundamentally different way than in the past; one in which responsive, mission-oriented service delivery is the objective; where uniformed and civilian personnel are the clients; where staff safety and security are paramount; and where structural efficiencies are introduced into every aspect of the Secretariat's work. Those objectives will be met, and in their achievement a solid foundation for other reforms will have been built. 81. Implementation of the global field support strategy will not end on 1 July 2015, however. Lessons will be learned from the first five-year period and the strategy will be adjusted to meet changing field requirements as well as field and system-wide reform requirements. The global field support strategy is as much a philosophical approach to the work of the United Nations as it is about structures and processes. 82. Further details of the implementation of the global field support strategy will be provided as annexes to the report of the Secretary-General on the overview of the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, which will address the remaining reporting areas requested by the General Assembly, as reflected in its resolution 66/264, as well as in the reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/66/718) and the Board of Auditors on United Nations peacekeeping operations (A/66/5 (Vol. II)). 