%%%MULTILINGUALISM|OFFICIAL LANGUAGES|WORKING LANGUAGES|LANGUAGE SERVICES|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|INTERPRETING|TRANSLATION|PARTNERSHIP|LANGUAGE STAFF|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|

Sixty-seventh session Item 120 of the preliminary list* Multilingualism * A/67/50. Multilingualism in the United Nations system organizations: status of implementation Note by the Secretary-General The Secretary-General has the honour to transmit to the members of the General Assembly the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled "Multilingualism in the United Nations system organizations: status of implementation" (JIU/REP/2011/4). MULTILINGUALISM IN THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM ORGANIZATIONS: STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION Prepared by Papa Louis Fall Yishan Zhang Joint Inspection Unit Geneva 2011 Note: All the above quotations are from anonymous staff members with the exception of the sentence in French from former Secretary-General Kofi Annan. Arabic: Multilingualism is an advantage for all, and in particular for Arabic-speaking people. Chinese: Chinese is the most spoken language in the world. French: At the United Nations, French is not polished, but punished. Russian: Multilingualism is a business card for the United Nations. Spanish: They would like me to speak in many tongues, but I have only one! EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Multilingualism in the United Nations system: status of implementation This report was included in the programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) in 2010, as per suggestions from the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the Board of Auditors (BoA) and the United Nations Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (DGACM), as a follow-up to the 2002 JIU report on the same subject. Its objective is to assess the status of implementation of multilingualism across the United Nations system organizations by reviewing different aspects related to language services and uses, including access to information and the development of multilingual websites, towards ensuring parity among the official languages and the working languages of the secretariats of the organizations. The report reviews key dimensions of multilingualism in the United Nations organizations, analysing its rationale and policy implications, and identifying effective measures to foster its implementation. The research covered the following areas: conference services, recruitment, training, outreach and institutional partnerships, among others. Key findings and recommendations Few organizations of the United Nations system have a formal policy on multilingualism, although the use of different languages in matters related to documentation, meetings and external communications is a general and factual reality. In the context of economic realities and financial constraints, the trend towards "monolingualism" is far from decreasing, with the "hegemonic" use of one language, English, over the other five United Nations languages, for the sake of pragmatism. Executive heads of organizations do not always either lead by example or ensure effective monitoring, controls and compliance regarding the parity of the six official languages and the equal treatment of the working languages within secretariats, including the use of additional working languages in specific duty stations. Within the United Nations Secretariat's departments and entities, despite significant ad hoc actions taken by DPI in specific areas, such as outreach, websites and language partnerships, the role of the Coordinator for Multilingualism is not well known; there has been no strategic plan to involve them in contributing in a coordinated way to the overall common objective. The main challenges faced by the interpretation and translation services are, inter alia, the shortage of professional language staff, many of whom will retire in the near future, the problem of succession planning, and the related issues of the language competitive examination and roster management of successful LCE candidates. The relevance of IAMLADP, a network of senior managers in Conference Services, in the development of good practices among its members is acknowledged at the highest management level within the United Nations system, as highlighted by the adoption of the Paris Declaration in 2010, which includes a request to the governing bodies of its member organizations "to ensure the necessary budgetary resources in order to achieve effective succession planning, including awareness-raising, pedagogical assistance activities and respective language admission examination". The Declaration also calls for the national authorities at country level to promote the teaching of languages throughout their education systems to promote better access to opportunities of employment in international organizations. Multilingualism and its implementation encompass many different actors. Further efforts need to be made by all stakeholders in the relevant areas for which they have a key role to play, including Member States and their representatives, executive heads of the organizations, secretariats, conference and language-related services, human resources, training, as well as public information and outreach departments. The effective implementation of multilingualism is a collective and shared responsibility. While the research identified positive and encouraging actions being undertaken in several organizations of the system, in particular the pro-active strategies launched by DGACM through its outreach programme, the piecemeal and fragmented approach across the system should be replaced by a "One UN policy on Multilingualism", under the institutional umbrella of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB). As part of such a policy, the following dimensions should be addressed: Member States Their role is crucial for adopting a clear position on multilingualism, expressed through their participation in the legislative bodies of the different United Nations system organizations, and for supporting its implementation by endorsing all the necessary measures to achieve it (recommendation 15). When creating new institutional bodies, they should plan for the resources required to address the resulting additional workload for conference services (recommendation 6). They should take their responsibilities in promoting the mandate and in ensuring the necessary resources to enable its effective implementation, in particular by supporting the development of multilingual websites in the United Nations system organizations (recommendation 12). Member States representatives should make use of all official languages at their disposal, and develop national capacities to promote language professional curricula up to the standards required by international organizations (see Chapter III, Box 1). They also have a key role to play in ensuring that succession planning be planned ahead with time-lead (recommendation 8). Systemic coordination: The organizations should establish an ad hoc coordinating working group through the CEB involving the network of coordinators for multilingualism. This working group would identify synergies for addressing common challenges related to the implementation of multilingualism and define a strategic "One UN policy on Multilingualism", so as to improve the language balance in the work of the organizations. Such a policy should take account of the recommendations issued by the International Annual Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publications (IAMLADP) (see paras. 63 and 73), an invaluable source of expertise in the area of conference and language arrangements for international organizations (recommendations 2, 3, 4 and 5). Internal coordination for multilingualism matters: Executive heads, with the support of senior officials appointed as coordinators for multilingualism in each organization, should foster internal collaboration among the different services -- clients and providers of language services -- so that multilingualism is duly implemented as per the mandates emanating from Member States (recommendation 1; see also para. 22 regarding the Coordinator for Multilingualism). Outreach and partnerships: The organizations should strengthen communication towards their constituencies and use all official and working languages as per their mandates; events, such as language days, should be advertised and promoted, with the support also of other sponsors (e.g. Members States, goodwill ambassadors). Partnerships with academia to improve the language curricula and to adapt them to the needs of the international organizations should be further developed, following the example of DGACM's outreach programme. Special attention should be paid to developing multilingual websites to ensure similar content in all official languages (recommendations 12 and 13; see also paras. 179 and 189). Recruitment issues and succession planning: The organizations should pay particular attention to requiring and assessing language skills of staff-at-large, as well as of senior officials, when recruiting or appointing them (recommendation 11, see also paras. 154 and 163). The organizations should facilitate the recruitment of new language professionals and further improve the procedures related to the United Nations language competitive examinations and plan for the succession, including deadlines to ensure replacement in language services and training for future candidates in language services (recommendations 8, 9, and 10; see also para. 85). Organizations should rely on a combination of in-house and external services to provide translation and interpretation services, thus ensuring internal delivery of core services and preserving the institutional memory (see paras. 123 and 127). Sectoral agreements with translators and interpreters: The signatories parties of the International Association of Conference Translators (AITC) and the International Association of Conference Interpreters (AIIC) sectoral agreements with translators and interpreters should comply with the agreed provisions, both at Headquarters and in regional offices (recommendation 7). Language-training and incentives: The organizations should promote continuous learning to promote the career development of language staff, and language training for staff-at-large (including incentives, time, recognition of language skills in career development, prompt release of language examination results, etc.). Common frameworks across the system and the different duty stations should be established so as to deliver equivalent language training programmes and final certificates recognized all over the system, following the example of the collaboration between the French learning sections of the United Nations in New York and Geneva (recommendations 9 and 10; see also paras. 151, 168, 169 and 171). Meetings and documentation: Cooperation between submitting departments and language services in conference services providing official documentation should be improved by reinforcing compliance with existing rules in terms of submission deadlines and quality of original documents (see para. 94). IT tools for improved language services: Support should be given to the recommendation formulated by the International Annual Meeting on Computer-Assisted Translation and Terminology (JIAMCATT) to develop in-house language software and to continue the development and use of CAT tools to assist staff in their daily work (see paras. 117 and 120). Language use in field activities: Local language needs and knowledge should duly be taken into account in delivering activities in the field and in preparing related materials (recommendation 14, see para. 84). The report contains 15 recommendations, of which 4 are addressed to the legislative bodies of the organizations and 11 to their executive heads. It also includes a number of suggestions (in bold) that the organizations might wish to consider. Recommendations for consideration by legislative organs Recommendation 6 When creating new institutional bodies that would require the provision of conference services, the legislative bodies of the United Nations system organizations should plan for the budgetary resources associated with the resulting additional workload, in particular for translation and interpretation. Recommendation 8 The legislative bodies of the organizations of the United Nations system should ensure that the necessary resources are allocated within the organizations to achieve effective succession planning and dispense targeted training to candidates to language examinations. Recommendation 12 The legislative bodies of the organizations of the United Nations system should direct and approve the necessary support to the executive heads to develop multilingual websites in all their official or working languages, with due attention to the language specificities of the duty stations concerned. Recommendation 15 As a matter of policy, the legislative bodies of the organizations of the United Nations system should endorse, including through budgetary channels, the arrangements required to ensure effective compliance in delivering the organizations' core work in all official and working languages. CONTENTS Chapter Paragraphs Page EXECUTIVE SUMMARY. ABBREVIATIONS. I. INTRODUCTION. A. Objective and focus B. Background C. Methodology II. MULTILINGUALISM: WHAT DOES IT STAND FOR? . A. Multilingualism in the United Nations system B. Status of languages in the United Nations system C. Language diversity and multilingualism III. MULTILINGUALISM: STAKEHOLDERS AND PARTNERSHIPS Key stakeholders Shared responsibilities Language networks and institutional partnerships IV. MULTILINGUALISM: CONFERENCE AND LANGUAGE SERVICES . Meetings and documentation Interpretation services Translation services D. Outsourcing translation and interpretation services E. Demographic transition, recruitment and succession planning for language staff V. MULTILINGUALISM: OTHER DIMENSIONS Language skills for a multilingual workforce: recruitment and training Outreach: Websites and public information Multilingualism, peace and development Role of Member States The way forward ANNEXES Formal frameworks for multilingualism in organizations of the United Nations system Official and working languages of the secretariats of the organizations of the United Nations system Language training: eligibility and cost sharing Websites and multilingualism Memoranda of Understanding between academic institutions and the United Nations VI. Coverage of the AIIC - United Nations Agreement VII. Organizations party to the AITC - CCAQ Agreement VIII. Overview of actions to be taken by participating organizations on the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit ABBREVIATIONS ACABQ Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions ACC Administrative Committee on Coordination (now CEB) AfDB African Development Bank AIIC International Association of Conference Interpreters AITC International Association of Conference Translators ASG Assistant-Secretary-General AUC African Union Commission BoA Board of Auditors CAT Computer assisted translation CCAQ Consultative Committee on Administrative Questions CEB United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (formerly ACC) CEFR Common European Framework of Reference for languages CTBTO Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-test-ban Treaty Organization DCM Division of Conference Management (UNOG) DGACM Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (UNHQ) DFS Department of Field Support (UNHQ) DM Department of Management (UNHQ) DPKO Department of Peacekeeping operations (UNHQ) DPI Department of Public Information (UNHQ) EC European Commission ECCAS Economic Community of Central African States ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ECOSOC Economic and Social Council EP European Parliament EU European Union FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations HLCM High-Level Committee on Management HR Human Resources IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency IAMLADP International Annual Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publications ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ICSC International Civil Service Commission IGO Inter-Governmental Organization ILO International Labour Organization ISO International Organization for Standardization IMO International Maritime Organization ITU International Telecommunication Union JIAMCATT International Annual Meeting on Computer-Assisted Translation and Terminology JIU LCE Language Competitive Examination LDCs Least Developed Countries MoU Memorandum of Understanding OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development OHCHR Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights OHRM Office of Human Resources Management (UNHQ) OIF Organisation internationale de la Francophonie OICT Office of Information and Communications Technology OIOS Office of Internal Oversight Services PBC United Nations Peacebuilding Commission PCT Patent Cooperation Treaty (WIPO) SDLS Staff Development and Learning Section (UNOG) UNCITRAL United Nations Commission on International Trade Law UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNECA United Nations Economic Commission for Africa UNECE United Nations Economic Commission for Europe UNESCAP United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific UNESCWA United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNFPA United Nations Population Fund UN-HABITAT United Nations Human Settlements Programme UNHCR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization UNODC United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime UNOG United Nations Office at Geneva UNON United Nations Office at Nairobi UNOPS United Nations Office for Project Services UNOV United Nations Office at Vienna UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization UPU Universal Postal Union USG Under-Secretary-General WFP World Food Programme WHO World Health Organization WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization WMO World Meteorological Organization I. INTRODUCTION 1. Stemming from various proposals made notably by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the United Nations Board of Auditors (BoA) and the United Nations Department for General Assembly and Conference Management (DGACM), the evaluation on "Multilingualism in the United Nations system organizations: status of implementation" was included in the 2010 programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) to review different aspects related to languages services and uses within the United Nations system. 2. Based on the landmark United Nations General Assembly resolution 50/11 and subsequent ones on multilingualism, the objective of this report is to assess the status of implementation of multilingualism across the United Nations system. The review has identified different stages of definition and status of implementation within the organizations of the United Nations system and offers a detailed analysis of the different services directly related to its effective implementation: conference services, translation, interpretation, recruitment, language training, outreach and public information, among others. 3. The review analyses the policy and strategic dimension of multilingualism as the Inspectors believe that this subject requires an in-depth analysis beyond the recurrent issue of financial and budgetary constraints. At a time when the Secretary-General of the United Nations is requesting its Secretariat "to think out of the box and be innovative and creative" in order to do more with less resources, an objective analysis is required to assess the pros and cons of a plural approach to the use of languages in a diverse and multicultural organization through a qualitative assessment of the issue. 4. As an update on the status of implementation of multilingualism across the United Nations system, the report will also follow up on JIU system-wide report on multilingualism (JIU/REP/2002/11) and address the issues of equal treatment and parity for the official languages and the working languages of the secretariats. It will address related issues, such as language examinations in connection with recruitment, language training and learning for staff, access to information, distribution of documents and development of multilingual websites to identify good practices and make recommendations. 5. The imbalance among the official languages and the disparity between the working languages of the Secretariat have been a matter of concern for Member States of the United Nations, as illustrated by numerous resolutions promoting multilingualism, from the first one, General Assembly resolution 2(I) of 1 February 1946 to the latest one, General Assembly resolution 65/311 of 19 July 2011. Multilingualism is an essential component of cultural diversity, a concept enshrined in the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions, adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO at its thirty-third session in October 2005, and welcomed by the United Nations General Assembly at its sixty-third session. The organizations of the United Nations system have a collective and shared responsibility in the implementation of this core value throughout their daily work and relations with their constituencies. As stated in the report of the Secretary-General on Multilingualism in 2006: "An essential factor in harmonious communication among peoples, multilingualism is of very particular importance to the United Nations. By promoting tolerance, it thus ensures effective and increased participation of all in its work, as well as greater effectiveness, better outcomes and more involvement. Multilingualism should be preserved and encouraged by various actions within the United Nations system, in a spirit of partnership and communication." 7. Multilingualism literally means "use of multiple languages". In practice, the term is used when dealing with the use of more than two languages. At the United Nations, multilingualism refers to the use, in fairness and parity, to its official and working languages. The six official languages of the United Nations are Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish, while English and French are the working languages of the Secretariat. Since the creation of the United Nations, multilingualism has been a prime and recurring issue on the agendas of governing bodies of the United Nations system. 8. The review covers 25 organizations of the United Nations system as well as other international organizations in order to learn from other experiences and good practices. The research was conducted between May 2010 and July 2011. In accordance with the internal standards and guidelines of the JIU and its internal working procedures, the methodology followed in preparing this report included a preliminary desk review, elaboration of questionnaires, interviews, and an in-depth analysis of data collected. Detailed questionnaires were sent to the administrative focal points for multilingualism of the participating organizations of the United Nations system as well as to other relevant stakeholders, such as language-staff associations and other international organizations with relevant multilingual dimensions. 9. The Inspectors conducted interviews at the headquarters of the organizations, at specialized language-related meetings (e.g. IAMLADP in 2010) or by videoconference. Interviews were conducted with different groups of key stakeholders, more specifically coordinators and focal points for multilingualism, public information and outreach departments, language learning services, conference services, including translation and interpretation, as well as human resources departments in 20 international organizations. Interviews were also held with representatives of international organizations, from outside of the United Nations system, such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the European Commission (EC) and the European Parliament (EP). 10. Comments on the draft report have been sought from the organizations and taken into account in finalizing the report. The research revealed common concerns across the organizations, the analysis of which helped in understanding the challenges and identifying possible measures to better implement multilingualism, in compliance with the mandates from the General Assembly and legislative bodies of other United Nations system organizations. The analysis is based on data collected through questionnaires, a desk review, official figures from DGACM, the Secretary-General's biennial report on multilingualism and the report on the activities of the Department of Public Information (DPI), among others. 11. In accordance with article 11.2 of the JIU statute, this report was finalized after consultation among the Inspectors so as to test its conclusions and recommendations against the collective wisdom of the Unit. 12. To facilitate the handling of the report and the implementation of its recommendations and the monitoring thereof, Annex VIII indicates whether the report is submitted to the organizations concerned for action or for information. It identifies the recommendations that are relevant for each organization and specifies whether decision by the legislative or governing body of the organization or action by its executive head is required. 13. The Inspectors wish to express their appreciation to all who assisted them in the preparation of this report, and particularly to those who participated in the interviews and so willingly shared their knowledge and expertise. Multilingualism: What does it stand for? A. Multilingualism in the United Nations system 14. As stated by DGACM, while languages are the attribute of nations, multilingualism is the attribute of the United Nations. The concept of multilingualism is understood in different ways depending on the target audience and users. Multilingualism is a means of preserving cultural diversity through the promotion of the use of different languages. According to UNESCO, experts estimate that there are currently more than 6,000 languages in the world. UNESCO has launched a specific programme to preserve "endangered languages". The preservation of institutional multilingualism in international organizations serves to promote international communication, understanding, participation and inclusion. 15. Early reference to the use of languages in the United Nations is made in General Assembly resolution 2(I), annex, paragraph 1, which states that "in all the organs of the United Nations, other than the International Court of Justice, Chinese, French, English, Russian and Spanish shall be the official languages, and English and French the working languages". The current language status was attained with the inclusion of Arabic as the sixth official and working language. 16. The adoption of a mandate on multilingualism resulted from the natural evolution and continued recognition of the importance of the diversity of languages as a vehicle for representing cultural diversity within the United Nations system community. In 1995, the General Assembly adopted its landmark resolution 50/11, recalling previous resolutions on different aspects related to language use in the United Nations, and addressing them under the single umbrella of "multilingualism". It referred to multilingualism as the corollary of the universality of the United Nations. Since then, the United Nations General Assembly has regularly adopted resolutions on multilingualism, and included the subject as an agenda item on a biennial basis. The latest resolution on multilingualism was adopted at the sixty-fifth session held in July 2011 (resolution 65/311). 17. In reviewing the status of implementation of multilingualism across the United Nations system, the Inspectors observed a variety of situations according to the different needs of the organizations, their clients, geographical location and mandates. Annex I displays the different formal frameworks existing in the organizations. Few of them have a formal policy on multilingualism, although all take into account the use of different languages in matters related to documentation, meetings and external communications. 18. Several organizations have adopted an internal policy on multilingualism and have referred to the previous JIU report on Multilingualism (JIU/REP/2002/11) as a source of inspiration for defining specific strategies towards improved implementation of multilingualism (e.g. UNIDO, WHO and WIPO). Other organizations, such as UNESCO, have a long track record in promoting multilingualism, and have active policies for language preservation throughout the world. It is expected that this report and its recommendations will inspire those organizations still lagging behind in addressing the issue of multilingualism. 19. In resolution 54/64 of December 1999, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to appoint a senior Secretariat official as coordinator of questions relating to multilingualism throughout the Secretariat. In May 2008, the Secretary-General appointed then Under-Secretary-General for Communications and Public Information as Coordinator for Multilingualism. The task of the Coordinator is "to harmonize the measures implemented and to propose strategies to ensure that United Nations linguistic practices are in keeping with the recommendations and provisions of the various resolutions relating to multilingualism. Among other things, the Coordinator centralizes the proposals and requests having to do with multilingualism throughout the Secretariat" (A/61/317, para. 11). 20. In practice, the Coordinator's role is not well-known within the United Nations Secretariat entities; (e.g. regional commissions or UNCTAD), they have not yet perceived any significant change or received particular instructions from the Coordinator. According to DPI, some departments do not contribute as expected to the overall coordinating task, despite repeated reminders. 21. Despite commendable ad hoc actions taken by DPI in order to improve specific areas, such as outreach, websites and language partnerships, there has been no strategic plan involving all the United Nations entities for the implementation of multilingualism. The Coordinator's Compact agreement with the Secretary-General does not include this task as an objective per se but rather as the expected accomplishment of one of the objectives. Reference is made indirectly to the expected accomplishment of "increased reach of public information products and services through multilingualism" as part of the overall objective of "raising public awareness of, and support for, the activities and concerns of the United Nations". However, DPI's proposed programme budget includes performance measures related to multilingualism, including the use of levels of the United Nations website, broken down by official language, as well as the number of partner broadcast stations for each of the languages in which the Department prepares audio/visual content. 22. The Inspectors believe that the mandate on multilingualism, as formally recognized by the General Assembly through the pertinent resolutions, should be strategically implemented by the Coordinator for Multilingualism, with the support of a network of focal points, and this role should be included as a specific objective in his annual Compact agreement with the Secretary-General. 23. Other organizations of the United Nations system have designated in-house coordinators or focal points for multilingualism. Nevertheless, with some exceptions, they are not positioned at a high hierarchical level of the organization (e.g. UNIDO), thus making difficult for them to be in a position to propose with the necessary authority concrete measures to be followed by all departments of an organization. The work of the coordinators is often an additional workload to their official duties and it is not fairly recognized or, and is not supported by the necessary resources to effectively implement any action plan in the area of multilingualism. In order to improve coordination and effectiveness in implementing multilingualism, the Inspectors recommend the following: Recommendation 1 The executive heads who have not yet done so should: (a) appoint a senior official as coordinator for multilingualism, tasked with proposing strategic action plans for the effective implementation of multilingualism, with the assistance of an internal network of focal points within their respective organization; (b) report regularly to their legislative bodies on progress achieved in this regard. 24. There is a variety of situations regarding formal policies on multilingualism in the different organizations of the system. In 2010, WIPO submitted to its legislative body a document prepared by the Secretariat and proposing a "Policy on languages at WIPO". This document addresses all the relevant aspects of the use of languages in the organization. 25. In 2007, WHO developed a strategic Plan of action on multilingualism for 2008-2013, which was endorsed in resolutions WHA60.11 and WHA61.12. The Plan covers objectives for establishing translation priorities, creating a team of multilingual web editors, promoting respect for linguistic diversity across the organization, building an institutional repository to store multilingual content online, building a database of staff language competencies, consolidating styles and terms in all official languages, ensuring high-quality language training for all staff, increasing multilingual publishing and appointing a special coordinator to oversee the implementation of the proposed actions. 26. UNIDO adopted a resolution on multilingualism (GC.13/Res.4) and has a proactive policy in this regard. The organization reintroduced full coverage of the costs of language training to its staff in 2010, while previously a cost-sharing policy had been applied. This is an enabling measure to give incentives to staff to strengthen their language skills. This initiative should be encouraged and adopted by those organizations not yet covering the full language training costs for their staff. 27. FAO's language policy is currently under review. In 1999, the thirtieth session of the FAO Conference reaffirmed "the imperative of ensuring parity and balanced in the use of all FAO languages and the need for supervision of the quality of translation and interpretation. In looking forward to further improvements in the future, the Conference agreed to the need for Members to monitor progress closely through periodic follow-up and evaluation" (C99/REP, para. 94). UNHCR also has a language training policy which is currently under review to incorporate within the organization the latest developments in the field and the changes in recording the language competency level of staff. 28. UNESCO has a formal policy for the implementation of multilingualism which is covered in different manuals, as well as in the rules of procedures for their General Conference, Executive Board and Secretariat. The organization is in the process of finalizing internal guidelines for the Internet website policy and creating specific rules for multilingualism. 29. These are all examples of good practices that could inspire other organizations which have not yet done so to formalize a policy on multilingualism or to promote exchanges of experiences within the system. Annex I shows the current status of formal frameworks for multilingualism in the United Nations system, based on the responses to the JIU questionnaire. B. Status of languages in the United Nations system 30. Article 111 of the Charter of the United Nations states that the texts in Chinese, French, Russian, English and Spanish are equally authentic. This is the seminal principle underlying the evolution of language-related procedures over the years. 31. Previous JIU reports, from as early as in 1977 and more recently in 2002, were unable to determine with certainty the origin of the distinction between "official" and "working" languages in the rules of procedure of the General Assembly or the other principal organs of the United Nations. 32. Since then, no definition of either "working" or "official" languages has been formalized. The add-on rules on use of languages and rules of procedure have only specified different uses in different organs (see Annex II for the status of official and working languages of the secretariats of the United Nations system organizations covered by this review). 33. The terminology also varies, and denominations such as "official working languages" can also be found. In practice, the difference between "working" and "official" is not clearly defined. For instance, in 1985, the Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) proposed the introduction of Portuguese as "an official working language" (ECOSOC resolution 1985/68), in consideration of "the number of States members of the Economic Commission for Africa and the growing numbers of people in those countries that use Portuguese as an official working language". 34. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) addressed the matter of the terminology "official working language" when it considered the above-mentioned resolution 1985/68. On the basis of the lack of clarity and the non-existence of a category "official working language", the Committee recommended that no action be taken with regard to the resources requested for its implementation. Regrettably, Portuguese still does not appear as being any "kind" of working language of the UNECA. 35. In some organizations of the United Nations system, the understanding of official and working language is opposite to the standard one (adopted by most organizations). In some cases, like at FAO, ICAO, ITU or WMO, the distinction between official and working languages does not exist. In general, while it is understood that working languages are a subset of official languages, there are exceptions, such as at ILO, UPU and WIPO, whereby there are more working languages than official languages (see Table 1 and Annex II). Table 1: Official and working languages at ILO OFFICIAL LANGUAGES WORKING LANGUAGES ARABIC X CHINESE ENGLISH FRENCH RUSSIAN SPANISH Other: GERMAN Source: Response to JIU questionnaire, 2010. 36. Based on the responses to the questionnaire and the different realities across the system, it appears that definitions relate more to the identification of which services and documents should be provided in what languages, than trying to obtain a clear definition of "official" and "working" language. Furthermore, the understanding of these concepts is not the same in all the organizations. 37. In order to have a "One UN" language policy, a common understanding of "official" and "working" language would help to identify their respective uses and to develop a coherent policy on the services to be provided in each of them. In order to enhance coordination and cooperation across the United Nations system in the area of conference and language-related services, the Inspectors recommend the following: Recommendation 2 The executive heads, through their participation in the CEB, should develop a common understanding of the differences between "official" and "working" languages as a coherent basis for better coordinating the use of languages and promoting multilingualism across the United Nations system. 38. The Inspectors found that, in practice, English and French, the working languages of the United Nations Secretariat and of almost all of the organizations of the United Nations system, are not treated equally, at the expenses of the other working language. The resolutions calling for equal treatment of working languages are not properly implemented. This is a matter of serious concern which needs to be dealt with in line with General Assembly resolution 59/266, para. 6. 39. It is necessary to reinforce language skills of the staff-at-large by encouraging and giving incentives to staff who command only one working language to take language courses in order to be able to deliver their work in both working languages. In view of fostering the effective use of French and English in the United Nations Secretariat as the working languages, as well as the use of at least two official working languages in the secretariats of other organizations of the system, the Inspectors recommend the following: Recommendation 3 The executive heads should take further effective measures towards eliminating the current imbalance in the use of the working languages within secretariats, including among senior managers, and require all staff to develop their language skills so as to acquire good knowledge of at least a second working language. C. Language diversity and multilingualism 40. Multilingualism relates to the use of several languages on an equal basis. In order for several languages to coexist, it is necessary to avoid the predominance of some languages over others. 41. Some languages are spoken by large groups of people all over the world, in different countries. One way to preserve linguistic diversity is to avoid the disappearance of languages due to their being used less and less, either because their original native speakers are disappearing or because other languages are replacing them for some purposes. 42. UNESCO has been active in promoting multilingualism and linguistic diversity. In the context of its initiative to protect endangered languages, it has developed the concept of language vitality as illustrated below: Source: http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/cultural-diversity/languages-and-multilingualism/endangered-languages/language-vitality/ 43. According to the concept of language vitality, no one parameter can lead to the extinction of a language, but together they constitute an indicator of the vitality of a language. While this concept was developed as a means to protect endangered languages and prevent their extinction, a similar reasoning could be extrapolated for analysing what can be done within the United Nations system to avoid the trend towards monolingualism, by increasingly imposing the use of one language as hegemony over the other five United Nations languages. Inspired by the parameters identified by UNESCO for endangered languages, JIU has associated potential actions aimed at strengthening multilingualism to the parameters for ensuring language vitality, within a broad understanding of the concept. In the context of the review of multilingualism in the United Nations system, the following parameters can be identified as areas in which action should be taken to contribute to the vitality of the six official languages of the United Nations. Language vitality parameters Examples of actions that could be taken by United Nations system organizations Governmental and institutional language attitudes and policies, including official status and use Effectively use all official languages in official events, in particular native speakers of these languages; secretariats should use official languages other than English whenever possible and meaningful in official meetings. This is in line with Resolution 56/656, para. 29: "Secretariat officials appearing before intergovernmental or expert bodies will be encouraged, when they address meetings with interpretation services, to use official languages other than English whenever possible." Availability of materials for language education and literacy Reinforce availability of language training material and courses in all official languages; provide incentives to staff within the organizations. Community members' attitudes towards their own language Pro-active attitude from representatives of Member States with regard to speaking in their own language if it is an official language of the United Nations, instead of using English. "to be better understood" Type and quality of documentation Preserve the necessary means to issue high-quality documentation in all official languages; encourage submission of documents in working languages other than English, in particular considering the target audience and beneficiaries. Response to new domains and media Develop outreach policies and social media in all official languages so as to reach a broader audience without language discrimination. 44. Instrumental in preserving cultural and language diversity in the world, UNESCO launched the International Year of Languages in 2008. The Year provided a visible platform to actively inform about language diversity and to organize events related to the importance of languages in the world. 45. Reference should be made to the constant efforts of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF), one of the most active actors in promoting cultural diversity and language preservation. Created in 1970, the OIF promotes cultural and outreach activities and maintains an active network of francophone countries worldwide. The OIF was also instrumental in the approval process of the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions (2005), a cornerstone of international law aimed at ensuring the preservation of socio-cultural diversity in the world. 46. Multilingualism has always been a matter of concern for the OIF, which has concluded 33 cooperation agreements with international and regional organizations and established permanent dialogue between the major international linguistic zones (Arabic, English, Portuguese, Spanish). While its original focus was directly related to promoting and preserving the status of the French language in the world, in recent years, its activities have broadened to encompass multilingualism. In 2010 and 2011, the OIF organized, in collaboration with the United Nations Office in Geneva (UNOG) and the multilingualism focal point, two round tables on the subject to coincide with the celebration of the French Language Day, in the context of the United Nations Language Day. 47. The 2011 seminar entitled: "Multilingualism in international organizations: which investments for which objectives?" discussed, among other aspects, the question of the value of multilingualism. Professor François Grin, an expert on language economics, shared with the audience his knowledge of the dialectic analysis of language and economics, an economic model according to which multilingualism would be an instrumental element of growth and economic development for a country. He presented a thought-provoking comment on the issue of the burden shift of costs. When an organization decreases its provision of services (e.g. documents, translation, interpretation, websites) to its Members States, the impact will be unevenly distributed, with the more severely hit being the poorer members, which are unable to pay for these services themselves. 48. The representative of Canada referred to the fact that often foreign services training in wealthier countries included intensive language courses to ensure that their diplomats would be proficient in at least one foreign language, while developing countries had less resources to provide language training to their future diplomats. Therefore, the lack of compliance with multilingualism within the United Nations system organizations would have a greater negative impact on the access to information for the delegations of developing countries. 49. Linguistic events, such as those organized by the United Nations in 2010 and 2011, in collaboration with the OIF, provide an enabling environment for monitoring language vitality in the United Nations and gauging public perception. Recently, an association of francophone journalists in Switzerland created the Observatoire des Langues to monitor the use of French in United Nations Geneva-based organizations and has designated a permanent observer to the United Nations for this purpose. 50. Special reference should also be made to the institutions of the European Union, as they are by far unique examples of multilingual organizations in which language diversity is a day-to-day reality. Their experience sheds light on the complexity involved in fairly implementing multilingualism and the related political choices inherent to such a policy. 51. The European Union (EU) has a two-fold approach to multilingualism that is oriented towards the internal functioning of its institutions and, even more important, towards strengthening language knowledge and sharing as vehicles for communication and cohesion, so as to build a sense of community within Europe. In that context, multilingualism is understood more as a policy outside of the European institutions than within them, oriented towards the use of languages in the member countries for the benefit of the populations. Multilingualism is a long-term strategy for building a European identity, and the basis for a multicultural Europe where people of different countries and cultures can understand each other and move around a common shared cultural space. 52. This policy is clearly reflected in the organizational chart of the European Commission (EC) and embedded in the competencies of its Directorates General (DG) for Education and Culture, Interpretation (including training support for interpreters) and Translation. Within the European Parliament (EP), multilingualism is an integral part of the competencies of the DGs for Interpretation and Conferences (including prospecting and traineeships) and Translation. The working environment of the EC and EP is by definition multilingual as they equally treat the 23 different languages of its member states, all of them being official languages. Initiatives related to non-official United Nations languages 53. The debate on the potential inclusion of other languages in addition to the current six official languages of the United Nations is a recurrent subject. While budgetary constraints are invoked to avoid developing further any argument about it, there is no in-depth assessment based on a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis of multilingualism, and extended language coverage, and its cost implications. In first instance, the incorporation of new languages appears essentially as a political matter. What would be the criteria? Which languages? For which services? The Pandora box remains closed until further notice. 54. Meanwhile, a piecemeal approach has been adopted by some countries which are truly interested in making United Nations documentation available in their own language, to the extent that they can afford to fund the provision of services to that effect. Certain non-official languages have been represented to some extent, on ad hoc basis, in the United Nations system, such as German, Japanese and Portuguese, among others. German 55. DGACM at UNHQ hosts the German Translation Section of the United Nations, established further to General Assembly resolution 3355 (XXIX) of 1974. Since 1975, all resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, as well as numerous other important United Nations documents, have been issued in an official German version. The Section is funded through a trust fund financed by contributions from Austria, Germany, Liechtenstein and Switzerland. 56. German is also used in several other organizations of the system: at ILO, as one of the seven working languages (even before the existence of the United Nations); at WHO, where it is an official language in the regional office for Europe, and a working language of the Regional Committee for Europe, with interpretation provided at Regional Committee meetings; at WIPO, as part of its multilingual services in the context of the work developed to serve the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT); at UNOV, where language courses in German are partially subsidized for staff members; at FAO, with interpretation provided in that language for the Conference and its Regional Conference for Europe, if so requested by the German government, with a cost-sharing arrangement. Portuguese 57. Even though it is not an official or working language of the United Nations, Portuguese is used by several organizations for specific activities, meetings and documents. This is the case at WIPO, where the 2000 session of the Assemblies of the Member States of WIPO decided to publish promotional material regarding WIPOadministered treaties in Portuguese; to develop WIPO's website to include publications in Portuguese; and to provide, as necessary, Portuguese interpretation for diplomatic conferences and for the General Assembly. The specific arrangements for the latter would be at the discretion of the Director General, who would also be encouraged to seek voluntary contributions in respect of this provision. Training activities in lusophone countries can also be provided in Portuguese. 58. At ILO, one quarter of all publications is available in Portuguese. In 2007, language training for staff was expanded to include Portuguese (in addition to Arabic, Chinese and Russian, compared to previous choices on only English, French and Spanish). Facilities for translation and interpretation from Portuguese are provided for certain meetings under special funding agreements with lusophone countries. 59. The Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) translates website content and some documents into Portuguese and on an as-needed basis with respect to technical or development cooperation activities undertaken in lusophone countries of the region (e.g. Brazil). UNESCO is currently preparing to provide information and documents in Portuguese on its website. At FAO, Portuguese interpretation is provided at the Regional Conference for Latin America and the Caribbean, if so requested by the Government of Brazil, as well as at the Regional Conference for Africa. In such cases, the respective government and the Director-General agree on the sharing of additional costs. Generally speaking, Member Nations may request interpretation into other languages, provided that they bear the costs of such services, as agreed with FAO. 60. At the country level, the Government of Angola has engaged in negotiating a host country agreement for the establishment of an Information Centre in Luanda that would strengthen the ability of the United Nations to reach Portuguese-speaking audiences in Africa. Portuguese is a working language in the WHO Regional Office for the Americas and the Regional Office for Africa. WHO headquarters also runs an "ePORTUGUÊSe" network, the mission of which is to strengthen collaboration among Portuguese-speaking countries, promote capacity-building of human resources for health and facilitate access to health information in Portuguese. The use of this language is also considered for specific cases of peacebuilding and reconstruction in post-conflict countries. Bangladesh 61. In September 2010, the Prime Minister of Bangladesh addressed the General Assembly's annual high-level segment and requesting that Bangla be included as an official United Nations language to reflect the vast number of its speakers. UNESCO observes the International Mother Language Day on 21 February, which commemorates a student's demonstration in 1952 for Bangla to be made an official language of then East Pakistan. 62. The lack of a common understanding of what are the criteria for a language to be eligible as an official or working language, and the differences between the two categories do not help to define clear policies on multilingualism. Furthermore, the current status quo of languages in the United Nations does not reflect the geopolitical, socioeconomic and demographic changes that have occurred in the world since Arabic was added as the sixth official language of the United Nations almost forty years ago, in 1973. In this regard, there is a gap -- a dissonance -- between the commitment to preserve cultural diversity as per the UNESCO Convention on this matter and its effective translation into a stronger promotion of multilingualism within the United Nations system. 63. In light of recommendation 2, the Inspectors propose that the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the CEB, invite the organizations of the United Nations system to undertake a self-evaluation of the status of implementation of multilingualism in their respective organization, and to regularly assess the needs of their key stakeholders, such as Member States and partner organizations (including civil society and academia). Such a systemic exercise could be implemented by establishing clear monitoring processes within each organization to collect information on language-related services, including surveys to users, partners and universities. The CEB Secretariat could coordinate the overall process and disseminate the results through the establishment of an ad hoc network or a working group on multilingualism, similar to those existing for other systemic issues (e.g. the human resources network). 64. Many organizational regulations and rules, such as administrative instructions, are issued in two or three languages only, sometimes in English only. Those key documents ought to be translated into all six official languages in order to ensure equal treatment of languages as well as proper and uniform translation when cited in other publications. Standard operating procedures should be developed for each organization, defining documents for which translation is mandatory in all official languages. The Inspectors are also of the view that the executive heads of organizations have a significant role to play in leading by example in their respective organization, by ensuring effective monitoring, controls and compliance regarding the equitable treatment of languages. Specific events could be organized by the respective focal points in each organization, inviting staff members to contribute ideas and experiences on how to improve the implementation of multilingualism. In order to increase effectiveness, the Inspectors recommend the following: Recommendation 4 The executive heads of the United Nations system organizations should, in monitoring the equitable use of official languages within their respective organization, regularly assess users' needs and formulate strategies to enhance the implementation of multilingualism through the involvement of their respective coordinators for multilingualism and related network of focal points. ltilingualism: Stakeholders and partnerships A. Key stakeholders 65. The implementation of multilingualism takes place through the participation of the relevant stakeholders that altogether can shape the proper environment for languages to evolve positively, on an equitable basis in compliance with the pertinent mandate. 66. As the main policy actors, Member States, through their representatives, and the executive heads of the United Nations system organizations are responsible for the definition of the mandate, the allocation of necessary resources to support its implementation, and the identification of concrete measures within the organizations aimed at preserving language diversity and ensuring the provision of high-quality language-related goods and services. In the context of the Secretary-General's reform initiative, DPI has made a proposal to launch a constructive debate with Member States to assess the true costs of multilingualism and the parity mandate, taking into account the fast-growing content on the United Nations website, most of which is being generated in English only by various departments and offices. The Inspectors concur with this view and support this proposal. 67. The implementation of multilingualism involves a variety of professionals from different areas related to language and conference services, including interpretation, translation, meetings and documentation, learning and language training, human resources, among others. It also involves external partners, such as academic institutions as providers of well-trained professionals in the area of language services. 68. Staff of the organizations can actively contribute by using different languages in their daily work and by strengthening their language skills through continuous language training. This is particularly relevant for internationally recruited professional staff, as they are subject to mobility provisions. Human resources departments and hiring managers have a key responsibility to include language skills in recruitment, promotion and career development as a parameter to be formally and effectively tested when considering future candidates. B. Shared responsibilities 69. The effective implementation of the mandate on multilingualism to achieve the goal of a multilingual working environment providing services in all official languages and, when pertinent in local languages, is a collective and shared responsibility requiring pro-action from all the different stakeholders. In setting up partnerships to ensure the availability of high-quality professional language staff, all stakeholders -- clients (countries, civil society, academia, media, etc); service providers (secretariats, field offices, peacekeeping operations, etc.); managers involved in the recruitment process; conference and language-related services; outreach and public information departments; the language community; policymakers -- have a role to play. 70. Horizontal matters, such as gender-equality and environmental policies, do not fall under one simple area of action; collaboration among different actors is required to ensure the collective achievement. Box 1 below highlights some responsibilities and potential actions of the different actors mentioned above. Stakeholders Responsibilities and actions - Establish a mandate on multilingualism and monitor its effective implementation; - Decide about allocation of resources to support implementation; - Choose their language(s) of communication and not privilege English over other official languages (contrary to current reality); - Use their official language in official meetings if it is a United Nations official language; - Support language training in their national education systems so as to promote new generations of language professionals adapted to the needs of international organizations; - Inform students interested in diplomatic or international civil service careers about the language requirements in international organizations. Executive heads - Define internal procedures to ensure effective implementation of the mandate and report regularly on progress made to Member States; - Lead by example by communicating in languages other than English in official events, if having a good command of other official languages; - Promote incentive measures to facilitate the development of language skills within their organization; - Make senior management accountable for achieving clear results with regard to language parity and equitable treatment for languages; - Ensure the enforcement of established agreements in language services (e.g. for organizations having ratified the agreements regarding freelance translators and interpreters). Managers in the organizations - Promote language training for staff and themselves and the use of different working languages, not only for official activities, but also in the day-to-day work of the unit, within existing resources; - Assess the real knowledge of language skills as required for a post, during the recruitment process; - Plan for multilingualism by including translation costs in project budgets. Managers and staff in language-related services - While providing quality goods and services as requested, continuously draw attention to the challenges and difficulties faced by their services, and limit quality-quantity trade-off caused by increasing resource constraints. Human resources departments - Verify compliance with language requirements in vacancy announcements and candidate competencies for posts; - Publicize (e.g. in the telephone directory or email signature) the languages known by staff in the organization. Outreach, public information, conference management and language services - Ensure issuance of information in multiple official languages, in particular in electronic media and public briefings; - Establish MoUs with academia, and partnerships with other organizations in language-related areas; - Maintain language-quality standards despite budgetary constraints, and request the resources necessary to maintain these standards. - Incorporate the results from IAMLADP annual meetings to keep improving quality, efficiency and coordination in the area of language and conference services Staff members at large - Continue to use languages other than English in their work environment, and enrol in language courses if they currently master only one official language; - Use computer-assisted translation when relevant and feasible in their daily work (with due caution). Academic institutions Strengthen partnerships and adjust curricula to the needs of international organizations so that there is an equilibrium in supply and demand for language services with a win-win result for both language professionals and language services. C. Language networks and institutional partnerships 71. Collaboration between Member States, academia and international organizations has strengthened in recent years, in particular following the launch of DGACM's University Outreach Programme. DPI also has its own outreach programme. 72. Language networks and partnerships between academia and international organizations are powerful tools for the dissemination of best practices in the area of language services. They also contribute to setting up mechanisms to face the multiple challenges related to the anticipated shortfall in language professionals as part of succession planning efforts taken by some organizations to address generational replacement and the scarcity of qualified interpretation and translation candidates. International Annual Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publication (IAMLADP) 73. Each organization or institution faces specific challenges in delivering language-related services. While part of these challenges depends on the intrinsic characteristics of the respective organization's formal framework, many others are of common concern across the United Nations system and within the international community in general. 74. In 1967, the General Assembly of the United Nations requested the Secretary-General to undertake a review of the publications programme to improve coordination and identify synergies. After a series of ad hoc events, IAMLADP was convoked for the first time in 1974, and further strengthened in 1994 and in 2001 to facilitate the inclusion of new members, formerly under observer status. Since 2001, membership includes intergovernmental organizations outside the United Nations system, such as the institutions of the EU (e.g. EC and EP) whose language services are among the largest in the world. Observer status had been granted, until 2006, to other national entities such as universities and government ministries, however, in 2007, IAMLADP decided to limit its membership to international organizations. Other entities, such as academic and business institutions and government ministries, are encouraged to participate in IAMLADP activities through its Universities Contact Group and JIAMCATT. IAMLADP has set up working groups on practically all relevant issues of interest for identifying key challenges and opportunities in the area of language and conference services within the member organizations. In between the annual meetings, the working groups prepare, inter alia, relevant information on different topics, such as succession planning, partnerships with universities, training, language services, publications, etc. 75. The relevance of IAMLADP in the development of good practices among its members is acknowledged at the highest management level within the United Nations, given the relevance of its work to identify efficient strategies in the area of language arrangements, documentation and publication. The following objective was defined in the 2010 Senior Manager Compact agreement between the Director of the Documentation Division and the Assistant-Secretary-General for DGACM: Objective Expected accomplishment Performance measures To contribute to improved integrated global management among duty stations by seeking the most cost-effective ways of delivering translation/editing services; to continue global coordination with international organizations. Integrated global management in relevant services strengthened and established as a rule, and not an exception. Benchmarking/identification of good practices in conference servicing, included in the annual report of IAMLADP and its working groups. Source: Senior management compact for documentation services at UNHQ, 2010. 76. IAMLADP held its annual meeting, hosted by OECD, in Paris in June 2010. The agreed outcome of this meeting led to the adoption of the Paris Declaration, which includes a request to the governing bodies of its member organizations "to ensure the necessary budgetary resources in order to achieve effective succession planning, including awareness-raising, pedagogical assistance activities and respective language admission examination". The Inspectors fully endorse the IAMLADP Paris Declaration. In order to enhance effectiveness across the United Nations system in the area of conference and language-related services, the Inspectors recommend the following: Recommendation 5 The CEB should establish an ad hoc network or working group, involving the coordinators for multilingualism in the respective organizations, to take account of the key recommendations of IAMLADP and translate them into strategies of action for conference and language services management, so that better coordination and resources-sharing would result in significant cost savings, higher productivity and effectiveness in the work of the organizations. International Annual Meeting on Computer-Assisted Translation and Terminology (JIAMCATT): The network on translation and terminology 77. JIAMCATT is a task force of IAMLADP created in 1987 at UNOG and renamed in 2006. It is a technical forum, open to language services of international organizations and national bodies to share resources and experiences in the field of terminology and translation. 78. An important area of knowledge-sharing within JIAMCATT is the increasing use of computer-assisted tools for translation (CAT). This is a field of growing importance which has introduced significant changes in the working procedures of translation services (see chapter IV.C). 79. Even in an international and polyglot environment of language experts, conflict could arise as to which language(s) to use during annual meetings. The Inspectors were stunned to learn that a formal request had been made by a representative of the African Union Commission (AUC) to the organizers of JIAMCATT 2011 for English only to be used during the annual meeting. This is emblematic of the attitudes and reactions that undermine the implementation of multilingualism. The Inspectors appreciated the constructive proposal made from within the forum about using, at no extra cost, the voluntary services of advanced interpretation students. Indeed, this would provide the students with live booth experience, and the participants with interpretation services at no cost for the organization. Institutional partnerships 80. In order to equip professionals with the expected qualifications required by the United Nations system, DGACM launched an ambitious programme of collaboration with academic institutions in different regions of the world. The first Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed in April 2008 with University of Westminster, United Kingdom, and the most recent one was signed in May 2011 with Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China. 81. All the MoUs have the same purpose and relate to all official languages. Common training material, funding for instructors and the possibility of internships are covered by these agreements. The Universities will adapt existing training programmes or create new ones leading to a degree in conference translation and/or interpretation, aligned to the needs of the United Nations. The students will receive specific training and access to material especially designed to prepare them for the United Nations language competitive examinations. 82. A total of 19 MoUs have been signed to date, with 3 universities in Asia, 2 in Africa, 11 in Europe, 2 in the Middle East and one in North America. This responds to the sustained request from Member States to the Secretary-General, through different resolutions, to take action to address the shortage of language staff in view of the massive projected retirements in these services. In particular, General Assembly resolution 64/230 requested the Secretary-General "to maintain and intensify those efforts, including the strengthening of cooperation with institutions that train language specialists, in order to meet the need in the six official languages of the United Nations". 83. Another significant project to enhance the training of interpreters in Africa was launched in Nairobi in 2010 further to a partnership agreement between the United Nations, the European Union (EU), the African Development Bank (AfDB) and University of Nairobi. The African Project, as it is known, is the result of an IAMLADP initiative in 2008 that culminated in the creation of a Master's degree in Interpretation in Africa. A milestone in the process was the first pan-African conference on the training of translators, conference interpreters and public service interpreters held at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, in February 2009. The conference adopted the Gigiri Declaration, which focuses on the achievement of the following goals: (a) adoption of a broad multilingualism including all the languages used in Africa; (b) establishment of a monitoring stakeholders committee to assess the implementation of the outcome of the conference; (c) leading role by the AfDB in coordinating the project and preparing the feasibility study on its implementation; and (d) set up of a pilot project to train multilingual conference interpreters at the University of Nairobi, with the support of the DG for Interpretation of the EC and the DG for Interpretation and Conferences of the EP. The African Project is currently in place in Nairobi, Kenya and in Maputo, Mozambique. The project is expected to be launched in Ghana in 2012; it offers post-graduate academic programmes in translation and conference interpreting through a network of centres of excellence on the African continent, contributing to the creation of a new source of languages professionals from African countries, which are currently underrepresented in this professional category. 84. The current outreach network launched by DGACM organized its first conference in May 2011 at University of Salamanca, Spain, where representatives of the academic institutions that have signed MoUs met with representatives of United Nations Headquarters language services, duty stations away from Headquarters and the Under-Secretary-General for DGACM. As a direct result of these newly established partnerships, interpretation, translation and verbatim reporting trainees have undertaken internships within the United Nations. Some have even passed freelance language tests and subsequently been given short-term contracts to service specific events, such as the LDC-IV Conference in Istanbul in May 2011. DGACM's pro-active outreach programme has started to yield its first concrete results. 85. A pioneer programme was launched at ECA in 1978 to create new generations of African English and French translators with a view to alleviating difficulties in finding qualified English and French translators to fill vacancies at Headquarters and in offices away from Headquarters, particularly ECA. The return on investment was worth the effort, as 50 per cent of the trainees successfully passed the LCEs and were hired as translators at the United Nations. This rate is well above the average success rate of current candidates, which in most cases do not even reach 20 per cent. However, despite it being a very successful programme, it was unfortunately discontinued in 1996. The Inspectors consider that training programmes for future candidates have proven to be effective strategies for attracting and retaining language staff, and therefore should be revived and strengthened. Training programmes should be developed, either through specific training in academic institutions or internships in language services. This would generate significant cost savings and efficiency in the medium term, by increasing the ratio of successful candidates for future language recruitment. 86. Another fruitful training programme for Chinese translators and interpreters was set up at Beijing Foreign Studies University in 1979 as a joint project between the United Nations and the Chinese government to train language professionals. This programme, which existed until 1993, turned out 227 language graduates, including 106 conference interpreters, many of whom are now working for the United Nations and other international organizations, some for the Chinese Government, and a few as freelancers. Based on these experiences, it is hoped that the new momentum gained through the establishment of agreements with academic institutions covering language curricula and training in respect of all official United Nations languages will contribute to reducing the gap between demand for and supply of language professionals in the medium term. A similar programme for Russian interpreters and translators existed in Moscow until 1991. 87. DPI has also established partnership agreements, with, for example, universities in China, Belarus and Spain for pro bono translations of material for the United Nations website into Chinese, Russian and Spanish. DPI has also availed itself of the services of expert volunteers, through United Nations Volunteers, for translations into French. Another positive example is the partnership being negotiated between the ICAO and Herzen State Pedagogical University in St. Petersburg, Russia. IV. MULTILINGUALISM: CONFERENCE AND LANGUAGE SERVICES A. Meetings and documentation 88. The department of conference services in each organization is responsible for the efficient provision of conference services, including timely simultaneous distribution of documents in all official languages, as well as their posting on websites. In organizations with internal language services, other services, such as translation of documents, interpretation, report and précis-writing, among others, are also provided. 89. The provision of conference services has been particularly under pressure in the last years to address concerns raised by the clients. Organizations increasingly undertake surveys on user satisfaction and try to better organize conference services in order to meet client needs. This collective work requires constructive collaboration among the different parties so as to become more efficient in both planning and delivery. 90. Further efforts should be made to improve the quality of the texts submitted to conference services departments by both Member States and author departments as input for forthcoming meetings. All parties should abide by the time limits for submission of original documents; statistics have shown a clear correlation between late submission and the lack of compliance with the issuance deadlines for official documents. 91. Current United Nations Secretariat directives on distribution and issuance of documents are centred around the following four principles, with a view to responding to the requests emanating from the different resolutions on the matter from the General Assembly: - The provisional agenda of a meeting is to be issued in all official languages eight weeks before the opening of the session; - All other documents for the consideration of the body are to be issued six weeks before the opening of the session, in all official languages; - All language versions are to be issued simultaneously; - No document is to be posted on a website until all language versions have been officially issued. 92. Unfortunately, these rules are not strictly applied. More often than not, the rule on simultaneous issuance and posting on websites of all language versions is infringed. For instance, the JIU website does not always issue simultaneously its reports in the six official languages. In this respect, the Inspectors note that since the JIU is a subsidiary body of the General Assembly it should make use of all the official and working languages of the General Assembly, instead of English being de facto the sole working language of the Unit. 93. Some organizations have taken specific measures to introduce a system of penalty fees payable by departments that do not comply with word limits and deadlines stated in the rules of procedures for submission of documents. While this might generate revenue, it does not resolve the structural problem. Lack of compliance with deadlines and text limits generates problems in the work plan of the documentation services. ILO noted that while the introduction of the penalty scheme had some impact on the "poor services," it was not a major deterrent for departments with more available funds. 94. The systematic infringement of the rules concerning submission of documentation by many organizations of the system impedes the improvement of overall planning in conference services (documentation, translation, interpretation, etc.). Such a systematic violation of the submission rules further contributes to non-compliance with the rule of simultaneous distribution. The Inspectors hope that the rules governing simultaneous issuance of documentation in all languages will be more strictly enforced in all cases. They encourage the submitting departments to collaborate with timely submission of original documents so that all translated versions can be made available simultaneously, in line with pertinent ACABQ recommendations, in order to ensure timely delivery, cost-effectiveness, quality and productivity with regard to documentation delivery. 95. Within the secretariats of the organizations, the substantive divisions that submit documents for translation should make further efforts to ensure that the documents submitted have been carefully drafted, with due attention to clarity of the text and complete referencing of documentation. This would save significant work for editors, and facilitate the work of translators. 96. In the United Nations Secretariat, most of the work relies on internal services and only a small proportion is outsourced to external services, mainly in the area of language services. Nevertheless, there is an increasing trend towards using translation services performed by non-regular staff. In other organizations of the United Nations system where there is not enough internal capacity, editorial and other services are sometimes outsourced, as it is the case for FAO. 97. In several organizations of the United Nations system, due to budgetary constraints, a number of documents that used to be translated are now delivered in English only (e.g. ICAO, United Nations Secretariat). In particular, documents, such as draft resolutions, are not systematically translated prior to their approval, despite the fact that they are essential negotiating tools for the delegates. The value of a multilingual organization is not just a question of image, but above all of fair access to information so as to facilitate access to and participation in the decision-making processes of the legislative bodies, on equal footing. At ICAO, the Council Minutes are no longer translated, as they are oral statements exceeding the four-page limit. However, those concerned are referred to the interpretation recordings, which is a fair solution to ensuring access to information at a lower cost. 98. An essential element in providing high-quality services in the area of meetings and documentation is the role of interpretation and translation services. These are two key dimensions of the implementation of multilingualism in the work of the United Nations system organizations. These distinct areas of work (addressed in sections B and C below) share common challenges and concerns, such as namely outsourcing, recruitment and succession planning (see sections D and E). All the organizations hire freelance interpreters in order to successfully deliver requested interpretation services. Reference will also be made to the professional associations, AIIC and AITC, representing free-lance interpreters and translators, respectively. B. Interpretation services 99. Simultaneous interpretation is at the core of the daily work of a multilingual international organization seeking to ensure fair and equitable dissemination of information to its members and interested stakeholders. 100. As in many other areas, interpretation has benefited to some extent from technological improvements, compared to its early days. Nevertheless, as one freelance interpreter stated, "there is a human limit -- a physical threshold -- to the potential gain in productivity in this particular profession". The development of IT tools has had a significant impact in the area of translation, in particular in automatic translation, use of terminology databases, text processing, etc. The impact in the field of interpretation is much more limited and this must be kept in mind when seeking to introduce cost-saving and efficiency strategies in this area of work. 101. The interpretation profession requires very strong language skills and specific training geared to the needs of this very demanding work. It also requires particular profiles in terms of ability to deal with the pressure and responsibility of the work, due to the real-time delivery of very sensitive information. Over the years, several health-related norms and standards have been developed to ensure that interpreters can deliver high-quality services and that their conditions of service are defined so as to preserve their physical and mental health, while satisfying client demands. 102. The early generations of interpreters worked under very difficult conditions, which resulted in various disabilities related to the inadequate conditions of the working environment (e.g. ergonomics, acoustics, downtime, etc.). Since then, different standards have been defined to ensure the quality and conditions of service for interpreters. Health-related standards resulting from efforts to improve the conditions of work of interpreters were defined by the International Organization for Standardization, with ISO standard 2603 for built-in booths, and ISO 4043 for mobile booths. 103. Interpretation is not a luxury but rather a necessity to effectively deliver the work of the United Nations system organizations while preserving fair access to information in all official and working languages. The provision of mandatory interpretation varies across the system and within each organization and their different organs. While all the organizations require interpretation services, not all of them have the in-house capacity of regular staff to provide interpretation services. The United Nations requires the highest provision of interpretation services from in-house resources; thus it maintains a regular workforce in this area. Other organizations, like UNIDO or ITU, which have no inhouse interpretation services, recruit short-term interpreters or use freelancers. The Vienna-based organizations (including CTBTO) avail themselves of UNOV interpretation services or use freelance interpreters. C. Translation services 104. Translation services have always been a core service for delivering the official documentation of the United Nations system organizations. Indeed, the number of official documents to be translated has dramatically increased in the last decades, in parallel with the expansion of the mandates and organizations of the United Nations system; however, there has not been a matching increase in resources. 105. In Geneva, mandatory translation services to be provided for documents from OHCHR, the Human Rights Council and the human rights treaty organs were defined with no adequate estimation of the resources needed to effectively deliver the services without jeopardizing the other mandated work of UNOG conference services. In the conference services audit put at the disposal of the Human Rights Council in 2009, OIOS concluded that "insufficient resources had been put at the disposal of the Division of Conference Management to provide conference services to the Human Rights Council while maintaining the same level of service to the Division's other Geneva-based clients". 106. In fact, the services to OHCHR, the Human Rights Council and the human rights treaty organs combined represented 60 per cent of the workload of UNOG translation services in 2010, as shown in the figures below: 107. The additional workload deriving from OHCHR is huge, considering that many of its documents are not subject to a page limit. It is therefore almost impossible to anticipate the planning without knowing a priori the expected number of pages of forthcoming documents. The increase in translation directly related to OHCHR is 40 per cent since 2008. In order to enhance efficiency in delivering documentation with adequate planning of translation needs, the Inspectors urge the legislative bodies to comply with the following recommendation: 108. Among the many difficulties faced by translation services in the United Nations system is the predominant use of English as the original language of texts submitted for translation, which creates an imbalance in the workload of the different linguistic sections. This is even more problematic in small organizations where translators often double as editors. During the interviews, different services suggested that it would be advisable to promote the submission of documents in official United Nations languages other than English. The Inspectors support this suggestion. 109. Translators also expressed the view that it would be better for the translation section to receive a text in the original language from authors who master other official languages. While all international civil servants are requested to have a working knowledge of English, they are not always proficient in writing it. The editorial work necessary to shape a text requires a stringent effort by the English editors. 110. In this regard, it is worth noting that SDLS in Geneva has proposed new training courses on writing skills in response to suggestions made by the editorial and translation units at UNOG. The goal of these courses is to improve the quality of original texts, so as to reduce the burden on conference services at the processing phase of the documentation. Similar initiatives to strengthen writing skills have also been implemented at UNOV and UNCHR. 111. Translation is not simply a matter of transferring words from one language to another, but rather involves a significant and intangible effort to produce the final high-quality product required of the United Nations translators. Therefore, in addition to the requisite language qualifications, translators use of full range of skills to ensure that their work meets United Nations standards and the expectations of their clients. Unfortunately, the source materials with which the translators work often do not meet these standards. In the United Nations organizations, compared to other organizations, a higher need for reference and terminology checking has been detected, as too often the original texts do not contain all the references for the background documents used to produce them. 112. The above-mentioned weaknesses related to original texts heavily impact on the effectiveness and productivity of the documentation section of conference services, as they require considerable editorial and revision work to ensure the quality of the final product. Member States representatives would contribute to alleviating the workload of the editorial and translation services by limiting, to the extent possible, the length of the texts and speeches which require language services from the secretariats of the organizations, and making better use of the variety of languages at their disposal, so as to facilitate the work of précis-writers and rapporteurs. 113. As part of the measures taken within translation services to ensure consistency and, to some extent, increase productivity, translators are encouraged to use computer-assisted translation (CAT) tools with reliable translation memories. Learning to use these new IT tools diverted part of the work time of the translators, whose output is measured in very strict terms, without taking account of the time invest in training. The evolution of CAT tools has resulted in their increased relevance in the daily work of translators, and they have become part of the standard skills within the profession. Computer-assisted translation (CAT) for language services 114. In light of the progress made in information and communication technology tools that support language-related activities (in particular translation memories and terminology databases) and the standardization requirements for language processes among the various international organizations, early in 2000, the United Nations system organizations embarked on implementing computer-assisted translation (CAT) to deliver its languages services in a more efficient and effective manner. 115. In 2009, JIAMCATT established a Working Group on Machine Translation to discuss the practicalities of using CAT tools, and to acquaint members with the new techniques. "Computer-assisted translation techniques" is a broad term covering a wide variety of tools of diverse complexity, from basic spell-checkers (either built-in or add-on programmes) to more sophisticated machine-translation software or translation memories (such as MultiTrans and Trados), which can facilitate the work of translators in specific contexts, by recycling paragraphs, sentences and segments that have already been translated in previous documents. 116. The Inspectors observed, during their research, that the Google Translate tool was sometimes used informally in order to shorten the preliminary work by providing a first version that would save significant time in getting to the final translated version. JIAMCATT refers to this tool as "having incorporated all multilingual documentation available on the Internet -- including United Nations documents -- and already producing perfectly reworkable paragraphs". The Google Translate tool bar has also been added to some websites (e.g. UN-HABITAT) to facilitate an initial rough translation of the website contents. The principal value of Google Translate is "gisting", that is, enabling a reader who is knowledgeable about a subject to gain a basic understanding of the source document. Google Translate can be useful for finding standard terminology, notably titles of United Nations conventions and agreements, and the names of organizational units, since most United Nations documents are indexed in this huge engine. It can also be useful if the source text has been meticulously edited in the original language and is substantially similar to past documents, as may be the case with certain resolutions or budget documents. However, in most situations where specific phrasing and terminology are not replicated in the Google Translate database and where the source-language material has not been thoroughly pre-edited, Google Translate is unlikely to produce a usable raw draft that a translator can rework. 117. In April 2010, the JIAMCATT Working Group on Machine Translation launched a survey on the use of CAT tools among JIAMCATT partners. The Inspectors welcome the establishment of the CAT tools database by the Working Group, by which organizations can update their data online. Its use, which is currently limited to the JIAMCATT community, could be expanded to all users as a rich source of information. 118. While it appears that CAT techniques have evolved considerably and are delivering positive results in providing a smoother environment in the translation and terminology tools context, the Inspectors noted that there was mixed feelings among the language practitioners within the United Nations, as highlighted in Table 2 below: Table 2: Pros and cons of using CAT tools Pros Cons :: Gains in productivity (for both translation and terminology) :: Uneven support for the six official languages of the United Nations :: Standardization of terminology :: Individual license rights are expensive :: Recourse to terminology online is much more efficient than manual references :: Need to increase quality control; could perpetuate poor translations if no proper quality-control measures are put in place :: Substantial indirect costs for hardware, software, continuing technical support and development 119. In this respect, computer-assisted translation systems seem to work much better in an organizational environment where a significant proportion of information in documents is "reused" year after year, thus offering the possibility of "recycling" terminology and expressions, which is often the case with annual documentation to be considered in the context of various conferences and sessions of the United Nations and the governing bodies. 120. The twenty-fourth session of JIAMCATT held in Turin, in April 2011, resulted in a number of interesting conclusions regarding the use of new IT tools in language services. It was recommended that, when developing in-house software, JIAMCATT partner organizations should opt for open-source solutions. The Inspectors fully concur with this recommendation and wish to recall the spirit of the conclusions of the JIU report on the use of open-source software in the United Nations system (JIU/REP/2005/3). This should be further consulted with OICT, in this respect, as this office tends to choose centralized proprietary software which does not support all the official languages. D. Outsourcing translation and interpretation services 121. Outsourcing has been used in the past years as a way to address the lack of core in-house resources and plan for peak times by contracting freelance interpreters and translators to cover the high demand at certain periods of the year, without having to recruit regular staff for the whole year. Outsourcing has become a regular source of provision of language-related services. 122. In many organizations, outsourcing is the only resource available to provide translation or interpretation services. For instance, at UNICEF, translation into Arabic, Chinese and Russian is outsourced as there are no regular posts for these languages within the organization. At ITU, ILO, WMO and many Vienna-based organizations (other than UNOV), all interpretation is outsourced or covered through short-term contracts to freelance interpreters. ILO has developed an innovative approach to secure the availability of a "pool" of freelance interpreters who are regularly hired on a short-term basis. It advocates long-term planning so as to ensure the availability of interpretation resources at the required time and makes arrangements with the external interpreters up to 18 months before the event for which interpretation is required. 123. During the interviews, the Inspectors obtained the views of the organizations concerning the pros and cons of the increased use of outsourcing for translation and interpretation services. While they all concurred that it was mainly a way to reduce service-related costs, they also pointed out that there were some negative aspects to be considered when choosing that option. In particular, in organizations where all the language-related services are outsourced, for particular highly-sensitive and important assignments that need to be serviced internally on an urgent basis as part of the daily work of the organization, the organizations (e.g. UNIDO) have to rely on the language knowledge of internal non-language staff to deliver these services. In this regard, the Inspectors are of the view that organizations should have at least one core unit with minimum in-house staff available to respond, on the spot, to urgent requirements, such as translation of correspondence and key short documents, for which it cannot plan for an ad hoc external recruitment. Despite the inherent risks, outsourcing might allow, in particular cases, for more flexibility, as it makes it possible to draw on a wider range of language combinations and subject specializations and affording greater flexibility in the deployment of personnel. 124. The Inspectors also collected data to compare the cost of freelance services with the cost of regular internal language staff. While some figures were provided by the organizations and also by the kind courtesy of the AIIC, the conclusion reached is that the figures are not commensurable. No objective scientific measure of the potential financial savings associated with using freelance services can be asserted. It appears that the strategic choice of an organization should not be based merely on financial costs and savings, but rather should include consideration of other indirect costs related to the use of freelance services as well. 125. There are non-monetary indirect costs associated with the externalization of services that are not accounted for when using the simple comparison of cost per unit of translation or interpretation service. Table 3 below indicates categories of such indirect costs. Table 3: Indirect costs (non-monetary) of externalizing language services Administrative workload (recruitment and evaluation) The recruitment of freelance interpreters and translators implies an added burden on HR departments as well as on language services, since the language staff have to define the substantive terms of reference, assess the skills of the candidates, as well as evaluate their performance on delivery. Quality control/ revision External services need to be revised by internal staff; this implies less time for internal staff to deliver translation and interpretation services. Usually the most experienced staff are in charge of quality control; while reviewing external work they cannot deliver internal work. See A/65/122, paras. 58, 59 and 74 concerning the specific situation at UNON, where more than 40 per cent of the translation is outsourced and requires an intensive effort by internal senior translators to ensure the revision thereof. UNON has since converted posts that were originally funded by extrabudgetary resources into regular budget posts, so as to retain experienced staff to ensure effective delivery of documents. It is expected that similar strategies will be undertaken in the budget request for the next biennium with a view to retaining experienced staff in documentation and interpretation services. Risks -- uncertainty with regard to availability There is market competition for freelance services and they might not always be available to respond to the needs of the organizations at the desired time; poor planning can mean no interpretation services for key events. Furthermore, United Nations rates are not competitive compared to market rates; there are no built-in annual increments to partially alleviate this problem. Loss of institutional memory Freelance professionals service many different organizations and the knowledge they acquire in the United Nations system can be lost due to their non-institutional affiliation. 126. Undoubtedly, there are also advantages, notably in terms of flexibility to cover peak periods and lower expenditure with regard to overall staff entitlements. Nevertheless, it is difficult to determine whether it is advantageous for an organization to fully rely on external services. This might explain the current practice in most of the organizations of the system, which aim for a 70/30 percent balance, when possible, of internal and external delivery. This does not apply to organizations with no or very small language departments which fully rely on external services. 127. In view of the existing trade-offs, in order for the organizations to rely on a stable workforce to ensure enhanced compliance in terms of on-time delivery and the required quality standards of translation and interpretation services, the Inspectors consider that the executive heads of the United Nations system organizations should have a combination of in-house and external translation and interpretation services, so as to create and maintain a stable regular internal capacity in the area of language services and preserve the institutional memory. Freelance interpretation and translation services: views of professional associations 128. Two professional associations represent the bulk of the language professionals community, namely AIIC for interpreters, and AITC for translators. While affiliation to these professional associations is not mandatory for the language professionals they represent, the agreements are binding to protect the rights of all freelance language professionals working for the organizations with which agreements have been signed. Active membership is not required to benefit from the conditions defined in the agreements. Freelance interpreters 129. Overall, according to AIIC, the estimated total number of conference interpreters worldwide is close to 5,000 professionals only; of these, almost 3,000 are members of AIIC. The Association, which is more than 50 years old, has developed professional standards as well as a Code of Professional Ethics. 130. AIIC has signed a sectoral agreement with the United Nations common system organizations, known as the United Nations sectoral agreement, with the latest one covering the period 2007-2011. It defines the conditions of employment of short-term conference interpreters. In May 2011, negotiations for the renewal of the sectoral agreement were launched. On 16 December 2011, the UN sector's Negotiating Delegation reported that a new 5-year Agreement had been successfully concluded with the UN CEB, although a few details remained to be settled (Annexes on "Compensation for Extra Workload" and "Webcast Meetings"). 131. The sectoral agreement is binding for most of the United Nations system organizations, as can be seen in Annex VI. Nevertheless, AIIC has reported serious failures on the part of many organizations to comply with the conditions defined in the agreement. 132. The professional associations have pointed out "frequent violations" of the terms of the agreements, as follows: (a) Organizations subcontract services to local companies which do not abide by the contractual conditions agreed under the framework agreement between AIIC and the United Nations common system organizations; (b) In some organizations, meetings systematically last longer than the official time, thus resulting longer work sessions for the interpreters; (c) Rules concerning rest time and travel conditions are not always respected. 133. Interpreters feel that they are unfairly considered as prima donnas when they defend their acquired rights. The view of AIIC, on the contrary, is that the agreements are the result of a long-term process in which the challenges and difficulties faced by the profession, in particular in terms of pressure, stress and health-related issues have been identified and recognized, including by WHO. 134. Therefore, the standards concerning the maximum duration of an interpreter's work session, conditions of the working environment (e.g. ISO standards for booths), rest breaks and travel conditions are necessary for interpreters to be able to perform as expected in delivering the best of his/her knowledge and skills in servicing the client. Freelance translators 135. AITC, the professional association for free-lance translators, has a smaller membership than AIIC because it only represents translators who work for international organizations, whereas AIIC represents many interpreters who work in the private sector. Nevertheless, AITC has a role to play in setting professional standards and working conditions for external translation services. 136. A framework agreement between AITC and CCAQ exists since 1969; its latest update was in 1991. The agreement applies to recruitment of short-term internal translators by the 15 signatory organizations worldwide, not only at headquarters but also in all the funds, programmes and secretariats, in all regional offices and field offices, and at all conference venues. It does not apply to contractual translators, for whom AITC has nonetheless developed guidelines for external translation services, as a reference document for these professionals. Often, translators are not purely short-term or contractual staff, but might combine these categories in delivering their services in different periods to different clients. 137. With regard to contractual translators, AITC representatives highlighted the fact that some United Nations system organizations do not realize how competitive the market is for high-quality freelance translators, and their rates are not as attractive as the remuneration offered by other organizations. Thus, the United Nations system organizations are losing out on the opportunity to secure the availability of the best freelance translators, who would prefer to work for other organizations offering a better remuneration. 138. In terms of compliance with the AITC agreement, there are alleged systematic failures to comply with the terms of the agreement. The Association reported cases of non-compliance with regard to payment of financial compensation when an organization cancels a confirmed contract less than 30 days prior to the start date of the contract. The agreement stipulates that, in such cases, financial compensation equivalent to the total net base salary applicable to the agreed contract period must be paid to the translator, unless he/she finds equivalent employment elsewhere for that period. Considering the alleged lack of compliance by many of the signatory organizations of the AIIC and AITC sectoral agreements with the United Nations system organizations, and in order to strengthen compliance with regard to respecting the conditions set up by these agreements, the Inspectors recommend that: Recommendation 7 The executive heads should take the necessary measures to ensure full compliance with the AIIC-United Nations agreement for interpretation and the CCAQ-AITC agreement for translation, in particular by ensuring greater awareness of these agreements at Headquarters and in the regional offices and by setting up compliance monitoring systems. E. Demographic transition, recruitment and succession planning for language staff 139. Common challenges faced by both interpretation and translation services are the shortage of professionals, the forthcoming retirement of a significant proportion of language professionals from the regular staff in the organizations, and insufficient succession planning. In some organizations, more than 50 per cent of the language staff in these services will be retiring over the next five years. While the demographic structure of the United Nations system is impacting the totality of its services in general, in some areas, such as in language services, the impact is even harder. 140. The Secretary-General's report on the pattern of conferences (A/65/122) specifically addresses the problem of succession planning, and the closely related issues of the language examination, roster management and recruitment of new staff in the language services. In response to these issues, DGACM and OHRM are closely collaborating to prepare the necessary measures to streamline the process of competitive examinations for language services, and revamp the format and assessment methods. The process takes account of the possibilities offered by a better use of new technologies, and by the establishment of partnerships with academia, so as to create tailor-made traineeship programmes to prepare future candidates for the language examinations. However, these commendable measures, and others, such as outreaching and partnerships for training language professionals, and the analysis of options to streamline the LCE process will not prevent the immediate shortage of resources in the area of language services. Nonetheless, these measures are expected to lead to improvements in the medium-term. 141. While the language competitive examination (LCE) is the natural entry point for joining the United Nations Secretariat as part of its language staff, in the past years, it has become a bottleneck, though problems vary from one language or professional group to another, as well as from one duty station to another. One common issue is insufficient awareness among training institutions and professional communities of the very high standards set by the United Nations in order to meet the demands of its Member States and ensure the highest quality language services. This problem is being pro-actively addressed by DGACM and IAMLADP through their outreach efforts. Nevertheless, in the current situation, the LCE roster does not provide enough successful candidates to replace the language staff on the way to retirement. The following data eloquently illustrates the high cost of processing the LCE and the very low rate of successful candidates, which is insufficient to adequately provide the required number of candidates to ensure a smooth demographic transition in some language services: :: From 2005 to 2009, 55 language examinations were held, 38,231 applications were received; 21,830 applicants (or 57 per cent) were convoked to the written examination, of whom 1,526 (or 7 per cent) were rostered; :: In 2008, examinations for English and French interpreters yielded only three and two candidates, respectively. :: In 2009, examinations for Russian interpreters and proofreaders yielded a roster of only five successful candidates each. 142. Considering that the overall vacancy rate at the four duty stations of the United Nations stands at 14 per cent for interpreters and 13 per cent for translators, when projected retirements over the period 2010-2016 are factored in, total turnover will reach 43 per cent for interpreters and 40 per cent for translators. Thirteen per cent of the language staff will reach the mandatory age of separation during the period 2009-13. In absolute numbers, this means that the competitive examinations will have to produce 119 new recruits for interpretation and 217 for translation during the period in question. Without improvement, the current procedure of recruitment through the LCE would not enable the organization to address in due time the necessary replacement of language staff. The Inspectors welcome the on-going efforts by DGACM and OHRM to reform the process as a matter of urgency. 143. In its current configuration, the LCE is administered by OHRM, but in practice, it relies on the collaboration of DGACM languages services to assist with the examination itself, including preparation and correction of texts. In 2009, close collaboration between the two departments during the pre-screening phase proved to be an effective approach in reducing the number of failures, by thoroughly assessing the skills and qualifications of the candidates prior to enrolling them for the final examination. 144. Owing to the difficulties of creating and maintaining a functional roster of LCE successful candidates, especially at a time of budgetary cuts, the organization increasingly opts not to replace outgoing staff. This trend has been noted not only in the United Nations system, but also in the European Commission. 145. As indicated by the high-level managers of some of the language services, even if retiring staff were replaced by recruitment of junior staff, the amount and quality of work delivered by the new staff cannot be compared, in the short term, with that delivered by the outgoing senior language staff, since the newly recruited staff will require coaching and supervision. 146. While recognizing the on-going effort within the United Nations Secretariat, the Inspectors consider that the time has come to thoroughly rethink the process of recruitment and promotion in language services, so as to avoid a critical demographic transition at the system-wide level in the future. If massive replacement takes place in waves, the problem will appear periodically with the same intensity unless structural measures are put in place and implemented so as to create a new and more flexible system for recruiting and retaining language staff. Taking account of the ongoing competition for these services among other international organizations, NGOs, the private sector, and the United Nations system, the latter should adopt a life-cycle approach in rethinking the whole process from recruitment to career development, promotion and anticipation of succession planning in the area of language services. In order to enhance effectiveness in language-related services across the United Nations system, the Inspectors recommend the following: 147. Given the alarming shortage of language professionals, the Inspectors consider that it is urgent to learn from the past and adopt a new strategic approach for addressing the examination and recruitment policies for language services. The provision of translation and interpretation services is essential to guarantee the implementation of multilingualism within the organizations, therefore, it must be given adequate attention. 148. All stakeholders should be involved in building a strategic plan of action to ensure the provision of continued high-quality languages services. CEB should lead the process towards launching a "One UN strategic plan on multilingualism" and involve the language professional associations in the process, in particular with regard to renewing the framework agreements governing conditions of service. In order to enhance the effectiveness of the examination and recruitment processes of language staff for the United Nations system organizations, the Inspectors recommend that: Recommendation 9 The executive heads should prepare strategic action plans in the area of languages services to address the examination, candidate-selection and recruitment processes, and propose incentives for language career development and language staff retention, bearing in mind that Member States have different education systems and none of them shall be considered the standard one. In order to ensure coordination within the United Nations system, the Inspectors consider that the CEB has a key role to play, and they recommend the following: Recommendation 10 The Secretary-General of the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the CEB, should address the issues of the language examinations, recruitment and promotion in language services, career development and training for language staff, and incentives for recruiting and retaining the best language professionals, with the assistance of the coordinators for multilingualism, through the ad hoc network or working group proposed in Recommendation 5. 149. After consolidating all efforts to recruit high-quality language professionals, the organizations should give strong consideration to providing them with attractive incentives in terms of training and learning in their area of expertise. Good practices can be learned from the EC, which has put in place permanent training programmes for its language staff and incentives for them to add other languages to their language portfolio (as passive languages) over the course of their career. This practice combines motivation of language staff through incentives for continuous learning and acquisition of new language skills during their career development, with positive returns for investment for the organization through more productive language staff. 150. The Inspectors were informed about some situations in the United Nations, in which not only were staff not encouraged to strengthen their language skills by participating in expert meetings to which they had been invited, but also the hierarchy impeded their participation and advised them to undertake these external activities, which are nonetheless directly related to their profession, during their leave time and at their own expense. The Inspectors believe that management should actively promote training and learning activities and support staff participation in external events related to their area of expertise, especially when they are at no additional cost for the organizations, other than time given to staff. Unfortunately, in-house language training does not enable the attainment of the level of language knowledge required for professional translation; therefore training in higher-education institutions is essential. In this regard, smaller language services in the United Nations system, such as at ECA, are able to provide only limited training opportunities, and funding provided for external training remains woefully inadequate. The Inspectors are confident that the executive heads of the organizations will adopt the necessary measures for language staff to have the opportunity to participate in external activities and training up to the highest standards required to continuously upgrade their professional skills in their area of expertise. V. MULTILINGUALISM: OTHER DIMENSIONS A. Language skills for a multilingual workforce: recruitment and training 151. A multilingual organization is characterized by the delivery of its daily work in a multilingual environment. The key asset of any international organization is its staff; therefore, strengthening the language skills of staff is a sine qua non condition for reinforcing the multilingual identity of any organization. 152. Language skills are a necessary component of the combination of requirements to serve in an international organization, in particular for internationally recruited staff subject to mobility provisions during their career development. While language requirements can be adjusted for locally hired staff (General Services), they should be much stricter for internationally recruited staff who should have a good command of at least two working languages, if not from the outset of their career, then during their career development and within a reasonable timeframe. The possibility for an organization to impact the effective level of multilingualism of its workforce depends on two key areas: due consideration and testing of language skills as part of the recruitment and promotion processes; and the provision of language training to staff in order for them to have good working knowledge of at least two working languages during the development of their career. Recruitment 153. The recruitment process is critical to the design and implementation of medium- and long-term strategies concerning the desired profile of the international workforce in the organizations of the United Nations system. Unfortunately, the manner in which human resources departments -- overloaded by lengthy bureaucratic procedures -- deliver their work appears to be based more on a piecemeal approach than on a top-down strategy aimed at consolidating a multilingual workforce. Indeed, a coordinated effort on the part of human resources departments and the hiring managers from the recruiting departments is required to build such a workforce in the long-run. Senior managers in the organizations should provide effective support to human resources departments so that they could effectively contribute to adequately assessing the language skills of candidates at the pre-screening phase, eventually calling on the expert assistance of the language staff to effectively test candidates' language skills. The result should be accordingly reflected in the scorecard of the recruitment process, as well as included in the performance evaluation of the staff. Human resources departments could seek support from language training services to evaluate candidates' language skills, with due compensation for such services. 154. While the use of working languages other than English is becoming more frequent in the regional commissions compared to other entities of the Secretariat, the Inspectors could assert that some human resources officers in the regional commissions were unable or unwilling to work in any working language other than English. The Inspectors are of the opinion that human resources departments should be the guiding example by recruiting human resources staff who have good command of at least two working languages of the organization. 155. Moreover, the Inspectors noted that there is a grey area, in terms of accountability, concerning effective language testing during the recruitment process. Human resources managers see themselves as mediators who merely check the information provided by candidates against the job description, but do not effectively test their linguistic capacities. The burden of testing is therefore on the hiring departments and their recruiting panels. 156. Unfortunately, hiring departments usually include rather vague clauses concerning language skills requirements. Most often, only fluency in English is required, while any other language, in the vast majority of cases, is only either desirable or an asset, not mandatory (with few exceptions). This is even more questionable in cases of vacancies in the field in non-anglophone countries, which do not require the knowledge of another working language. Taking into account the large number of least-developed countries (LDCs) where French, another working language of most of the United Nations system organizations, is used, one would expect that, for the benefit of the host country, international civil servants should be able to work in French as well. 157. The working languages of the United Nations organizations are not being used on equal footing, and the predominant trend is to use English, as the sole working language. In this respect, the Inspectors refer to the previous JIU review on multilingualism (JIU/REP/2002/11), particularly paragraph 71, as the statement is still valid today: In his bulletin ST/SGB/201 of 8 July 1983, the United Nations Secretary-General restated the rules concerning the Organization's working languages and emphasized that `each staff member should be free to use in his/her written communications either English or French, at his or her option' and that `no impediment is to be placed by anyone to this policy', which was also to be applied to the other working languages of three of the regional economic commissions, namely Russian in the case of ECE, Spanish in the case of ECLAC and Arabic in the case of ESCWA. In another bulletin issued two years later,* the Secretary-General, noting that the policy referred to in bulletin ST/SGB/201 was not being fully applied, `encouraged those staff members throughout the Secretariat whose principal language is French, or who prefer to work in that language, to use French in all official communications'. * ST/SGB/212, 24 September 1985. 158. The Inspectors welcome initiatives taken by some organizations to establish effective collaboration between human resources departments and substantive departments. At IAEA -- a highly technical and specialized agency -- for example, a manager may be reluctant to discard an ideal candidate just because he/she lacks the required diversity of language skills. In such a case, a special waiver could be requested of the Director-General of the Agency, and the new staff could be given the necessary language training opportunities upon joining the organization, so that in the medium-term the staff member would be able to strengthen his/her language skills. Similar policies are in pace at UNESCO and FAO, where a new staff member who does not meet the language requirements, commits to undertake language training and to be tested within a certain period of time, so that in the long-run these skills will be acquired. On a similar ground, the WFP has also set up a human resources policy aimed at building a multilingual workforce, by requiring fluency in one of the six official languages and limited knowledge of any of the other languages. 159. With regard to the language of vacancy notices, the majority of the United Nations system organizations advertise positions in English and French (see Table 4). The Inspectors note with disappointment that a significant proportion of organizations still post vacancy announcements only in English. Good practice is to be highlighted in the six organizations which post vacancies in English, French and Spanish (see Table 4 below); however they are the minority. Human resources departments have confirmed that in practice most applications are submitted in English, even in cases where the organization allows for applications to be submitted in other languages. For instance, the Inspectors noted that, in some cases, vacancy announcements for local recruitment at ECLAC in Santiago, Chile, were advertised in English only. Table 4: Languages used in job vacancy announcements in the United Nations system Language(s) used in vacancy notices Organizations concerned English UNFPA,* UNHCR, UNICEF, UNRWA, WFP,* ICAO, IAEA, UNIDO English, French United Nations Secretariat, UNCTAD, ESCWA, ESCAP, ECLAC, ECA, UNODC, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO English, French, Spanish UNDP, FAO, ILO,* IMO, ITU, UNWTO* * Field-based positions are advertised according to language specificities in the region. 160. At a time of increasing budgetary constraints, and in order to respond to the Secretary-General's call to do more with less, a strategic approach would be to reinforce the language capacities of the international civil servants, so that they rely less on translation and interpretation services and can directly deliver their work in different working languages of their organizations. Again, the strengthening of these language capacities relies on two arms: (a) recruitment, when selecting new staff; and (b) training, during career development. 161. The Inspectors also observed that the demonstration-effect deriving from the example set by the executive heads of the organizations was a positive motivator for the staff-at-large to strengthen their language skills. This was noted at FAO, ILO, ITU and UNESCO. This phenomenon is also a reality in Member States in which several official languages co-exist; multilingual high-level representatives provide a positive example of equal treatment of their official languages by using them equally in national and international fora (e.g. Cameroon, Canada, Switzerland). 162. Clear responsibilities should be identified for the different actors involved in the recruitment process, namely the human resources department, hiring managers in the recruiting departments, with the possible support of language training services. Job descriptions should include stronger language requirements and language skills should be properly evaluated during the recruitment process. Furthermore, new recruitment tools, such as INSPIRA at the United Nations Secretariat, should carefully address language competencies, and the instructions for use of INSPIRA should be made available in at least the two working languages of the organization. At the present time, the manuals for applicants and hiring managers are available only in English. 163. The Secretary-General and executive heads should also be accountable for the appointment of senior managers, and take into account their language skills and suitability for the function. In particular, the Inspectors are confident that the process for appointing senior officials for United Nations offices away from Headquarters will include a language requirement so as to ensure fluency in the language of the host country, if it is an official United Nations language. The same recommendation applies to the process for appointing senior officials, including executive heads, for the organizations of the United Nations system. In view of the above, and in order to enhance effectiveness in the work of the multilingual United Nations system organizations, the Inspectors recommend the following: Recommendation 11 The executive heads should take the necessary measures to ensure that the recruitment process, including that relating to senior officials, fully and fairly addresses language requirements, so that in the medium-term, the organizations of the system could rely on a multilingual workforce that is fluent in one working language and has good knowledge of at least one other working language, with due attention to the specific needs of the duty stations. Training 164. The development of training programmes varies across the United Nations system. Language training opportunities are offered with full or partial cost coverage, and subject to different eligibility criteria across the system. As a career development tool, language training is generally administrated through the human resources services. In some organizations, language services are provided externally by language academies; in others they are offered in-house. 165. When preparing language courses, the training services take into account staff needs as well as the needs of the substantive departments. Surveys have been undertaken to assess the salient needs and identify the key areas demanded by staff and management. For example, in Geneva, new courses on writing skills have been tailored to improve staff report writing. This can be seen as strengthening the capacity of staff to use their language skills to produce better quality original documents, and it will in turn alleviate the workload of editors and translators at the end of the line. 166. The responses to the recent survey undertaken by the language training services at UNOG lead to two main recommendations: :: More specific courses should be offered in English and French; :: More flexibility in class formats should be explored (evening, on-line, etc.). 167. Thirty per cent of the respondents claimed that they had not enrolled in language courses because their schedule was too busy. In a context where acquisition of language skills is not sufficiently rewarded in the overall staff performance evaluation, it is difficult to further motivate staff to strengthen their language skills. There are language incentives in place across the United Nations system; they should be systematized in terms of financial coverage of the training costs -- which happens in many cases -- and in terms of recognition of this effort in the staff performance appraisal. 168. The United Nations has developed very rich language training programmes in the different duty stations. A problem of consistency has been noted by users of the language courses, in particular in the context of mobility. At present, the language courses at UNHQ and UNOG are not aligned due to the different course formats at the two duty stations (e.g. 1 term at UNHQ consists of 36 teaching hours compared to 48 hours at UNOG). Currently, a staff member moving from one location to another within the same organization is required to sit a new enrolment test to continue his/her language training. Harmonization efforts are being made to align the language programmes, using the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR). The CEFR is of particular interest to language professionals involved in language teaching and testing. It provides a clear framework for teaching, including learning objectives and methods, as well as the necessary tools for proficiency assessment. At UNHCR, the CEFR is already being used to determine the level of language courses -- both traditional and online -- and the final proficiency assessment. The Inspectors expect a United Nations system language reference framework to be put in place, inspired by the good practice example of the CEFR, but independent of it. 169. The Inspectors acknowledge the on-going collaboration within the United Nations Secretariat to harmonize language courses curricula so that different duty stations can offer similar training packages, thus facilitating mutual arrangements in the area of language teaching. A pioneering exercise has been undertaken to that effect by the French language training sections of UNHQ and UNOG. To foster such a process, the Inspectors are convinced that full recognition of the professionalism of language teachers and better prospects for career development should be explored, so that the organizations can retain the best staff and reward them according to their expertise. Currently, language training staff have little or no leeway in their career development, as they are mostly General Services staff or external consultants; those in charge of language coordination are at the P-2 level at the most. Considering that in many cases language training staff have Master's level education, or even higher, it would be advisable to review and upgrade the current status of contractual arrangements for these professionals. Hiring should also be based on qualifications and age should not be a criteria. 170. Harmonization across duty stations could be strengthened by reconsidering the current contractual arrangements for language teachers. Since they are locally recruited, they are not subject to mobility provisions; however, facilitating the mobility of language teachers to different duty stations and system organizations would contribute to knowledge and experience sharing in the area of language training. 171. United Nations staff must pass the Language Proficiency Examination (LPE) to prove their proficiency in a language. The complex logistics of this process should be reviewed so as to facilitate its decentralization and reduce the high administrative cost. The Inspectors noted that the LPE registration period is open before the results of the previous session are issued. This leads to unnecessary double enrolment and additional administrative costs. The Inspectors are of the view that the LPE results should be issued prior to the opening of the new enrolment period. B. Outreach: Websites and public information Websites 172. Websites and social media are increasingly the ideal windows for publicizing the achievements of organizations worldwide. They are now essential tools for promoting the image of an organization, and they also provide unique opportunities for disseminating information to a larger audience. The Inspectors deplore that insufficient attention is paid to the use of websites and the dissemination of information in all official languages, or at least in the working languages of the organizations. 173. Indeed, a fully multilingual website is more the exception than the rule. While there are good examples in the United Nations system, such as the websites of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), UNESCO, WHO and the United Nations, most of the other organizations' websites are only in English. Some may be multilingual at the homepage level, but the actual content of the website may differ from one language to another, and the target document at the end of the search may be only in English. WHO has a full team of multilingual web editors who edit and prioritize content specific to each language group in order to make efficient use of limited resources. 174. UNESCO's website has evolved from being mainly in English in 2004 to truly multilingual in 2010. A specific contribution from Saudi Arabia over a four-year period, further to a bilateral agreement, provided the necessary resources to develop the Arabic version of the website and support translation of documents and publications. Launched in 2008, the Arabic-language site covered all major themes by 2010. The central texts of UNESCO's portal are now available in all six languages, and will soon be available also in Portuguese. 175. For subsites devoted to local country projects, efforts should be made, to the extent possible, to facilitate access to information by the direct beneficiaries of the projects, in their local language. 176. The JIU report on Management of Internet websites in the United Nations system organizations (JIU/REP/2008/6) had already noted, in 2008, that the multilingual dimension of the websites was not satisfactory, and recommended (recommendation 6) the setting up of internal ad hoc committees to deal with the implementation of multilingualism on corporate websites. Two years later, only 13 JIU participating organizations had accepted the recommendation, and only three had implemented it. Some organizations, such as WHO, have already taken actions as part of its Plan of Action on Multilingualism, in part inspired by that JIU report. Many others have yet to make significant progress. In view of the increased role of media, and in particular the use of websites, in order to enhance effectiveness of public information policies, the Inspectors recommend the following: 177. In his recent report on the news services activities of DPI (A/AC.198/2011/3), the Secretary-General referred to the efforts made towards achieving the goal of multilingualism and parity of languages in the websites. To ease the burden of the costs for website development in the six official languages, a requirement mandated by the General Assembly, DPI has established cooperative arrangements with universities in China, Belarus and Spain for the translation of web content into Chinese, Russian and Spanish. Concerning Arabic, DPI and DGACM worked together, with the cooperation of the Arabic Translation Service, which hosted DGACM interns during the summers of 2009 and 2010. The internships enabled an increased number of web pages to being translated into Arabic. At UNIDO, ad hoc initiatives were undertaken, including assigning the translation of some parts of the website to consultants. These partnership initiatives regarding translation of website information could be emulated within the United Nations system organizations in order to progressively implement the necessary measures aiming at developing fully multilingual websites in the medium and long term. 178. In light of the increasing relevance of websites as communication tools, the Inspectors consider that the CEB, the highest coordinating body at the executive heads level, should be an example in providing information to the public in the official languages of the United Nations, or at least in the working languages of the majority of the organizations of the system. 179. Noting that the CEB website contains information only in English, the Inspectors consider that the CEB secretariat should be given the necessary resources to develop a multilingual website and lead by example in this area, providing information in all official languages, if possible, otherwise, at least in the working languages used by most of the organizations. Public information and outreach 180. The image of an organization is promoted not only through its website, but also through its outreach activities. The relevant departments should be able to deliver information in languages other than English and to interact with Member States, to the extent possible, in the languages that they have chosen to receive official communications. In this regard, good practices have been observed at DPI in Geneva, which has made special efforts to recruit multilingual staff, precisely for the purpose of communicating and working in several languages. 181. Despite its critical role in outreach policies, DPI could be more responsive in supporting the initiatives of other services carrying out clearly targeted outreach activities related to multilingualism. At UNHQ, some language training services have proposed very interesting activities that could be undertaken on Language Days, which were launched after UNESCO's International Year of Languages in 2008. While many dedicated professionals make their services available for these outreach activities on a voluntary basis, they still need additional resources to support the organization of the language-related events. Unfortunately, this year, due mainly to budgetary constraints, DPI proposed to organize "virtual language days" only. DPI has also successfully worked out partnerships with Member States to sponsor Language Days. In this context, the Inspectors are of the view that more innovative approaches should be explored, including the appointment of Goodwill Ambassadors for Multilingualism by the executive heads of the organizations. 182. Language Day initiatives have proven to be successful outreach activities and the Inspectors consider that strong support should be given to the services organizing these events so that they are not limited to virtual activities. Some Member States have expressed their support for these initiatives, as illustrated by the following excerpt from a statement by the representative of the Russian Federation: "We believe that holding in 2010 of the days of each of the six official UN languages in celebration of the International Mother Language Day was successful. Diplomatic missions and United Nations Secretariat staff showed great interest to the Russian Language Day, marking the birthday of the great Russian poet Alexander Pushkin. This year, we plan to continue this initiative." In view of promoting language outreach activities such as the Language Days, the Inspectors recommend that: Recommendation 13 The Secretary-General of the United Nations should actively promote the development of language-related events, such as the Language Day initiative, to increase awareness of multilingualism challenges and to disseminate information to Member States, academia and other partners, seeking, as appropriate, their support through innovative partnerships or ad hoc extrabudgetary contributions. 183. In case of scarce resources, one language event per year could be considered, not necessarily focusing only on official United Nations languages. Another possibility would be to promote one official language and one non-official language on Language Day; this would provide visibility for the achievements within the organization with regard to one official language, and provide information on other languages of the world, thereby promoting UNESCO's language vitality scheme (see chapter II). 184. DPI has made a commendable effort towards language parity through the recently introduced daily news-related video featured on the United Nations homepage, which is posted with captions in all official languages, thus improving multilingual access. 185. In 2010, DGACM and DPI merged their outreach efforts; DGACM awards prizes for each language of the Saint Jerome Translation Contest on a Language Day organized by DPI. The Saint Jerome Contest was initially limited to the translation of a passage from Spanish or French into English. However, it was expanded in 2009 to include translations into all the official languages of the United Nations, as well as into German. Such initiatives should be further strengthened and supported within the organizations. 186. As part of its outreach activities, WHO organized an exhibition on multilingualism to raise awareness among WHO staff and the public about the importance of language in achieving global health objectives. It included posters on multilingualism, video clips on the use of multilingual information in country offices and a language quiz disseminated through internal channels and via social media. C. Multilingualism, peace and development 187. The role of the United Nations in humanitarian affairs and in contributing to resolving conflict situations is at the core of its universal mandate. In this area, the organizations of the system should make renewed efforts to facilitate access to information and to communicate with clients in the field in their own languages so as to enhance effectiveness and success of the operations. Particular attention should be paid to ensure that staff in the field can communicate in local languages with the population, during peace operations. 188. As an example of good practice, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) is developing activities to improve outreach in all their working languages, and publishing a bilingual newsletter, in English and French, on a quarterly basis. In October 2010, the OIF and UNIDIR signed a cooperation agreement centred around three axes of interest: research, knowledge management and sharing, and networking. 189. The relevance of using multiple languages and maximizing outreach to target audiences has been recurrently addressed in different General Assembly resolutions. In particular, in 2001, General Assembly resolution 55/34 addressed the United Nations disarmament information programme and recommended that the United Nations website maintain an updated source of accessible information on disarmament issues and, within available resources, produce versions of the site in as many official languages as feasible (paragraph 5 (b)). The Inspectors fully support this recommendation. 190. Another core mandate of the United Nations system is its contribution to development further to the Millennium Declaration and the Millennium Development Goals. A recurrent trend in many development-related organizations is to produce their publications and prepare their projects in English only. This can lead to situations in which non-English-speaking developing countries receive technical assistance, as well as the final report of the project, which is meant to assist the country in identifying and implementing development strategies, in English only. Noting that among developing countries, the least developed countries in Africa include a significant number of francophone countries, efforts should be made to facilitate their access to information that is instrumental for their development strategies. 191. As part of the United Nations' role in preserving peace in the world, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), created in 2005, focuses its work on assisting in the recovery of post-conflict countries. This requires a participatory process at national level to elaborate applicable strategies, taking account of the relevant national stakeholders and their regional and international partners. To this end, effective and regular communication among all stakeholders in New York as well as at country level is a must, and might require the full use of languages other than the six official United Nations languages. For instance, within the context of the country-specific configuration for a Portuguese-speaking country in West Africa, it is vital that meetings be held in Portuguese and that all documentation be speedily translated from and into that language. In this case, a communications strategy should be developed, taking into account extra-budgetary fund-raising options, targeted to the provision of language services in the official national language so as to strengthen the effectiveness of the activities carried out at national level. The United Nations offices concerned should be equipped with the necessary facilities, such as state-of-the-art simultaneous interpretation equipment, to deliver such services. In order to ensure a sustainable impact and effectiveness of the work of the United Nations system organizations in areas such as peacebuilding, humanitarian affairs and development, among others, the Inspectors recommend that: Recommendation 14 The executive heads of the organizations of the United Nations system delivering work in the field in the area of humanitarian affairs, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development activities, among others, should ensure that due attention is given to delivering their activities and related materials in all official or working languages, taking account of the local language(s) of the beneficiaries D. Role of Member States: enforcing equal treatment of official and working languages 192. While the implementation of multilingualism within the organizations and their respective secretariats is the responsibility of the organizations themselves, Member States should reconfirm their commitment to this policy, which reflects the foundational texts and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations to build a United Nations serving all members on equal footing with no language discrimination. Therefore, instead of being sometimes passive observers of the loss of language diversity, Member States should more actively promote and support effective implementation of multilingualism by using the tools at their disposal through their legislative power and their budgetary support. 193. Members States should not be reticent about exercising and demanding their language rights. One example of an unacceptable situation occurred in Geneva recently when highly sensitive draft resolutions related to an ongoing conflict in a francophone country in West Africa was distributed only in English. The affected Member State did not have a French version to consider during the delicate negotiations. This should not happen in a multilingual organization that cares about peace in the world. The savings realized by not translating draft resolutions for the negotiating process would be cancelled out by the cost in human lives that could result from delays and misunderstandings due to language. Ultimately, it is a matter of incommensurable values: money versus human lives. 194. As far as multilingualism is concerned, budgetary constraints cannot be the Procrustean bed for aligning fair treatment of languages on inadequate standards and for the degradation in the quality of services due to Member States. Far from becoming a private corporation, the United Nations deals with core values of humanity, and the multilingual function is not a fashion business but a key tool for serving and servicing its stakeholders more equitably, effectively and transparently. In order to ensure compliance with the mandate of multilingualism, the Inspectors recommend the following: E. The way forward Timeo hominem unius libri (I fear the man of a single book) 195. This Latin quote, attributed to 13th century philosopher, Thomas Aquinas, could not be more timely today in reflecting the United Nations' true commitment to language diversity as reaffirmed in the General Assembly's landmark resolution 50/11 of November 1995, which states as follows: "the universality of the United Nations and its corollary, multilingualism, entail for each State Member of the Organization, irrespective of the official language in which it expresses itself, the right and the duty to make itself understood and to understand others". 196. In this respect, the Inspectors acknowledge with appreciation the ongoing work and initiatives being undertaken within the United Nations by DGACM (whose Head chairs the IAMLADP network) in addressing the current challenges in the area of conference and languages services for the effective implementation of multilingualism. While welcoming the appointment of a new Coordinator for Multilingualism, in his capacity as Head of DPI, the Inspectors are of the view that, in line with the Coordinator's mandate, strategic action plans should be promoted with the assistance of a fully fledged focal points network. Other organizations have followed suit, in paving the way for language diversity, based on ad hoc arrangements made by their executive heads, and endorsement by their governing bodies (FAO, UNESCO, UNIDO, WIPO, WHO and more). 197. Considering the recurring impediments for the full implementation of multilingualism across the system, the Inspectors stress the need for the organizations of the United Nations system: (a) To adhere more strictly to the principles of equality in respect of the official languages and the equitable use of the working languages within secretariats, including the use of additional working languages in specific duty stations; (b) To formally require from all staff, in the context of recruitments and promotions, a good knowledge of at least one other working language; (c) To consistently tackle the alarming issues of the shortage of qualified interpreters and translators, effective succession planning, targeted training and career development; (d) To establish within the CEB machinery a working group on multilingualism to develop policies and strategies of action based on the key recommendations issued by IAMLADP and the respective coordinators for multilingualism. 198. In the context of economic realities and financial constraints, Member States are the ones to ultimately answer this central question: Should the United Nations abdicate their commitment to cultural diversity within one world and succumb, for the sake of pragmatism, to the trend towards de facto monolingualism and its inherent single-thought culture, or do they truly want to stand up coherently for their valued principles in further preserving the right and duty of using a diversity of languages to serve "the Peoples of the United Nations"? 199. Multilingualism being in this regard the sole legitimate response to the rising pattern of the "pensée unique", the Inspectors firmly believe that the time has come for the governing bodies to "walk the talk" and take bold steps in establishing the right balance between effective implementation of multilingualism and allocation of required resources, based on the priorities of Member States as well as the strategies and practices of the secretariats across the system. Thanks to the sense of shared responsibility on the part of the main stakeholders, the executive heads should seek to launch a strategic "One UN policy for multilingualism" through the CEB, and seek matching budgetary support from their governing bodies. Formal frameworks for multilingualism in the United Nations system organizations (based on responses to the JIU questionnaire, 2010) Organization Existence of a formal framework for multilingualism Reference documents UN Yes A/RES/50/11, A/RES/52/23, A/RES/54/64, A/RES/56/262, A/RES/59/309, A/RES/61/266, A/RES/63/396 ESCWA No, but various policies promoting multilingualism exist for different areas of work Idem ESCAP No ECA No, but clauses on the working languages of the Commission exist in the Terms of Reference ECE Communications strategy (TD/B/56/9/Rev.1) Rules of Procedure of the Executive Board of UNDP and UNFPA (DP/1997/32) ST/AI/2001/5, ST/AI/189 UN-Habitat General Assembly resolutions 50/11 and 63/306 No. but various policies promoting multilingualism exist IOM/033-FOM/033/2010, IOM/05-/FOM/05/2006, SAMM 3.11, A/AC.96/187/Rev.6 CF/AI/2000-013 A/RES/63/306 Certain policies supporting multilingualism in international staff regulations and rules Documents cited include Language Training Policy and HR Policy on admin. procedures for international P staff Basic Texts (Rule XLVIII of the General Rules of the Organization) -- FAO Administrative Manual, section 530, and Appendix D on Conference arrangements -- Governing body containing the language policy (PC 81/6 -- FC 92/13 of 1999) -- Administrative circulars on interpretation and translation (AC 2006/13 and AC 2006/07). Doc 9958 -- Assembly resolutions in force (Oct 2010) Staff Regulations 5.05 Various standing orders, information notes and office procedures Rules of Procedure of the IMO Assembly, Council and Committees enshrine multilingual policies Resolution 154 Administrative manual, chap. 1.9 IDB-36/Dec.2, IDB-38/11, GC.13/Res.4 Administrative instruction No. 31 WHA61.12, WHA60.11, WHA50.32, WHA51-30, WHA31.13, EB105.R6, EB121/6 A/48/26 para. 250 (following proposal PBC/15/9), A/48/11, A/48/11 Add. WMO General Regulations (ref: Reg. 117-122) Annex II Official and working languages of the secretariats of the United Nations system organizations (based on responses to JIU questionnaire, 2010) Official languages Working languages UN Secretariat A C E F R S E F A E F C E F R UNECLAC E F S E F R A E F S E A C E F S A E A C E F R S G FAO* A C E F R S H P I WHO** F F E WIPO*** * FAO's Basic Texts do not define the terms "official" and "working" languages, and refer only to the languages of the Organization. Other languages (e.g. German, Portuguese) are used for specific sessions. ** WHO uses all official languages as working languages of the meetings of its governing bodies. It does not define the "working languages" to be used in the secretariat, but allows each office to use the languages suitable to their location and work. WHO regional offices for example have working languages specific to their regions. *** WIPO's constitutional texts do not define the term "official languages" and refer only to working languages. Other languages (e.g. German, Japanese, Korean) are used for specific committees. Key: A: Arabic; C: Chinese; E: English; F: French; G: German; H: Hindi; I: Italian; P: Portuguese; R: Russian; S: Spanish Free training provided to Training provided on a cost-sharing basis to All staff Members Core staff Others/Non-staff (interns, consultants, retirees, diplomats. etc.) Staff Others/Non-staff (interns, consultants, retirees, diplomats, etc.) Spouses X(*) X (family members included) (*) UNHCR has for some time implemented a cost-sharing policy as it improves commitment, not only for registration in but also for completion of language studies. In this way, the organization can provide more effective language training to a larger number of staff. In order to reach a broader audience, e-learning courses in all official languages are available to staff who do not have access to classroom learning. Websites and multilingualism (JIU participating organizations) Languages on official homepage Additional languages C E F S 57 Country office websites: 24 English, 14 Spanish, 12 French, 2 Portuguese, 1 English/Farsi, 1 English/Arabic, 1 Japanese, 1 Russian, 1 Vietnamese A C E S Google translate toolbar added to site to provide several other language options 48 country websites in native language(s), including all official languages National Committees are responsible for additional languages on country sites Hebrew Czech, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, German, Icelandic, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Slovak, Swedish Other languages are used locally (e.g. Italian, Japanese, Portuguese) A E F R S Regional offices websites have additional languages (e.g. German in the Regional Office for Europe) Annex V Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) between academic institutions and the United Nations Date of MoU University and location 24 May 2011 Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, China 20 December 2010 American University in Cairo (AUC), Egypt 9 November 2010 University of Nairobi, Kenya 29 October 2010 Saint Joseph University (USJ) Beirut, Lebanon 27 October 2010 Damascus University, Syria 09 March 2010 Ecole supérieure d'interprètes et de traducteurs (ESIT) and Université Sorbonne Nouvelle Paris 3, France 08 March 2010 Institut de management et de communication interculturels (ISIT), France 04 March 2010 Université de Mons (UMONS), Belgium 20 January 2010 Lomonosov Moscow State University (LMSU), Russian Federation 18 January 2010 Minsk State Linguistic University (MSLU), Belarus 12 November 2009 Monterey Institute of International Studies (MIIS), California, USA 05 November 2009 Moscow State Institute of International Relations (MGIMO), Russian Federation 10 July 2009 Université de Genève, Switzerland 20 February 2009 University of Salamanca, Spain 18 February 2009 University of Bath, United Kingdom 28 August 2008 Herzen State Pedagogical University of Russia, Russian Federation 05 August 2008 Shanghai International Studies University, China Beijing Foreign Studies University, China 30 April 2008 University of Westminster, United Kingdom Coverage of the AIIC -- United Nations Agreement (2007-2011)* * Negotiations for the renewal of the agreement were launched in May 2011 and successfully completed with a new 5-year binding agreement in December 2011. List of organizations which are party to the Agreement 1. United Nations, including its Departments, Offices and Regional Commissions, Funds, Programmes and other entities administered by the United Nations Secretariat; 2. International Labour Organization (ILO), including its Regional Offices; 3. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO); 4. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); 5. World Health Organization (WHO), including its Regional Offices and Programmes; 6. International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO); 7. Universal Postal Union (UPU); 8. International Telecommunication Union (ITU); 9. World Meteorological Organization (WMO); 10. International Maritime Organization (IMO); 11. World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO); 12. International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD); 13. World Food Programme (WFP); 14. Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO); 15. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO); 16. ILO Training Centre, Turin (ITCILO); Organizational entities to which the Agreement applies 17. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR); 18. United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS); 19. United Nations University (UNU); 20. International Trade Centre (ITC); 21. International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY); 22. International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); 23. United Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC); 24. Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO); 25. Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS); 26. The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis & Malaria (GFATM); 27. International Agency for Cancer Research (IARC); 28. Onchocerchiasis Control Programe (OCP); 29. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA); 30. World Trade Organization (WTO); 31. International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV). Annex VII Organizations party to the AITC - CCAQ Agreement (ACC/1991/PER/CM/3) 1. United Nations; 2. International Labour Office (ILO); 5. International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO); 6. Universal Postal Union (UPU); 7. World Health Organization (WHO); 13. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO); 14. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA); 15. World Trade Organization (WTO) (previously General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade). Annex VIII Overview of actions to be taken by participating organizations on the recommendations of the Intended impact United Nations, its funds and programmes United Nations* UN Women For action For information e c d L b Legend: L: Recommendation for decision by legislative organ E: Recommendation for action by executive head Recommendation does not require action by this organization Intended impact: a: enhanced accountability; b: dissemination of best practices; c: enhanced coordination and cooperation; d: enhanced controls and compliance; e: enhanced effectiveness; f: significant financial savings; g: enhanced efficiency; o: other. * Covers all entities listed in ST/SGB/2002/11, other than UNCTAD, UNODC, UNEP, UN-Habitat, UNHCR, UNRWA. 