%%%NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|GOOD NEIGHBOURLINESS|REGIONAL SECURITY|ECONOMIC INTEGRATION|MONGOLIA|

Sixty-seventh session * A/67/50. Item 95 (k) of the preliminary list* General and complete disarmament: Mongolia's international security and nuclear-weapon-free status Letter dated 4 June 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Mongolia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith Mongolia's national report on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 65/70 entitled "Mongolia's international security and nuclear-weapon-free status" (see annex). I should be grateful if you could have this report circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under item 95 (k) of the preliminary list. (Signed) Enkhtsetseg Ochir Ambassador Permanent Representative of Mongolia to the United Nations Report of the Government of Mongolia on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 65/70 entitled "Mongolia's international security and nuclear-weapon-free status" 31 May 2012 In 2011, Mongolia celebrated the fiftieth anniversary of its accession to the United Nations (27 October 1961). That accession is considered to be one of the major achievements of Mongolia's foreign policy in the twentieth century. It was not only the fruit of Mongolia's political and diplomatic efforts, and a political guarantee of the country's independence, but also opened doors for Mongolia in strengthening its position in the international arena and in becoming actively engaged in international affairs. The country currently maintains diplomatic relations with 164 countries, is a member of more than 60 international and regional intergovernmental organizations and is a State party to more than 240 international agreements and conventions. Over the past years, Mongolia has pursued an active policy within the United Nations to make its modest contribution to promoting the noble goals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. During the past decade, more than 5,000 Mongolian peacekeepers have served in peacekeeping operations. In cooperation with other Member States, Mongolia has successfully promoted initiatives and the adoption of General Assembly resolutions on, among other things, the right of peoples to peace, disarmament weeks, promoting education for all, supporting cooperatives, rural women, the rights of landlocked developing countries and promoting democratic reforms. In July 2011, Mongolia assumed the presidency of the Community of Democracies for the period 2011-2013. As a demonstration of its commitment to maintaining international peace and security, in 1992 Mongolia declared its territory a single State nuclear-weapon-free zone. The year 2012 marks the twentieth anniversary of that declaration. Since 1998, the General Assembly has been considering Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status every other year. On 8 December 2010, the General Assembly unanimously adopted resolution 65/70 entitled "Mongolia's international security and its nuclear-weapon-free status", which was co-sponsored by all five nuclear-weapon States, among others. That co-sponsorship by all five nuclear-weapon States, an unprecedented move, underlined the importance that they attached to the issue and their interest in promoting Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status. The present report contains an account of activities undertaken over the past two years in the implementation of resolution 65/70. Activities related to Mongolia's international security and nuclear-weapon-free status Since the submission in June 2010 of its national report on the implementation of resolution 63/56 and the report of the Secretary-General on Mongolia's international security and nuclear-weapon-free status (A/65/136), Mongolia has continued to strengthen its national security and promote the country's nuclear-weapon-free status at the international level. In that regard, the measures described below have been taken. National-level measures National security concept In recent years, the external and internal conditions of Mongolia's national security have changed, the nature and sources of possible challenges have become diversified and complicated and non-traditional threats have emerged. Accordingly, Mongolia reviewed and updated its national security concept of 1994 to reflect the changes at the national and international levels. A working group comprising more than 70 participants, including members of the parliament, representatives of relevant ministries and Government agencies, retired statesmen, researchers and scholars, was set up in 2009 by presidential decree to prepare a new draft of the national security concept. More than 50 meetings and round-table discussions were held during the 10-month drafting process. The draft was twice reviewed by the relevant Government agencies and discussed by the Cabinet before its adoption by the parliament on 15 July 2010. The national security concept is the second most important document of national consensus after the Constitution in terms of the scope of regulation and the principles that determine the legal basis of the country's policies. The new concept addresses security issues in the interrelationship among the following six pillars: security of existence, economic security, internal security, human security, environmental security and information security. While ensuring continuity and reinforcing traditional principles, it includes new progressive principles such as broader civil participation, respect for human rights and freedoms and the rule of law, human security and development. While previously associated with traditional understandings of political and military threats, and regarded as the duty of the State, the new concept stipulates that national security is to be ensured through cooperation between the State and citizens. It also states that democratic governance based on the parliamentary system is the guarantee of national sovereignty and security. For the first time in Mongolia's history, a concept and fundamental policies for ensuring its information security were defined. In implementing its national security concept and related policies, Mongolia attaches particular importance to cooperation with other countries and international organizations. It is thus stipulated in the new concept (article 3.1.1.7) that Mongolia is to cooperate actively with the Security Council, Member States and international organizations in implementing General Assembly resolutions regarding strengthening Mongolia's international security. Foreign policy concept Similarly, Mongolia's foreign policy concept of 1994 was reviewed by a working group set up at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The renewed foreign policy concept was adopted by the parliament on 10 February 2011. In the new concept, it was stressed, among other things, that Mongolia would refrain from joining any military alliance or grouping, from allowing the use of its territory or airspace against any other country and from permitting the stationing of foreign troops or weapons, including nuclear or any other type of weapons of mass destruction, on its territory (para. 9). Nuclear-weapon-free status The implementation of Mongolia's policy of institutionalizing the country's nuclear-weapon-free status was considered by the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Trade in December 2011 and by the parliamentary Standing Committee on Security and Foreign Policy in January 2012. They welcomed the progress made to date and approved further measures to promote and consolidate that status. In May 2011, Mongolia organized a scientific conference to discuss the views of scholars and researchers on the new geopolitical reality, at which participants, among other things, considered issues connected to Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status and how changing geopolitical realities could affect it. During the period 2011-2012, a series of round-table discussions was organized by the Institute for Strategic Studies, an independent research arm of the National Security Council of Mongolia, on various aspects of the country's security, including economic security, human security, environmental security and information security. On 25 January 2012, the Institute organized a round-table discussion on external conditions that could affect Mongolia's security in 2012. The participants discussed issues related to the world economic situation in 2012, regional prospects, challenges and possible risks that they could pose to Mongolia. The outcomes and the scholars' recommendations have been brought to the attention of the relevant bodies. Mongolia continues to pay particular attention to the implementation of its law on its nuclear-weapon-free status, which was adopted on 3 February 2000. As the country is vast and shares long borders with two neighbours, border control and management have become a serious challenge at a time of increased concern over transnational crimes, including trafficking in nuclear-related items. Moreover, its efforts to respond to the threat of nuclear smuggling have been beset by a shortage of trained personnel and the necessary equipment. Considering the above-mentioned circumstances, a project proposal to improve technical capacity to control exports and imports of nuclear and other radioactive materials was developed and presented to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). In follow-up, in October 2007, the Governments of Mongolia and the United States of America signed a memorandum of understanding concerning cooperation in preventing illicit trafficking in nuclear and other radioactive materials. Under the memorandum, the United States Department of Energy is providing Mongolia with technical assistance in the form of equipment, material and training for use at border posts. To date, radioactivity detection equipment has been installed at 13 border posts, and 2 more posts are to be equipped in 2012. To improve coordination in efforts to combat the spread of weapons of mass destruction, the Government of Mongolia hosted a proliferation security initiative workshop and tabletop exercise with the United States in Ulaanbaatar on 22 and 23 February 2011. International-level measures Institutionalizing nuclear-weapon-free status During the period under review, Mongolia specifically focused on institutionalizing internationally the country's nuclear-weapon-free status. As mentioned in its previous report, during consultations held in Geneva in 2009, the representatives of China and the Russian Federation proposed changing the proposed trilateral treaty format (between China, Mongolia and the Russian Federation) to a format that would include the other three nuclear-weapon States (France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States). Without them, according to China and the Russian Federation, it would be difficult to address the issue of meaningful security assurances that would duly reflect Mongolia's unique geopolitical location. Mongolia's main interest was to have its status formally recognized by the nuclear-weapon States (in a mutually acceptable form, such as a treaty) and to have them undertake not to contribute to any act that would violate that status. That interest notwithstanding, the consultations with its neighbours showed that they had difficulties concluding a treaty that would set a precedent that the five nuclear-weapon States were not prepared to accept. They were, however, ready to consider a non-treaty commitment to Mongolia and, since the issue involved nuclear weapons, China and the Russian Federation wanted the other nuclear-weapon States to join the consultations. In May 2010, the Government of Mongolia met the representatives of the nuclear-weapon States on the margins of the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and shared its view on how to promote and strengthen its nuclear-weapon-free status. Mongolia presented to France, the United Kingdom and the United States the draft trilateral treaty on Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status and its protocol for their consideration. Subsequent consultations with the representatives of those States showed that they too had difficulties with the proposed treaty format since that would, according to them, set a precedent for a single State to establish a full-fledged nuclear-weapon-free zone. After some thought, Mongolia indicated that it would not insist on a treaty format if another appropriate form of security assurance could be found. The consultations in 2011 and early 2012 led to agreement to consider the issue of Mongolia's status in a meeting format involving Mongolia and the five nuclear-weapon States. Such a meeting was held in May 2012 in Vienna on the margins of the first session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It afforded representatives of Mongolia and the nuclear-weapon States the opportunity to explain their positions on the issue of format and possible content of security assurances that might go beyond the assurance that the States had provided to Mongolia in 2000. The sides agreed to continue consultations in autumn 2012. In April 2011, Mongolia organized an international round-table discussion at the Diplomatic Academy of Vienna on challenges and opportunities in promoting further nuclear-weapon-free zones. The participants discussed relevant issues, including the possibility of establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East and North-East Asia. Mongolia updated the participants on its contacts with the nuclear-weapon States, with special emphasis on the issues that were preventing them from providing assurances broader than those contained in their 2000 joint statement. The participants expressed support for Mongolia's efforts to institutionalize its status. Mongolia participated in a forum organized by the International Atomic Energy Agency on experience of possible relevance to the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, held on 21 and 22 November 2011 in Vienna, at which it presented an overview of its experience in promoting the single-State nuclear-weapon-free zone concept and practice. In February 2011, the coordinator of Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status participated in a meeting held in Vienna of the Monterey Nonproliferation Strategy Group on the theme "A WMD-free zone in the Middle East: promises and prospects". Mongolia co-organized and chaired the first preparatory meeting for the Third Conference of States Parties and Signatories of Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia, held in Vienna in April 2012. Support for Mongolia Since the submission of the most recent report of the Secretary-General on the subject, Mongolia has also continued to raise awareness of its nuclear-weapon-free policy and broaden its international support. Such support was underlined in, among others, the following multilateral and bilateral documents: (a) The Final Document of the Sixteenth Ministerial Conference and Commemorative Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Bali, Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011, in which the ministers expressed the belief that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones created by the treaties of Tlatelolco, Rarotonga, Bangkok and Pelindaba, and the Central Asian nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty, in addition to Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status, were positive steps and important measures towards strengthening global nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation (para. 156), and expressed their support for Mongolia's policy aimed at institutionalizing its nuclear-weapon-free status and for the measures taken by Mongolia to consolidate and strengthen that status. In that regard, they welcomed the start of the talks by Mongolia with its two neighbours to conclude the required legal instrument and expressed their hope that it would soon result in the conclusion of an international instrument institutionalizing the status (para. 157); (b) The Final Document of the Ministerial Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement Coordinating Bureau, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, from 7 to 10 May 2012 (reiterating the statements above); (c) The declaration of the Third Summit of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia, held in Istanbul, Turkey, on 8 June 2010, in which the participants supported Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status as contributing to security and confidence-building measures in the Conference region; (d) The sixth meetings of the Special Working Group and the Senior Officials Committee of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in Asia, held in Istanbul in February 2012, when, during discussions on military and political issues, the participants expressed support for Mongolia's efforts to institutionalize its nuclear-weapon-free status at the international level and the hope that that status would be institutionalized in the near future; (e) The joint communiqué of 14 December 2010 on the outcome of dialogue between the Heads of Government of Mongolia and the Russian Federation, in which it was noted that the Russian side expressed its readiness to continue, together with other nuclear-weapon States, the negotiations with the Mongolian side on the issue of institutionalizing Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status; (f) The Mongolia-Russian Federation joint statement of 31 May 2011 on the President of Mongolia's visit to the Russian Federation, in which it was underlined that the Russian side, together with other members of the five nuclear-weapon States, was prepared to continue to examine Mongolia's proposal to strengthen further its nuclear-weapon-free status; (g) The United States-Mongolia joint statement of 16 June 2011 on the President of Mongolia's visit to the United States, in which it was pointed out that the United States recognized and supported the Mongolian nuclear initiative, and applauded Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status; (h) The joint statement of 16 June 2011 on the establishment of a strategic partnership between Mongolia and China, in which it was noted that the Chinese side confirmed its support for the efforts of the Mongolian side to secure by political and diplomatic means Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status, its national security and legitimate interests. These continued references to Mongolia's nuclear-weapon-free status serve as proof of its international recognition. Non-nuclear aspects of Mongolia's international security Non-nuclear aspects of security constitute an important and integral part of Mongolia's policies aimed at strengthening the country's national security, independence, unity and development. Economic security The national security concept places economic independence and ecologically balanced development among vital national interests. To ensure economic security, it sets forth various tasks, including the creation of a multi-pillar, efficient structure, the implementation of balanced investment policies, the reinforcement of financial sector security, and the implementation of efficient policies regarding energy and mineral resources, foreign trade and integration. It is stated that the basic precondition for achieving and maintaining the country's economic security is the design and adoption of a sustainable development model that ensures economic independence and an environment for promoting human security and peaceful living. Unfortunately, the country's economy remains one-sided and fragile, heavily dependent on imports of oil and some consumer goods. Raw materials make up the bulk of its exports. Price changes frequently affect the economy and, as a landlocked country, Mongolia is physically remote from world markets. Today, however, the country is tapping into its vast natural resources that attract foreign investment and open up both significant opportunities and economic risks. Economic growth reached 17.3 per cent in 2011, largely owing to high copper prices and increasing coal production. The dependence of its economy on mining revenue, however, exposes the country to commodity price volatility. Mongolia faces challenges similar to other extractive-industry economies, including those known as "resource curse" and "Dutch disease". These issues were discussed at an international conference on extractive industries and human development organized by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Ulaanbaatar in October 2011. The prevention of risks and threats associated with growth requires concerted action on the part of the Government, political parties, the business sector, research institutions, non-governmental organizations and the media. To that end, the Mongolia Economic Forum was established as an independent, non-governmental organization committed to improving and creating a common concept to accelerate the development of Mongolia. The Mongolia Economic Forum held an initial conference on 8 and 9 February 2010, a second on 2 and 3 March 2011 and a third on 5 and 6 March 2012. In addition to policy discussions, the Forum is of significant value in establishing extensive business networking, cooperation and understanding, given that more than 1,000 people participate in its meetings. Recently, the Forum, in cooperation with the Economic Research Institute, undertook and published a research study entitled "Risk Report for Mongolia 2012", in which the major risks facing the country and their interlinkages are discussed. On 17 April 2012, a round-table discussion was held to discuss the risks to Mongolia's economic security, during which the participants exchanged views on issues related to State policy on economic security, prevention and reduction of major risks, the pressing issues of budget and financial security, the natural resources sector, the current investment climate and related risks. Issues pertaining to economic security were discussed at a meeting organized on 26 April 2012 by the parliamentary Standing Committee on Security and Foreign Policy. Over the past two years, specific practical measures have been taken by the Government to ensure its economic security. Today, it is of primordial importance to introduce highly developed technology and produce value added products. To that end, in 2011 the Government of Mongolia adopted and began to implement a programme for the development of high-technology-based industries. During a State visit by the President of Mongolia to Germany in March 2012, an agreement was reached on the implementation of a project on building a plant for producing liquid fuel from coal. Human security Mongolia is strongly committed to ensuring human security and promoting human-centred development. The national security concept identifies human security as one of the fundamental pillars of national security. Creating a healthy and safe living environment and conditions, ensuring food security, guaranteeing security of residence and living environment, and protecting people from becoming victims of crimes are defined as the basis for ensuring human security. Human trafficking is becoming a challenge for Mongolia. It is a relatively new phenomenon, with the first case registered in the country in 2000. In recent years, according to the Gender Equality Centre, a non-governmental organization, more than 130 persons have become victims of human trafficking annually. Over half were aged between 18 and 26 years, and 11 per cent were girls under the age of 18 years. Although measures have been taken, including the adoption of a national programme and the establishment of a system to monitor its implementation, the number of cases is on the rise. The National Security Council specifically considered the issue of human trafficking in March 2011. The Government was instructed to take legal, administrative and other necessary measures to overcome the challenge and to raise public awareness about human trafficking in partnership with non-governmental organizations. The assistance and cooperation of international organizations and other countries are of particular importance in this regard. Food security remains an important issue in Mongolia, not only because of the negative impacts of global climate change and environmental degradation, but also its own specific problems. For example, desertification is increasing, with deserts covering some 72 per cent of Mongolian territory. The country is highly dependent on the import of major consumer goods (more than 70 per cent of such goods are imported). The Government therefore considers it a priority to ensure food security and safety by implementing programmes and projects. With the support and assistance of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the Government drew up and adopted in 2011, by its decision 114, a national programme on food security. Currently, more than 20 programmes and projects aimed at promoting food supply and ensuring food safety and security are being implemented at the national and branch levels. In addition, 16 projects are being implemented with the support of FAO, other international organizations and donor countries. Issues related to food production, supply and security were discussed at a national forum on food security in Mongolia held on 24 June 2011. Representatives of all stakeholders, including research institutions, the private sector and nongovernmental organizations, participated. The recommendations made have been brought to the attention of the relevant bodies. Environmental security The protection and strengthening of its environmental security is another important pillar of Mongolia's national security. The national security concept provides that maintaining a balance of nature, protecting water resources, mitigating the impact of climate change and land degradation, preventing harm from biological deficiencies and reducing risks of environmental pollution, natural disasters and adversities are prerequisites for assuring healthy human life and security, and for preserving the natural environment. Today, Mongolia faces many challenges in achieving its development goals. Those challenges are coupled with environmental problems such as climate change, desertification, pasture degradation, natural disasters, droughts, the Dzud, water and forest resource depletion, and air and soil pollution. Those issues evidently have a negative impact on the livelihoods, health and well-being of nomadic herders and ordinary Mongolians. Increasing consumption and economic growth and the accelerating development of the mining sector are intensifying the pressure on nature and the environment. Sound policies and joint efforts are both essential in surmounting these challenges. Over the past two years, Mongolia has continued its efforts to address environmental security challenges by establishing and expanding the necessary legal framework, organizing meetings and round-table discussions, and implementing national programmes and projects with the support and cooperation of UNDP, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), other international organizations and donor countries. On 2 February 2011, the parliament adopted a law on reducing air pollution in the capital city. With the adoption of a package of laws on environmental protection at its 2012 spring session, today 17 per cent of the country's territory comes under the special protection of the State. More than 25 national programmes on nature and environmental issues are currently being implemented in Mongolia. In 2010, the Government began implementing national programmes on water protection and combating desertification. In 2011, the parliament adopted a national programme on climate change. Mongolia is also preparing for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, to be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 2012. A team of national experts has been tasked to review progress on Mongolia's implementation of Agenda 21. It has looked at what has been achieved, what gaps remain and the challenges and opportunities for sustainable development. As part of its preparations for the Conference, Mongolia hosted on 22 and 23 May 2012 the fourth Asia-Europe meeting of environment ministers, discussing sustainable water and forest management. Information security The protection of national interests in the field of information and the guaranteeing of the integrity, confidentiality and availability of information for the State, citizens and private organizations are the basis for ensuring information security. A national programme on ensuring information security (2010-2015) was adopted by the Government through its decision 141 on 2 June 2010. It pursues four main goals: to create a legal environment for ensuring information security; to reduce the vulnerability of information and establish a system to counteract problems; to build a culture of information and communications service users, improve citizens' knowledge and education, develop human resources and create conditions conducive to public-private partnerships; and to develop a State system of information security. To promote further the implementation of the Programme, a conference on theoretical and practical issues surrounding information security was organized on 28 April 2011, at which the participants adopted recommendations on measures to be undertaken by all relevant actors in the public and private sectors. Emphasis was laid on facilitating the creation of the legal environment necessary for ensuring citizens' rights to information and information and communications security. Legislation on cybersecurity is being drafted. International cooperation Since its previous report, the Government has continued its cooperation with the United Nations system and other international organizations to address the country's economic and ecological vulnerabilities and human security, based on, among other things, the conclusions and recommendations of two studies undertaken together with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat of the United Nations and the UNDP country office in Mongolia in 2004. The findings and recommendations were incorporated into the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for 2007-2011 and the National Development Strategy for 2008-2021, which is based on the Millennium Development Goals. They are also reflected in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for 2012-2016. Important policy recommendations are also made in the Mongolia Human Development Report 2011: From Vulnerability to Sustainability: Environment and Human Development, published in 2011 with the support of UNDP and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency. As the Prime Minister of Mongolia highlighted in his foreword, the conclusions and recommendations of the report are of great value for Mongolia in strengthening and moving forward with its progress and achievements in human development, especially, when it has stepped onto the new path of resource-based dynamic development. Dozens of projects supporting the implementation of General Assembly resolution 65/70 have been successfully implemented with the support and cooperation of various organizations of the United Nations system, other international organizations and donor countries. They include a UNDP/Government of Luxembourg project on strengthening the disaster mitigation and management system in Mongolia (phase III), a UNDP/UNEP project on strengthening environmental governance in Mongolia, a Government of the Netherlands/Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation/UNDP project on sustainable land management for combating desertification in Mongolia, and the UNDP/United Nations Children's Fund/World Health Organization/United Nations Population Fund joint programmes on water and sanitation and on comprehensive community services to improve human security for the rural disadvantaged population. With the support and cooperation of the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States, the Multilateral Agreement for the Establishment of an International Think Tank for Landlocked Developing Countries was developed and adopted by Member States in September 2010. Efforts are being made to advance its operationalization. The Think Tank is based in Ulaanbaatar. Mongolia hosts four stations in the International Monitoring System network (seismic station PS25, radionuclide station RN45, infrasound station IS34 and a SPALAX noble gas detector station). In addition to their primary function, they are bringing scientific and civil benefits to the country. Their cutting-edge equipment has contributed greatly to geophysics and seismology research in Mongolia, among other research. Conclusions The report of the Government on its activities undertaken to implement General Assembly resolution 65/70 clearly demonstrates the country's resolve to implement the provisions of the resolution in letter and spirit. Although the actions taken by Mongolia at the national and international levels are impressive, they will yield practical international results only if other Member States, especially the five nuclear-weapon States, are more constructive and forthcoming. In this connection, it should be pointed out that, as the co-sponsors of General Assembly resolution 65/70, the five nuclear-weapon States have agreed to consult Mongolia on the non-treaty format of a more credible security assurance than that provided by them in 2000, an assurance that would be tailored to the country's unique geographical location and its security risks and challenges. It is therefore to be hoped that the resumption of consultations between Mongolia and the five nuclear-weapon States will soon yield positive results that will contribute to enhancing not only Mongolia's security but also stability and confidence in the region. Mongolia hopes that these consultations will soon lead to official recognition by the General Assembly of Mongolia's unique nuclear-weapon-free status. Mongolia also believes that its nuclear-weapon-free status will be credible only if other international aspects of its security, especially economic security and ecological balance, are consolidated and strengthened, as underlined in paragraph 6 of the resolution. For its part, Mongolia stands ready to work with other Member States and relevant United Nations bodies and specialized agencies to strengthen the non-nuclear aspects of its security that would contribute to stability, greater trust and mutually beneficial cooperation in the region and beyond. 