%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|HUMAN RIGHTS MONITORING|MEDIUM-TERM PLANNING|PROGRAMME PLANNING|

Sixty-seventh session Third Committee Agenda item 131 Programme planning Letter dated 12 September 2012 from the Chair of the Committee for Programme and Coordination to the Chair of the Third Committee I am writing to inform you that the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fifty-second session recommended that the General Assembly allocate programme 20, (Human rights) of the proposed strategic framework for the period 2014-2015 (A/67/6 (Prog. 20)) to the Third Committee for its review and action under the agenda item entitled "Programme planning". I would like to further inform you that, although an exchange of views took place, owing to a shortage of time, the Committee was unable to complete its review of the amendments to programme 20 that were proposed by delegations. The conclusions and recommendations of the Committee are contained in the report on its fifty-second session (A/67/16). The Committee has therefore recommended transmitting to the Third Committee, the draft conclusions and amendments that were proposed. The conclusions and recommendations of the Committee, as well as the proposals of Member States, are annexed to the present letter. (Signed) Eric Franck Saizonou Chair Committee for Programme and Coordination Conclusions on and amendments to programme 20, Human rights, of the proposed strategic framework for the period 2014-2015, as proposed at the fifty-second session of the Committee for Programme and Coordination The Committee recommended that the General Assembly approve the programme narrative of programme 20, Human rights, of the proposed strategic framework for the period 2014-2015, subject to the following modifications: Overall orientation Paragraph 20.2 In the second sentence, delete the words "collective security and". Paragraph 20.5 In the first sentence, after the words "with countries" insert the words "from all regions and at all levels of development". Paragraph 20.6 In the second sentence, replace the words "The United Nations treaty-monitoring bodies" with the words "The United Nations treaty bodies". Subprogramme 1 Human rights mainstreaming, right to development, and research and analysis In the title of the subprogramme, delete the comma after the word "development". A. Human rights mainstreaming Objective of the Organization Replace the words "integrate all human rights" with the words "integrate a human rights perspective". Before the word "relevant", delete the word "all". Expected accomplishments of the Secretariat Replace expected accomplishment (a) with: "(a) Further assistance to all United Nations organs in integration of a human rights perspective into all areas of their work, such as economic and social development, humanitarian, peace and security, governance and rule of law programmes and activities". or In expected accomplishment (a), after the words "all areas", delete the words "of work". In expected accomplishment (b), replace the words "in particular" with the words "including, where appropriate,". After the words "Member States", insert the words "from all regions and at all levels of development". In expected accomplishment (b) replace the words "integrate all human rights" with the words "integrate a human rights perspective". In expected accomplishment (c), delete the phrase ", including United Nations country teams,". At the end of expected accomplishment (c), delete the phrase: "and their disability and gender dimension". Indicators of achievement In indicator of achievement (a), replace the words "that further integrate all human rights" with the words "with a human rights component". In indicator of achievement (a), after the word "integrate", include the words ", where appropriate,". Replace indicator of achievement (b) with: "(b) Increased number of United Nations common country programming documents, including information on activities and projects that further integrate a human rights perspective". In indicator of achievement (b), after the word "activities", insert the word "and" and, after the word "projects", delete the phrase "and common country programming documents". In indicator of achievement (c), replace the words "other senior officials" with the words "and other senior United Nations officials" and, after the word "officials", delete the words "and country teams". Strategy Paragraph 20.9 In the first sentence, replace the words "integration of all human rights" with the words "integration of a human rights perspective". In the first sentence, after the word "integration" insert the words ", where appropriate," and, after the words "the existing", insert the words "and respective". Subparagraph 20.9 (a) After the word "perspective", insert the words ", where appropriate," and, after the words "law areas," insert the phrase "consistent with their existing mandates,". Subparagraph 20.9 (b) Delete the word "substantive" before the word "engagement". At the end of the subparagraph, delete the words ", as well as with civil society, including non-governmental organizations". Subparagraph 20.9 (c) Replace the words "integration of all human rights" with the words "integration of a human rights perspective". Replace the word "concerned" with the word "requesting". Replace the text of subparagraph (c) with: "(c) Promoting the practical integration of all human rights into relevant development programmes.". Subparagraph 20.9 (d) Delete the entire subparagraph. After the words "humanitarian assistance", delete the remaining text. Subparagraph 20.9 (e) After the word "system", delete the phrase ", in particular the United Nations country teams,"; after the words "Member States in", delete the words "building and"; and before the words "national policies" insert the word "relevant". B. Right to development Insert new accomplishment (b): "Consideration of ways and means to ensure the operationalization of the right to development as a priority, including the consideration of proposals on the elaboration of a comprehensive and coherent set of standards for the implementation of the right to development". Change existing expected accomplishment (b) to (c) accordingly. In indicator of achievement (b), delete the words "within and outside the United Nations". Insert new indicator of achievement (b) to read: "(b) Increased number of activities, analytical papers and information materials organized or made available by OHCHR as a contribution to the fulfilment of the substantive operationalization of the right to development". Change existing indicator of achievement (b) to (c) accordingly. Subparagraph 20.10 (a) At the end of the subparagraph, delete the words "and monitoring to that end". Subparagraph 20.10 (b) After subparagraph (b), insert a new subparagraph (c) to read: "(c) Promoting the operationalization of the right to development as a priority, including by encouraging the consideration of proposals on the elaboration of a comprehensive and coherent set of standards for the implementation of the right to development;" and renumber the subsequent subparagraphs. Subparagraph 20.10 (e) In the second line of existing subparagraph 20.10 (e), replace the word "countries" with the words "Member States". Also in existing subparagraph 20.10 (e), replace the phrase "and, taking into account a human rights-based approach" with the word ", including". C. Research and analysis In expected accomplishment (a), insert the words "supporting efforts of Member States in" before the words "combating discrimination". In expected accomplishment (b) insert the words "activities of Member States on" after the words "that contribute to". At the end of expected accomplishment (b), after the word "racism", insert the phrase ", as recognized in major United Nations documents such as the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action". Replace expected accomplishment (d) with: "(d) Enhanced assistance to Member States, at their request, in the promotion of legal protection and advocacy for the full implementation of all human rights". Replace expected accomplishment (e) with: "(e) More effective United Nations assistance to Member States and, as appropriate, to civil society, media and national human rights institutions, where they exist, at their request, in accordance with national legislations for the promotion and protection of all human rights for all". In expected accomplishment (f), replace the word "Governments" with the words "requesting Member States". In expected accomplishment (f), before the word "partners", insert the words ", as appropriate,". In expected accomplishment (g), after the words "to promote", insert the words ", as appropriate,". In indicator of achievement (a), add the word "increased" before the word "Number". In indicator of achievement (c), add the word "increased" before the word "Number". In indicator of achievement (d), add the word "increased" before the word "Number". In indicator of achievement (e), add the word "increased" before the word "Number". Replace indicator of achievement (e) with: "(e) Number of activities and measures taken to assist national efforts, upon Governmental request, for the promotion and protection of all human rights for all". In indicator of achievement (f), add the word "increased" before the word "Number". At the end of indicator of achievement (f), add the words ", in accordance with General Assembly resolution 48/141". Paragraph 20.11 In the third sentence, replace the words "used to overcome" with the words "used to assist, upon request, in overcoming"; and, after the word "basis", insert the phrase ", in accordance with its mandates,". Subparagraph 20.11 (a) In the third line, after the word "consolidation", insert the words ", as appropriate,"; in the fifth line, after the word "governance", insert the words "at the national and international levels"; in the eighth line, after the word "strategies", insert the words "and programmes"; in the tenth line, before the words "the elimination" delete the words "contributing to". In the eleventh line, replace the words "and new forms of discrimination" with the words ", including contemporary forms of racism". Subparagraph 20.11 (c) In the second line, replace the word "countries" with the words "Member States". Subparagraph 20.11 (d) In the first line, after the words "Follow-up to", insert the words "and implementation of". Subprogramme 2 Supporting human rights treaty bodies Replace the word "substantive" with the word "technical"; delete the words "and advice"; and add the word "by" before the word "increasing". Replace expected accomplishment (a) with: "(a) Enhanced Secretariat support of treaty bodies' work by OHCHR". Delete expected accomplishment (b). At the end of existing expected accomplishment (c), add the phrase "consistent with the specific mandates of those bodies and obligations of States parties to the treaties". In existing expected accomplishment (d), delete the words "at all levels" and, at the end of the accomplishment, add the phrase ", respecting the specific mandates of those bodies". Delete expected accomplishment (d). In indicator of achievement (a) (ii), replace the words "to promote follow-up to" with the words "to assist States parties, at their request, to implement". Delete expected indicator of achievement (b). At the end of existing indicator of achievement (c), add the words "with the requested support of OHCHR". At the end of indicator of achievement (c), add the words "consistent with the specific mandates of those bodies and obligations of States parties to the treaties". At the end of existing indicator of achievement (d), add the words ", respecting the specific mandates of those bodies". Delete indicator of achievement (d). Subparagraph 20.12 (b) Replace the subparagraph with: "(b) Drawing on all available in-house resources to provide technical support to the work of treaty bodies in accordance with the guiding principles of the programme". In the second line, after the word "capacity" insert the phrase ", in accordance with the specific mandates of the treaties and strictly taking into account the obligations of the States parties under examination,". Subparagraph 20.12 (c) Subparagraph 20.12 (d) At the end of the existing subparagraph, delete the words "in order to support the effective implementation of international human rights standards and compliance with treaty commitments by States parties". In the second line, after the word "partnerships" insert the phrase ", in accordance with the mandates of the treaty bodies, which emanate from the instruments that constituted them,". Subprogramme 3 Advisory services, technical cooperation and field activities In expected accomplishment (a), replace the word "translate" with the word "implement". In expected accomplishment (a), after the word "States," insert the words "both developing and developed countries,". In expected accomplishment (b), add the word "Member" after the word "requesting". In expected accomplishment (c), after the word "areas,", insert the words "in both developing and developed countries,". In expected accomplishment (d), add the word "Member" after the words "request of". In expected accomplishment (e), after the word "requesting", replace the word "countries" with the words "Member States"; and replace the words "the programme" with the words "this programme". In expected accomplishment (f), replace the phrase "the prevention of the continuation of human rights violations in accordance with the mandate of the High Commissioner for Human Rights" with the phrase "the fulfilment of its mandate for the promotion and protection of human rights". In expected accomplishment (g), add the word "Member" after the word "requesting". In indicator of achievement (a), replace the words "human rights standards and instruments" with the words "international human rights obligations". In indicator of achievement (a), delete the words "standards and". In indicator of achievement (c), after the word "areas,", insert the words "in both developing and developed countries". In indicator of achievement (f), add the word "in" after the word "OHCHR". In indicator of achievement (f), after the words "contributing to", replace the existing text with "addressing, as appropriate, identified, objective and nonpoliticized situations of large-scale human rights violations, essentially through cooperative means". In the indicator of achievement (g), add the word "Member" after the word "requesting". Place subparagraphs 20.13 (a) and (b) after paragraph 20.13 (d) and renumber subparagraphs accordingly. Subparagraph 20.13 (a) In the first sentence, replace the words "peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding activities to assist countries" with the words "peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding activities and possible United Nations presences in developed countries to assist countries"; and, in the second sentence, after the word "offices,", add the words "where they exist,". Subparagraph 20.13 (b) At the end of the subparagraph, delete the phrase "and other United Nations policymaking bodies;". Subparagraph 20.13 (c) In the first sentence, replace the words "at the national level" with the words ", upon request of Member States,". In the first sentence, after the word "level", add the words ", as appropriate,". Delete the entire second sentence. Subparagraph 20.13 (d) At the end of the subparagraph, after the words "human rights", delete the remaining text. Subparagraph 20.13 (e) Replace the words "Following human rights developments to assist the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms" with the words "Assisting the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms". In the first line, insert the words ", in an objective and non-selective or nonpoliticized manner," after the words "to assist". Replace the words "treaty-monitoring bodies" with the words "treaty bodies". Insert the word "respective" after the words "implementation of their". Insert the words "thematic and" before the words "country-specific". In the fifth line, delete the word "and" before the word "effective"; insert a comma between the word "efficient" and the word "effective"; and insert, before the word "functioning", the words ", non-selective and non-politicized". Subprogramme 4 Supporting the Human Rights Council, its subsidiary bodies and mechanisms Delete the words "and expert". Replace the words "principles of the programme" with the words "principles of this programme". In expected accomplishment (a), delete the words "and expert". In expected accomplishment (c), replace the word "gross" with the word "grave". In expected accomplishment (c), after the word "addressing", insert the words ", where and as appropriate,". In expected accomplishment (d), replace the word "gross" with the words "grave and systematic". In expected accomplishment (e), before the word "stakeholders", insert the word "pertinent". In indicator of achievement (a) (ii), delete the word "positive" and add after the word "provided" the words "to them upon request". In indicator of achievement (b), add the word "Increased" before the word "number". In indicator of achievement (c) (ii), add the word "Member" before the word "States". In indicator of achievement (c) (ii), replace the words "number of responses and feedback" with the words "amount of feedback". In indicator of achievement (d) (i), delete the word "Increased". In indicator of achievement (e), after the words "joint activities", insert the words "in accordance with the OHCHR mandate,"; insert, after the words "treaty bodies", the words ", where applicable to and in accordance with their respective mandates"; and delete, before the word "cooperating", the words "and policymaking bodies". Paragraph 20.14 Replace the word "are" with the word "is". Subparagraph 20.14 (a) Replace the words "principles of the programme" with the words "principles of this programme". Subparagraph 20.14 (b) Replace the subparagraph with the following: "(b) Enhancing the effective functioning of the Human Rights Council, its subsidiary bodies and mechanisms, including in their efforts to make their deliberations and decision-making processes more effective". Subparagraph 20.14 (c) In the fourth line, replace the word "support" with the word "assist". In the first line, after the word "Governments", insert the phrase ", as well as with pertinent"; in the second line, before the word "United", insert the word "relevant"; and, after the words "policymaking bodies", insert the words ", respecting their specific mandates,". Subparagraph 20.14 (e) Replace the words "fact-finding missions" with the words "country visits". At the end of the subparagraph, delete the words "geographic desks". Subparagraph 20.14 (f) After the word "appropriate", insert the phrase "and taking into account the distinctive mandates,"; at the end of the subparagraph, after the word "holders", delete the remaining text. Subparagraph 20.14 (g) Replace the word "among" with the word "between". After the word "teams", insert the phrase ", where pertinent and appropriate,"; and, before the word "civil", insert the word "pertinent". After the first sentence, insert the amended text of subparagraph 20.13 (e) from subprogramme 3 to read: "Assisting the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms, in particular the universal periodic review and special procedures, as well as other United Nations policymaking bodies and treaty-monitoring bodies, in preparing for and following up on their dialogue with countries in implementation of their respective mandates, and ensuring the efficient and effective functioning of the thematic and country-specific special procedures of the Human Rights Council". Legislative mandates General Assembly resolution Add the following General Assembly resolutions: 64/178 Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons (subprogrammes 1 and 4) 66/136 Report of the Human Rights Council Delete the following General Assembly resolution: 65/198 Indigenous issues Section "Human Rights Council resolutions and decisions" Delete the following Human Rights Council resolutions: 8/4 The right to education 13/4 The right to food S-18/1 The human rights situation in the Syrian Arab Republic Delete the following Human Rights Council decision: 12/119 The effect of foreign debt and other related international financial obligations of States on the full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights Subprogramme 1. Human rights mainstreaming, right to development and research and analysis General Assembly resolutions Replace resolution 62/163 "Promotion of peace as a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human rights by all" with resolution 65/222 "Promotion of peace as a vital requirement for the full enjoyment of all human rights by all". Replace resolution 63/168 "Moratorium on the use of the death penalty" with the resolution 65/206 "Moratorium on the use of the death penalty". Replace resolution 63/183 "Missing persons" with the resolution 65/210 "Missing persons". Human Rights Council resolutions and decisions Delete the following resolution: 7/5 Mandate of the independent expert on human rights and international solidarity Subprogramme 3. Advisory services, technical cooperation and field activities Add the following Human Rights Council resolution: Subprogramme 4. Supporting the Human Rights Council, its subsidiary bodies and mechanisms Add the following General Assembly resolution: 66/127 Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing Add the following resolution: 