%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|

Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) Summary record of the 25th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 11 September 2012, at 11.30 a.m. Chair: Ms. Miculescu (Romania) Contents Tribute to the memory of the victims of the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 Agenda item 54: Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (continued) The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m. 1. At the invitation of the Chair, the Committee observed a minute of silence. Agenda item 54: Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (continued) (A/66/19; A/C.4/66/L.18) 2. The Chair recalled that the Committee had conducted a general debate under the agenda item in October 2011. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations had held its regular session from 21 February to 16 March 2012 and, at a concluding meeting held on the morning of 11 September 2012, had adopted its draft report, to be issued as document A/66/19. As it had not been possible to make the consolidated version available in the six official languages of the Organization in time for the current meeting, the draft report had been issued in two parts: a procedural part (A/AC.121/2012/L.4), which was available in all official languages; and Chapter V, entitled "Proposals, recommendations and conclusions", which was available in English only, without a symbol, and would be translated at a later date. She asked whether, exceptionally, the Committee would be willing to consider the second part of the draft on the basis of the advance version in English so that it could be adopted within the current session of the General Assembly. 3. Mr. Mohamed Selim (Egypt), speaking as Rapporteur of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, introduced the draft report. During its 2012 session, the Special Committee had held a general debate and heard statements by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, as well as briefings from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support and the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission. 4. The Working Group of the Special Committee had met from 5 to 16 March and on the morning of 11 September 2012 to discuss and finalize the draft recommendations. The proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee were contained in paragraphs 16 to 289 of the draft report. The Special Committee had adopted a decision on its working methods and those of the Working Group, which was contained in annex I to the report. 5. The membership of the Special Committee had remained at the level of 147 Member States, with 14 other States and organizations participating as observers. Draft resolution: Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (A/C.4/66/L.18) 6. Mr. Mohammed Selim (Egypt), speaking as Rapporteur of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, introduced the draft resolution. 7. The Chair said that if there was no objection, she would take it that the Committee wished to waive the 24-hour rule under rule 120 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and to take immediate action on the draft resolution. The Secretariat had informed her that it had no programme budget implications. 8. Draft resolution A/C.4/66/L.18 was adopted. 9. Ms. Eteläpaa (Observer for the European Union), speaking also on behalf of the acceding country Croatia; the candidate countries Iceland, Montenegro, Serbia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the stabilization and association process countries Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; and, in addition, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, said that her delegation had sought and made considerable compromises in order to close the Committee's work during the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly with the adoption of a substantial report. However, the European Union and its member States deeply regretted the process that had resulted in the current situation, including the fact that the issue of troop reimbursements -- which, at the request of the Assembly, was being discussed in parallel in a different forum -- had, once again, been a factor in the delayed issuance of the draft report. That process had undermined the relevance of the Special Committee; proper time management was essential and it must conclude and deliver within the time allotted if its report was to provide strategic guidance that the Secretariat could assess in order to draw conclusions to be implemented in subsequent peacekeeping operations. 10. The draft report must, moreover, be strategic, meaningful and capable of implementation; the practice of increasing its length substantially every year was not sustainable. It was common knowledge that the modest decisions regarding the Special Committee's working methods, adopted at the start of the 2012 session, had not been put into practice; they must be implemented in 2013 and complemented by further reforms. She encouraged the Chair of the Special Committee to begin work with the relevant parties as soon as possible in order to make recommendations for the Committee's consideration at the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly and stressed that the Bureau should be given an enhanced role in the reform process. 11. Ms. Morgan (Mexico) said that while her delegation recognized the importance of peacekeeping operations and the role of the Committee, it regretted that the draft resolution made no reference to a matter of particular importance to Committee's work: the relationship between peacekeeping operations and special political missions. As her delegation had pointed out repeatedly, that relationship merited explicit recognition, especially since the size of those missions had an impact on the international peacekeeping and security architecture. The Committee's experience could be used more effectively to improve the governance of special political missions, particularly at field level, on matters such as logistics, organization, conduct, discipline and training. 12. It was also important to promote accountability and transparency since there was still no intergovernmental forum of the General Assembly that monitored non-financial aspects of those issues. She understood that a substantive result of the Committee's work, though incomplete, was important for many countries. Therefore, despite its reservations regarding the draft resolution, her delegation had not objected to its adoption but would continue to address the issue constructively in order to move towards a more efficient, responsible and accountable peacekeeping system. 13. Mr. Mohamed Selim (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that the Movement had always supported efforts to improve the working methods of the Special Committee and was keen to promote a field-driven perspective in the latter's discussions, which was not adequately ensured by its current working methods. He reiterated the Movement's commitment to consensus and stressed that adoption of the draft report, preferably by consensus, was the Committee's primary objective. There were many lessons to be learned from the Committee's endeavours in 2012 and delegations should work together in order to overcome the problems that had arisen. 14. Mr. Mulet (Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations) congratulated the Committee for having achieved consensus on the draft report. Its members knew first-hand that United Nations peacekeeping personnel were working tirelessly under challenging circumstances and that it was through the Special Committee that the relevant stakeholders worked towards a unified strategic objective. The Committee had laboured over issues such as mandates, capacities, training and support and he understood that that process had been particularly difficult for many delegations. He welcomed their determination to begin the next cycle with renewed energy and focus and stressed that the United Nations stood ready to lend its full support. 15. The issues critical to shaping and improving peacekeeping had never been simple. The United Nations mounted complex missions with multifaceted tasks, as evidenced by the large scale and complexity of operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur and South Sudan; institution-building in order to ensure safety and consolidate peace in Haiti, Liberia and Timor-Leste; and continued engagement at the highest level of preparedness in various situations around the world. 16. The Special Committee was a unique body and the issues discussed therein, as well as in its parent body, had implications for United Nations missions and for uniformed personnel of Member States deployed around the world. It was vital to continue the effort to forge consensus and to strengthen the much-needed global partnership that sustained United Nations peacekeeping. The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m. 