%%%CONTINGENCY FUNDS|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|COTE D'IVOIRE|

Fifth Committee Summary record of the 24th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 19 December 2011, at 3 p.m. Chair: Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: Mr. Kelapile Contents Agenda item 134: Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 (continued) Revised estimates: effect of changes in rates of exchange and inflation Contingency fund: consolidated statement of programme budget implications and revised estimates Agenda item 144: Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 (continued) Agenda item 145: Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (continued) Agenda item 129: International residual mechanism for criminal tribunals (continued) Agenda item 149: Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m. Agenda item 134: Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 (continued) (A/66/7/Add.22 and 23 and A/66/614; A/C.5/66/13) Agenda item 144: Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 (continued) (A/66/7/Add.22 and A/66/605) Agenda item 145: Financing of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (continued) (A/66/7/Add.22 and A/66/605) Agenda item 129: International residual mechanism for criminal tribunals (continued) (A/66/7/Add.22 and A/66/605) 1. Ms. Casar (Controller), introducing the Secretary-General's reports on the revised estimates arising from the effect of changes in rates of exchange and inflation on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 (A/66/614) and the proposed budgets of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2012-2013 (A/66/605), said that, in keeping with past practice, the Advisory Committee's recommendations had been taken into account in preparing the reports, which provided updated projections, as at December 2011, for inflation and the effect of changes in operational exchange rates on the proposed budgets. The requirements for the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 would amount to $5,387.3 million. The final estimates for the Tribunals were $181.8 million for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, reflecting a decrease of $1.5 million; $287.6 million for the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, reflecting an increase of $4.7 million; and $53.8 million for the International Residual Mechanism, reflecting a decrease of $1.3 million. 2. Introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the contingency fund: consolidated statement of programme budget implications and revised estimates (A/C.5/66/13), she recalled that, in its resolution 65/262, the Assembly had approved the level of the contingency fund in the amount of $40.5 million, or 0.75 per cent of the approved budget outline level. Potential new charges against the contingency fund amounted to $34.6 million, according to the recommendations of the Advisory Committee after consideration of individual statements. The Fifth Committee had yet to take formal action on the specific programme budget implications and revised estimates before it. Should the Committee endorse the recommendations of the Advisory Committee, it should request the Assembly to note that a balance of $5.9 million would remain in the fund. 3. Mr. Kelapile (Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions), introducing the report of the Advisory Committee on the revised estimates (A/66/7/Add.22), said that the Advisory Committee had no objection to the estimates and, accordingly, transmitted them to the Assembly for consideration. He recalled that, in its report on the second performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011 (A/66/611), the Advisory Committee had recommended that the Assembly should request the Secretary-General to report comprehensively on alternative options for the recosting methodology, including an analysis of the risks and resource requirements of each option. 4. Turning to the report of the Advisory Committee on the contingency fund (A/66/7/Add.23), he said that, should the Assembly approve the appropriation of the amounts set out in the Secretary-General's report (A/C.5/66/13), a balance of $5,876,500, or 14.5 per cent of the contingency fund, would remain to meet future requirements during the biennium 2012-2013. 5. While recognizing that additional requirements must be considered and that it was not always possible to fit new initiatives within the biennial cycle of the regular budget, the Advisory Committee considered that at least some of the additional requirements for the biennium 2012-2013 could have been included in the proposed programme budget, thus avoiding a piecemeal approach to the budget process. Furthermore, the prudent use of the fund required that it should not be exhausted before the end of the period it covered. The Committee recommended that the Secretary-General should be requested to analyse the current utilization of the contingency fund and make every effort in the future to incorporate additional requirements into the initial budget proposals. Agenda item 149: Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (A/66/529 and A/66/612) 6. Ms. Casar (Controller), introducing the Secretary-General's report on supplementary estimates for the financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) (A/66/529), said that the Assembly, by its resolution 65/294, had appropriated $486.7 million for the maintenance of the Operation for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. The Security Council, by its resolution 2000 (2011), had extended the mandate of UNOCI until 31 July 2012 and decided that the authorized strength of the military and police components should be 11,142 personnel. In order to implement the resolution, additional funding of $165.7 million was requested, representing a 34.1 per cent increase over the initial appropriation. An additional 265 civilian and 26 Government-provided personnel were also requested, primarily to support the coordination of legislative elections and associated certification activities; security sector reform; disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and human rights and civil affairs. Other additional requirements included provisions for facilities and infrastructure, mainly for the acquisition of prefabricated facilities and related construction; maintenance and security services associated with the establishment of new camps; self-sustainment costs of military contingents; and costs associated with support of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration initiatives, clearing of unexploded ordnance and management of weapons and ammunition. 7. The actions requested of the Assembly were set out in paragraph 99 of the report. 8. Mr. Kelapile (Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions), introducing the related report of the Advisory Committee (A/66/612), said that its recommendations would entail reductions of $381,500 in the proposed supplementary estimates set out in the Secretary-General's report (A/66/529). The Advisory Committee considered that that report lacked sufficient explanation and did not adequately justify the additional requirements in some areas, particularly regarding posts and positions, relating to the activities mandated for UNOCI under Security Council resolution 2000 (2011). 9. The Secretary-General proposed to increase civilian personnel by 60 international staff, 28 national staff and 177 United Nations Volunteers. The Advisory Committee had no objection to the proposed increases, with some exceptions. First, the requirement for a post of Information Analyst at the P-3 level in the Joint Mission Analysis Centre had not been fully justified, particularly in view of the existing capacity. Second, the Advisory Committee considered that the proposed establishment of a new Security Sector Reform Section in UNOCI should reduce the volume of work in the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Section, even given the demands of an increased number of beneficiaries, and therefore did not find sufficient justification for two of the proposed P-3 posts for the latter Section. The Advisory Committee trusted that UNOCI would ensure that the facilities for the demobilization sites would be adequate to meet the requirements of the beneficiaries. Third, while the Advisory Committee recognized that UNOCI had additional responsibilities under its mandate to support the Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation Commission, it did not consider that all the posts requested for the Transitional Justice Unit in the Human Rights Section had been fully justified and recommended against approval of one P-3 post for the Unit. The Advisory Committee noted that the supplementary staffing proposals under component 5, support, and for the Electoral Assistance Office under component 3, peace process, were proposed as temporary positions through 30 June 2012. 10. The Advisory Committee recommended approval of the Secretary-General's proposals for operational costs, which included $1 million to implement 40 additional quick-impact projects. It expected that UNOCI would make every effort to implement all such projects within the remaining time frame of the budget for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. 11. Mr. Kisoka (United Republic of Tanzania), speaking on behalf of the Group of African States, expressed support for the Secretary-General's proposals. The Group attached great importance to the mandate of UNOCI as a means of restoring the rule of law, improving political stability in Côte d'Ivoire and facilitating lasting peace in the country and the region. All necessary support should be provided to the Operation to ensure the discharge of its mandate. Moreover, planned quick-impact projects in the areas of restoration of public order, justice and corrections should be implemented in full and in a timely manner. The Group wished to receive information on the implementation of all quick-impact projects and on key issues for UNOCI, including programmes for internally displaced persons. 12. Mr. Coffi (Côte d'Ivoire) expressed concern at the late issuance of the reports relating to an important agenda item that had a substantial impact on the lives of the Ivorian people. It was regrettable that the item was being taken up by the Committee only three days before the end of the main part of the session and that so little time had been scheduled for its consideration in informal consultations. 13. In December 2011, after a decade without legislative elections, Côte d'Ivoire had begun holding elections that would lead to the establishment of a National Assembly, the last stage in a process that had seen executive and judicial authorities put in place after the country had successfully emerged from the crisis that had followed the presidential elections. On behalf of the President of the Republic, his delegation wished to convey the Ivorian people's deep gratitude to the international community as a whole and to the United Nations in particular for their assistance. 14. Despite the progress achieved, much remained to be done in Côte d'Ivoire, with the support of UNOCI, on such issues as national reconciliation, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, security and defence sector reform, combating impunity, reconstruction of the judicial system; and the promotion and protection of human rights. His Government welcomed the decisions set out in Security Council resolution 2000 (2011), which took into account its concerns on the issues of protecting civilians, monitoring the border to prevent the movement of mercenaries, weapons and drugs, and countering the spread of terrorism in West Africa. During meetings with the Secretary-General and the President and permanent members of the Security Council, Prime Minister Soro had reiterated his Government's desire to work with UNOCI to maintain peace despite the many security threats in the subregion, which it would tackle with the support of the Governments of neighbouring and other West African States. In view of the successful support provided by UNOCI during the presidential and legislative elections, the Government was eager to receive similar assistance for the upcoming local and regional elections. 15. During the informal consultations, his delegation would seek information about the specific measures being taken by UNOCI to implement its mandate under Security Council resolution 2000 (2011) while it awaited the financing now under consideration by the Committee. The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m. 