%%%APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS|INTERNATIONAL COURTS|SIERRA LEONE|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|LEBANON|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|SERBIA|

Fifth Committee Summary record of the 37th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 30 May 2012, at 10 a.m. Chair: Ms. Al-Shamisi (Vice-Chair) (United Arab Emirates) later: Mr. Tommo Monthe (Chair) (Cameroon) Vice-Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions: Mr. Ruiz Massieu Contents Agenda item 115: Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments (continued) (k) Appointment of members and alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee (continued) Agenda item 134: Programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013 (continued) Subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone (continued) Agenda item 160: Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East (continued) (b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (continued) Agenda item 158: Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (continued) Agenda item 141: United Nations common system (continued) In the absence of Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Ms. Al-Shamisi (United Arab Emirates), Vice-Chair, took the Chair. The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m. Agenda item 115: Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments (continued) (k) Appointment of members and alternate members of the United Nations Staff Pension Committee (continued) (A/66/531/Add.1) 1. The Chair drew the Committee's attention to document A/66/531/Add.1, in which the Secretary-General informed the Committee of the resignation of Mr. Jun Yamada (Japan) from the United Nations Staff Pension Committee. The Secretary-General also informed the Committee that the Government of Japan had nominated Mr. Hitoshi Kozaki to fill the vacancy arising from that resignation and that his candidature had been endorsed by the Group of Asia-Pacific States. She took it that the Committee wished to recommend the candidate's appointment by acclamation. 2. It was so decided. 3. Mr. Kozaki (Japan) was recommended for appointment to the United Nations Staff Pension Committee for a term of office beginning on the date of his appointment by the General Assembly and expiring on 31 December 2012. 4. The Chair recalled that, at its 36th meeting, the Committee's attention had been drawn to document A/C.5/66/16 concerning the subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone and that the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions had been introduced orally at that meeting. She had prepared an oral draft decision for consideration by the Committee whereby it would recommend that the General Assembly should request the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone in the context of the performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013. If she heard no objection, she would take it that the Committee wished to adopt the draft decision. 5. It was so decided. (b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (continued) (A/C.5/66/L.35) Draft resolution A/C.5/66/L.35: Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon 6. Mr. Ballantyne (New Zealand), speaking as the coordinator of the informal consultations on sub-item 160 (b), said that the Committee had been unable to reach consensus on the text of a draft resolution. 7. The Chair drew attention to draft resolution A/C.5/66/L.35, submitted by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. 8. Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria), introducing the draft resolution on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, recalled that Israel had failed to comply with the many General Assembly resolutions requesting that it should pay the amount of $1,117,005 owed to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as a result of the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996. The Group was therefore submitting a draft resolution in which the Assembly's previous requests were reiterated. 9. The Chair said that action would be taken on the draft resolution at a subsequent meeting. Agenda item 158: Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (continued) (A/66/718/Add.20 and A/66/777) 10. Mr. Ramanathan (Deputy Controller), introducing the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 (A/66/777), said that, by its resolution 65/300, the General Assembly had appropriated an amount of $44.9 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the 2011/12 period. Projected expenditures for that period were estimated at $48.3 million, resulting in additional requirements of $3.4 million. 11. The increased requirements were primarily due to the classification of Field Service and national staff posts; a higher average post adjustment multiplier than anticipated for international staff; a lower than budgeted vacancy rate for international staff; the implementation of revised national staff salary scales in 2011 and 2012; and higher than budgeted average grade level of national General Service staff. They were partly offset by reduced requirements under operational costs and military and police personnel. 12. As UNMIK was unable to absorb additional requirements within its approved budget, the General Assembly was requested to appropriate and assess on Member States the additional amount of $3,385,300 in respect of the 2011/12 financial period. 13. Mr. Ruiz Massieu (Vice Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions), introducing the related report of the Advisory Committee (A/66/718/Add.20), said that the Advisory Committee had no objection to the appropriation, but without assessment, of the amount of $3,385,300 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, which would be in addition to the amount of $44,914,800 already appropriated and assessed under General Assembly resolution 65/300. 14. Noting that the projected increase in expenditure was partly due to the classification of Field Service and national posts, the Advisory Committee was concerned at the budgetary consequences of the classification exercise, particularly its retroactive implementation. The Advisory Committee also noted with concern the late submission in the budget cycle of the request for an additional appropriation. The meeting was suspended at 10.45 a.m. and resumed at 10.50 a.m. Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) took the Chair. Agenda item 141: United Nations common system (continued) (A/66/7/Add.26, A/66/30/Add.1 and A/66/394/Add.1) 15. Mr. Rhodes (Chair of the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC)), introducing the addendum to the Commission's annual report for 2011 (A/66/30/Add.1), said that it responded to an urgent request from organizations of the common system, particularly the United Nations Secretariat, that ICSC should reconsider the rest and recuperation framework proposed in its 2011 annual report (A/66/30) and approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/235. The addendum took into account the recommendations of the Department of Safety and Security regarding danger pay locations and information that had not been available when the Assembly considered the matter in December 2011. 16. In its recommendation on the rest and recuperation framework, the Commission had proposed a four-week travel cycle for staff in extreme emergency situations where danger pay was authorized by the Chair of the Commission. Danger pay would apply only in extraordinary situations where very dangerous conditions prevailed and staff were direct targets of violence, such as acts of terror committed against them precisely because of their employment by a United Nations system organization. Given the stricter criteria applied to danger pay as compared to the former hazard pay, the Commission had believed that the number of duty stations affected would be significantly reduced. Furthermore, it had not been possible to accurately assess the potential operational implications and impact on programme delivery of linking a four-week rest and recuperation travel cycle to locations approved for danger pay. 17. The Chair of ICSC relied on the recommendations of the Department of Safety and Security to decide on locations that should receive danger pay. When the Under-Secretary-General for Safety and Security made his recommendations in February 2012 based on a thorough analysis of the prevailing security situation in the field, the number of such locations was much greater than anticipated, as the world had become a more volatile place in the spring and summer of 2011. It should be noted nevertheless that the number of danger pay locations was lower than the number of hazard pay locations, with a reduction from 18 to 13 countries and from 180 to 140 duty stations. Those locations were reviewed every three months and their number might therefore change again in July 2012. 18. The automatic triggering of a four-week rest and recuperation travel cycle in all duty stations approved for danger pay had serious operational implications for field-based organizations and might adversely affect programme delivery. At the request of those organizations, the Commission had decided to delay the implementation of the rest and recuperation framework until 1 July 2012 and was now submitting a revised framework to the Assembly. The proposed framework would not include a four-week travel cycle and would not be linked to danger pay. However, in exceptional cases, a four-week travel cycle could be approved by the Chair of the Commission outside the framework, upon the recommendation of the Human Resources Network of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination. Those cases would be limited: at present, the four-week travel cycle was in effect at only sixteen duty stations in three countries: Afghanistan, Iraq and Somalia. 19. The linkage of danger pay to the four-week rest and recuperation travel cycle had not as yet had any implications owing to the postponement of implementation of the framework to 1 July 2012. Should the Assembly decide not to follow the Commission's recommendations, there would operational implications for the affected duty stations as of that date. The issue did not concern danger pay itself, which had been approved by the Assembly in its resolution 66/235 and was based on solid criteria, but rather the unintended consequences of linking danger pay to the four-week rest and recuperation travel cycle. 20. Mr. Ramanathan (Deputy Controller), introducing the statement submitted by the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, on the administrative and financial implications of the decisions and recommendations contained in the addendum to the ICSC report for 2011 (A/66/394/ Add.1), said that, should the recommendations of ICSC be adopted, there would be no additional resource requirements under the programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013, the budget for peacekeeping operations or the budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial period 2012/13. 21. Mr. Ruiz Massieu (Vice-Chairman of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions), introducing the related report of the Advisory Committee (A/66/7/Add.26), said that the Advisory Committee recommended that the General Assembly should take note that, should the Commission's recommendations be adopted, there would be no additional resource requirements under the programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013, the budget for peacekeeping operations or the budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period 2012/13. 22. Danger pay had been implemented on 1 April 2012. In the light of the Secretary-General's statement that the number of locations identified for danger pay was significantly higher than anticipated, the Advisory Committee had requested clarification of the estimated requirements for danger pay compared to previous requirements for hazard pay. Since that information had not been provided in time for inclusion in its report, the Advisory Committee had requested that a number of elements should be provided to the General Assembly when it considered the matter. Furthermore, it had requested that the Assembly should be given an explanation of the underlying causes for divergence between the anticipated and actual number of danger pay duty stations and information on the application of the criteria approved by the Assembly in its resolution 66/235. 23. The Advisory Committee emphasized the need for accurate and reliable data to support informed decision-making on proposals and the implementation of measures with significant financial and administrative implications. 24. Mr. Van den Akker (Observer for the European Union) said that the Member States of the European Union were committed to providing United Nations staff, especially those working in dangerous circumstances, with the support they required to work effectively and safely. However, he was surprised to find the current item once again under consideration by the Committee after the decision taken by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/235. It was a matter of concern that the information about the potential financial implications of the introduction of danger pay and its effect on the rest and recuperation framework, on which the Committee had based its decision, appeared to have been inaccurate. The ICSC report for 2011 (A/66/30) had stated that the introduction of danger pay would result in savings of approximately $19.6 million; it was under that assumption, inter alia, that the Member States of the European Union had joined the consensus on resolution 66/235. The Member States of the European Union would seek details, in informal consultations, of the financial implications of the current ICSC recommendations. Any solution would have to take into account the contents of the ICSC report for 2011 and the related resolution. 25. Mr. Rhodes (Chair of the International Civil Service Commission) said that the proposed changes would only affect the rest and recuperation framework; nothing would change with respect to danger pay. The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m. 