%%%PLEDGING CONFERENCES|DEVELOPMENT|

2012 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities New York, 14 November 2012 Report of the 2012 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities A. Opening and duration of the session 1. By its resolution 45/215, the General Assembly decided, inter alia, that the adoption and signing of the Final Act of the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities should be replaced by the adoption of a procedural report of the Conference. 2. The Conference was held at United Nations Headquarters on 14 November 2012. 3. The Conference was opened by the Director, Office for Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination, Department of Economic and Social Affairs. B. Attendance 4. The Conference was attended by representatives of the Governments of the following States: Algeria, Bangladesh, Benin, China, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Fiji, Finland, Germany, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, Lao Democratic People's Republic, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Pakistan, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey and United Arab Emirates. 5. The representative of the European Union and representatives of the following organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations and the specialized and related agencies also attended the Conference: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, United Nations Children's Fund, United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, United Nations Population Fund and World Food Programme. C. Election of officers 6. At its meeting on 14 November, the Conference elected by acclamation Raimonda Murmokaité, Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the United Nations, as President. D. Documentation 7. The Conference had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the analysis of the funding of operational activities for development of the United Nations system for 2010 (A/67/94-E/2012/80); (b) Note by the Secretary-General on operational activities for development of the United Nations system (A/CONF.208/2012/1); (c) Note by the Secretary-General on contributions pledged or paid at the 2011 United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities for 2012, as at 30 June 2012 (A/CONF.208/2012/2 and Add.1); (d) Draft report of the 2012 Pledging Conference (A/CONF.208/2012/L.1); (e) Background information on programmes and funds for the 2012 Pledging Conference. E. Announcement of pledges 8. The Conference heard the announcement of pledges by a number of Governments to one or more programmes and funds and took note of the fact that, while several Governments were not in a position to announce their contributions, they had proposed to communicate their announcement of such contributions to the Secretary-General as soon as they were in a position to do so after the closure of the Conference. 