%%%HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY|NETHERLANDS|RECOMMENDATIONS|

United Nations A/HRC/21/15/Add.1/Rev.1 General Assembly Distr.: General 12 October 2012 Original: English Human Rights Council Twenty-first session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Netherlands Addendum Views on conclusions and/or recommendations, voluntary commitments and replies presented by the State under review Not accept. See 98.1. Regarding the ICRMW, see 98.1. As for the CRPD, the Netherlands accepts this recommendation. Regarding the ICRMW, see 98.1. As for ILO Convention 189, the government is studying the possible consequences of ratification for existing legislation. Regarding the CRPD, see 98.3. As for the Optional Protocol to the CRPD, the Netherlands will consider accession after a decision on ratification of CRPD has been made; the question of ratifying the OP-CRPD is therefore premature at this stage. See 98.3 and 98.5. See 98.5. On the ratification of the CRPD and OP-CRPD, see 98.3 and 98.5. As for the OP-CESCR, the Dutch government is studying the possible consequences of ratification for existing legislation. See 98.3. Not accept. The arguments for entering these reservations still apply. See 98.12. See 98.9. Accept. Ratification is currently under examination. Accept. Violence in parenting has been formally prohibited in the Netherlands for several years. In Aruba corporal punishment is prohibited by law in schools, and legislation to extend the prohibition to the family setting is expected in 2012. In Curaçao, the Civil Code was amended to define the parents' role as that of caregivers and educators, prohibiting them from emotional or physical violence or any other form of humiliating treatment in parenting their children. The same goes for Sint Maarten since passing of the National Ordinance on Parental Authority in 2011 amending the Civil Code. The Dutch government is currently studying existing Dutch law and practice in relation to the European Convention on the Legal Status of Migrant Workers. The legal possibility of sentencing children to life imprisonment (which in practice was never used) was abolished in 2008. Accept. See 98.21. See 98.27. Not accept. We have opted for a pragmatic manner of implementing the UN World Programme for Human Rights Education, building on the current situation through a bottom-up approach that pays attention to human rights while respecting the freedom of education. In practice we are in fact implementing the World Programme. The Kingdom of the Netherlands, consisting of four countries, is party to the six major international human rights treaties. The constitutions and national legislation of the four countries cover the majority if not all of the provisions of these treaties. Recommendation is in line with existing policy. Comprehensive statistics on crimes and offences committed on the basis of discrimination are in place. The Netherlands has a standing invitation to all Special Rapporteurs. Everyone in the Netherlands is protected by law from discrimination. In case of an infringement, access to justice is provided. In addition active policies to prevent discrimination are implemented. Accept. See 98.38. See 98.38. Regarding the monitoring of racism see 98.36 and the National Report, VII.A. Regarding the investigation, prosecution and punishment of incitement to and acts of hatred, intolerance, racism and xenophobia, see 98.38 and the National Report, VII. A. Discrimination is forbidden by law in the Netherlands. No discriminatory legislation exists. See National Report VII.A. Accepts the recommendation to combat discrimination on the internet. Combating hate speech on the internet is part of our policy on fighting discrimination and racism. See 98.38. With regard to racist speech by political parties, see National Report VII.A.50 and XIII.120. See 98.38 and National Report VII.A. See 98.38 and the National Report VII.A. Accept. See 98.38 and the National Report VII.A. See 98.38 and the National Report VII.A.42. Not accept. Mr Wilders was prosecuted before the Amsterdam District Court on charges of incitement to hatred and insulting a group. The District Court, after a thorough examination of the charges, acquitted him (judgment of Amsterdam District Court of 23 June 2011). The court found that as a politician and an MP, Mr Wilders should benefit from a certain freedom to express his opinions. Neither the public prosecutor nor Mr Wilders decided to appeal this judgment. The criminal proceedings have therefore ended. In addition, the Procurator General at the Dutch Supreme Court has found that there are no legal grounds for submitting the case to the Supreme Court for an extraordinary appeal (without any effect to the substance of the case). See 98.36 and the National Report under VII.A. The Dutch government rejects the use of ethnic profiling for criminal investigation purposes as a matter of principle. Accept, See 98.38 and the National Report VII.A.42. Accept. See 98.38 and the National Report VII.A.42. See 98.38 and 98.45. . See 98.38 and the National Report VII.C and VIII. See 98.45 and the National Report VII.A.50. The Netherlands ensures that the needs of everyone, regardless of their origin, religion or beliefs, are addressed by the regular services in fields such as education, employment and health care. For migrants to assert their rights effectively, they must invest in their future and have a good command of the Dutch language. See 98.38 and the National Report VII.C. Political parties must respect the law, which defines racist speech as a criminal offence. The Kingdom of the Netherlands does not make any provision for preventive or precautionary monitoring of political parties, their ideas or public expressions. See 98.45 and 98.63. Accept. See 98.38 and the National Report VII. Accept. The Municipal Anti-Discrimination Services Act is being evaluated. Accept. See 98.38, 98.45 and the National Report VII.A. The Netherlands actively contributes to implementing the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women. With regard to violence against women, see 98.71. The Netherlands is in a good position with regard to the number of people at risk of poverty and social exclusion. The government intends to use existing measures and instruments to involve more people in society by reducing the number of jobless households. Conditions in Dutch prisons are satisfactory. Overcrowding is not a problem. Prisoners can file complaints about alleged ill-treatment to an independent supervisory committee attached to each detention centre. Under the Custodial Institutions Actprisoner is entitled to participate in work available at a custodial institution. One of the prison governor's tasks is to ensure that there is work available for prisoners. Convicted offenders must participate in this work, which the Dutch government sees as part of organising normal life for prisoners and as preparation for a successful reintegration into society after they have served their sentence. The 1998 Working Conditions Act and the Working Conditions Decree which lay down rules governing conditions in all places in the Netherlands where work is performed are applicable to work in prisons. Furthermore, the Working Conditions Decree lays down special rules for custodial institutions. Prisoners are allowed to refuse work on the grounds of poor working conditions. See 98.18. The Netherlands has up-to-date legislation on combatting sexual abuse against children. The Netherlands also has wide jurisdiction facilitating the prosecution of child sex tourism abroad. In 2012 the total staff dedicated to the investigation of child pornography will increase from 75 to 150. A national unit with about 40 detectives has become operational, in addition to 10 regional units. A specialised public prosecutor has overall authority over these investigations and prosecutions. Currently between 380 and 480 cases of child pornography are prosecuted every year; the aim is to prosecute about 25% more cases over the coming years. New measures to combat child pornography and to prevent sexual abuse of children will be taken as part of the 2012-2016 Action plan against child abuse. Various measures are being taken to sensitise public officials, social workers and other key actors to possible signals of sexual exploitation of children, and training is being provided on ways of effectively combating it. Child victims of sexual exploitation are treated with utmost care. Statements are taken in a child-friendly environment by specially certified detectives. Law enforcement officials also need special qualifications to take statements from victims of human trafficking. The Public Prosecution Service's guidelines on human trafficking further stipulate that the public prosecutor may object to a minor victim being questioned in court. Not accept. See 98.71 and the National Report under IX. Accept. Combating trafficking in human beings is given the highest priority. .The Dutch government makes every effort to combat trafficking in human beings, especially minors. See 98.80 and the National Report under X. 101, 102 and 103. Accept. Alternatives are available for the detention of minors such as house arrest. The bill on increasing court fees has been withdrawn. Dutch law is in accordance with human rights standards. When new laws are enacted, they meet these standards. See also (e.g.) 98.45 and National Report XIII.120. See 98.45. Accept. See 98.38 and the national report under XIII. See 98.38. and the National Report under VII. The Netherlands has adopted legal provisions that require employers to take measures to protect their employees. The Netherlands does not consider it necessary to take additional measures. The small differences in remuneration between men and women cannot be fully explained. The main reason for this gap is that women mainly work in part-time jobs. The pay gap shows a different position in the labour market. In the younger generation (ages 23 to 35) there is hardly any pay gap. The expectation is that the gap will disappear in the coming years. See 98.93. To change women's position in the labour market, the Netherlands requires a cultural change. From 2008 to 2010 the Task Force Part-time Plus launched a debate on how women can work more hours. It formulated recommendations on increasing working hours in part-time jobs. Employees and employers need to discuss ways of better coordinating working and private life. See 98.93, 98.94 and the National Report underVII.C. Recommendation is in line with existing policies. This recommendation has been realised. This recommendation has been realised. Every child of school age, regardless of legal status, undergoes compulsory education. See 98.98. See the National Report under VII.C and VIII. Not accept. Priority is given in the Netherlands to education in the Dutch language. See the National Report under VIII. Accept. See 98.3. Accept. See 98.38 and the National Report under VII. The Immigration and Naturalisation Service assesses the application of aliens that request asylum in the Netherlands This procedure meets international standards. Opportunities exist to lodge an objection to and request judicial review of the rejection of an application. Not accept. Under Dutch policy, rejected asylum seekers and undocumented aliens may be detained on grounds of public policy or national security with a view to arranging their repatriation. Detention may also be used if people are refused entry at the border. It may only be used as a last resort and may not last longer than strictly necessary to arrange the return of the person concerned. The maximum limit on detaining undocumented aliens in the Netherlands is six months, which in special circumstances may be extended to 18 months, in line with the EU Return Directive. See 98.104. Accept. Alternatives to detaining aliens are since January 2012 part of policy. See 98.100. Irregular residence in the Netherlands is not a criminal offence. However, illegal residents are required to leave. If they do not leave voluntarily, detention is used as a last resort to force them. Alternatives to detention are already part of policy. See 98.108. See 98.108 and 98.112. There are special policies aimed at avoiding detention of families with minors. If it is necessary to have a family under supervision for a longer period while their return is being prepared, they may be placed in a centre where their freedom of movement is restricted. Recently new plans were developed and presented to the Dutch parliament to enhance and speed up the Dutch asylum procedure: asylum seekers must be provided with clear information as early as possible in the procedure. Similar plans are being developed for vulnerable minors, so that a clear perspective is offered to these minors as soon as possible. When a child has no right to asylum, reunifying the child with their family in the country of origin is the highest priority. European cooperation is viewed as crucial in this connection. Not accept. The Dutch asylum procedure and reception centres are open to oversight by civil society. During the asylum procedure the Dutch Refugee Council is responsible for giving asylum seekers information on the procedure. They are also allowed, if the asylum seekers give permission, to be present during the interviews. The Dutch Refugee Council is present at the reception centres to assist asylum seekers and advise them on any issues or problems that may arise. Other NGOs (such as NGOs specifically concerned with minor asylum seekers) visit regularly the reception centres. Dutch aliens policy and practice take into account the vulnerable position of minors, especially unaccompanied minors. The best interest of the child is incorporated into policy and practice. Specific measures are taken in children's interests. For example, there are specially trained officials who interview children, special child-friendly offices for conducting interviews with young children, and specific asylum policies for child soldiers and on female genital mutilation. As long delays and uncertainty are seen as undesirable, there is a constant focus on swift decision-making. See 98.115. Not accept. See the National Report under XI. Not accept. As is well known, the Netherlands is not in favour of a legally binding international instrument on the right to development. The responsibility to create an enabling environment cannot be expressed in terms of binding obligations. Moreover, a legally binding instrument is not an appropriate way of transforming the right to development from a political commitment into a development practice. The Netherlands highly appreciates the work done by the high-level task force. We consider this a useful basis for further work on putting the right to development into practice. 