%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|PROTEST MOVEMENTS|ABDUCTION|SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC|

United Nations A/HRC/21/G/8 General Assembly Distr.: General 20 September 2012 English Original: Arabic Human Rights Council Twenty-first session Agenda item 4 Human rights situations that require the Council's attention Note verbale dated 18 September 2012 from the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations Office and other international organizations in Geneva addressed to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights The Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations Office and other international organizations in Geneva presents its compliments to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). With reference to our previous notes concerning the current situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, and in the context of the transparent and honest approach adopted by the Syrian Arab Republic in presenting the facts about what is happening in Syria, you will find below information on members of the Syrian Arab Army and of the security forces in the Syrian Arab Republic who have been killed or abducted or who are missing as a result of the activities of armed terrorist groups. Some international and regional actors remain intent on misleading the international community about the situation in Syria. Facts supported by figures are a more accurate indicator of the state of affairs. Large numbers of personnel from the Syrian Arab Army and the security forces have been killed, with estimates running into the thousands, as a result of the activities of armed terrorist groups. As stated in an announcement on the subject by the director of Tishrin military hospital in Damascus, 60 per cent of those killed had been shot dead, 35 per cent had died in explosions and the remainder had been massacred or decapitated. Numerous soldiers from the Syrian Arab Army have also been abducted by armed terrorist groups in order to force them to "defect", among them General Faraj al-Muqit, whom they abducted on 2 July 2012 and whom they have continued to hold until now on account of his refusal to renounce his country. In other cases, members of the army and security forces have been abducted in order to force their families to pay a ransom or in order to torture them in brutal retaliation as a prelude to their killing. Statistics indicate that during the period 17 February - 12 August 2012 alone, 1,975 members of the army and security forces were abducted. This figure excludes those who were successfully liberated by the competent authorities or whose bodies were found after they had been killed by armed terrorist groups. The available figures indicate that those abducted comprise 16 enlisted officers, 168 commissioned officers, 1,215 personnel and 576 non-commissioned officers. The Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic requests that the present note be disseminated and circulated in the official languages of the United Nations as a document of the twenty-first session of the Human Rights Council. The Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic avails itself of this opportunity to express to OHCHR the assurances of its highest consideration. 