%%%SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES|RULES AND REGULATIONS|INTERNATIONAL CIVIL SERVICE|PROFESSIONAL STAFF|STAFF ASSESSMENT|

ST/SGB/1998/8 Staff Regulations United Nations • New York, 1998 1 March 1998 SECRETARY-GENERAL'S BULLETIN STAFF REGULATIONS The Secretary-General promulgates the following, with respect to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations, established by the General Assembly according to Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations: 1. By its resolution 52/216 of 22 December 1997, the General Assembly approved, with effect from 1 March 1998, the revised base scale of gross and net salaries for staff in the Professional and higher categories contained in annex I to the Staff Regulations, and the consequential amendment to staff regulation 3.3 (b) (i). 2. The revised text of the Staff Regulations is attached to the present bulletin. The new text is effective as from 1 March 1998. 3. The present bulletin supersedes the following Secretary-General's bulletins: (a) ST/SGB/Staff Regulations/Rev.23 of 1 January 1995; (b) ST/SGB/Staff Regulations/Rev.23/Amend.1 of 23 May 1995; (c) ST/SGB/Staff Regulations/Rev.23/Amend.2 of 7 May 1997. (Signed) Kofi A. ANNAN Secretary-General CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS Provisions relating to service of the staff Article 8 The United Nations shall place no restrictions on the eligibility of men and women to participate in any capacity and under conditions of equality in its principal and subsidiary organs. Article 97 The Secretariat shall comprise a Secretary-General and such staff as the Organization may require. The Secretary-General shall be appointed by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council. He shall be the chief administrative officer of the Organization. Article 100 1. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the staff shall not seek or receive instructions from any Government or from any other authority external to the Organization. They shall refrain from any action which might reflect on their position as international officials responsible only to the Organization. 2. Each Member of the United Nations undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff and not to seek to influence them in the discharge of their responsibilities. Article 101 1. The staff shall be appointed by the Secretary-General under regulations established by the General Assembly. 2. Appropriate staffs shall be permanently assigned to the Economic and Social Council, the Trusteeship Council, and, as required, to other organs of the United Nations. These staffs shall form a part of the Secretariat. 3. The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. Article 105 1. The Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the fulfilment of its purposes. 2. Representatives of the Members of the United Nations and officials of the Organization shall similarly enjoy such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Organization. 3. The General Assembly may make recommendations with a view to determining the details of the application of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article or may propose conventions to the Members of the United Nations for this purpose. Amendments to the Staff Regulations The General Assembly established the Staff Regulations of the United Nations according to Article 101 of the Charter by resolution 590 (VI) of 2 February 1952 and amended them thereafter by resolutions 781 (VIII) and 782 (VIII) of 9 December 1953, resolution 882 (IX) of 14 December 1954, resolution 887 (IX) of 17 December 1954, resolution 974 (X) of 15 December 1955, resolution 1095 (XI) of 27 February 1957, resolutions 1225 (XII) and 1234 (XII) of 14 December 1957, resolution 1295 (XIII) of 5 December 1958, resolution 1658 (XVI) of 28 November 1961, resolution 1730 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, resolution 1929 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, resolution 2050 (XX) of 13 December 1965, resolution 2121 (XX) of 21 December 1965, resolution 2369 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, resolutions 2481 (XXIII) and 2485 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968, resolution 2742 (XXV) of 17 December 1970, resolution 2888 (XXVI) of 21 December 1971, resolution 2990 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, resolution 3008 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, resolution 3194 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, resolutions 3353 (XXIX) and 3358 B (XXIX) of 18 December 1974, resolution 31/141 B of 17 December 1976, resolution 32/200 and decision 32/450 B of 21 December 1977, resolution 33/119 of 19 December 1978, decision 33/433 of 20 December 1978, resolution 35/214 of 17 December 1980, decision 36/459 of 18 December 1981, resolution 37/126 of 17 December 1982, resolution 37/235 C of 21 December 1982, resolution 39/69 of 13 December 1984, resolutions 39/236 and 39/245 of 18 December 1984, decision 40/467 of 18 December 1985, resolutions 41/207 and 41/209 of 11 December 1986, resolutions 42/221 and 42/225 of 21 December 1987, resolution 43/226 of 21 December 1988, resolution 44/185 of 19 December 1989, resolution 44/198 of 21 December 1989, resolutions 45/241 and 45/251 of 21 December 1990, resolution 45/259 of 3 May 1991, resolution 46/191 of 20 December 1991, resolution 47/216 of 12 March 1993, resolution 47/226 of 30 April 1993, resolutions 48/224 and 48/225 of 23 December 1993, resolutions 49/222 and 49/223 of 23 December 1994, resolution 49/241 of 6 April 1995, resolution 51/216 of 18 December 1996, resolution 52/216 of 22 December 1997 and resolution 52/225 of 4 February 1998. CONTENTS Page Scope and purpose . 1 Article I. Duties, obligations and privileges . 1 II. Classification of posts and staff . 2 III. Salaries and related allowances . 2 IV. Appointment and promotion . 6 V. Annual and special leave . 7 VI. Social security . 7 VII. Travel and removal expenses . 8 VIII. Staff relations . 8 IX. Separation from service . 8 X. Disciplinary measures . 10 XI. Appeals . 10 XII. General provisions . 10 Annexes I. Salary scales and related provisions . 11 II. Letters of appointment . 14 III. Termination indemnity . 15 IV. Repatriation grant . 17 STAFF REGULATIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS Scope and purpose The Staff Regulations embody the fundamental conditions of service and the basic rights, duties and obligations of the United Nations Secretariat. They represent the broad principles of personnel policy for the staffing and administration of the Secretariat. The Secretary-General, as the chief administrative officer, shall provide and enforce such staff rules consistent with these principles as he considers necessary. Article I Duties, obligations and privileges Regulation 1.1: Members of the Secretariat are international civil servants. Their responsibilities are not national but exclusively international. By accepting appointment, they pledge themselves to discharge their functions and to regulate their conduct with the interests of the United Nations only in view. Regulation 1.2: Staff members are subject to the authority of the Secretary-General and to assignment by him to any of the activities or offices of the United Nations. They are responsible to him in the exercise of their functions. The whole time of staff members shall be at the disposal of the Secretary-General. The Secretary-General shall establish a normal working week. Regulation 1.3: In the performance of their duties members of the Secretariat shall neither seek nor accept instructions from any Government or from any other authority external to the Organization. Regulation 1.4: Members of the Secretariat shall conduct themselves at all times in a manner befitting their status as international civil servants. They shall not engage in any activity that is incompatible with the proper discharge of their duties with the United Nations. They shall avoid any action and in particular any kind of public pronouncement that may adversely reflect on their status, or on the integrity, independence and impartiality that are required by that status. While they are not expected to give up their national sentiments or their political and religious convictions, they shall at all times bear in mind the reserve and tact incumbent upon them by reason of their international status. Regulation 1.5: Staff members shall exercise the utmost discretion in regard to all matters of official business. They shall not communicate to any person any information known to them by reason of their official position that has not been made public, except in the course of their duties or by authorization of the Secretary-General. Nor shall they at any time use such information to private advantage. These obligations do not cease upon separation from the Secretariat. Regulation 1.6: No staff member shall accept any honour, decoration, favour, gift or remuneration from any Government excepting for war service; nor shall a staff member accept any honour, decoration, favour, gift or remuneration from any source external to the Organization without first obtaining the approval of the Secretary-General. Approval shall be granted only in exceptional cases and where such acceptance is not incompatible with the terms of staff regulation 1.2 and with the individual's status as an international civil servant. Regulation 1.7: Staff members may exercise the right to vote but shall not engage in any political activity that is inconsistent with or might reflect upon the independence and impartiality required by their status as international civil servants. Regulation 1.8: The immunities and privileges attached to the United Nations by virtue of Article 105 of the Charter are conferred in the interests of the Organization. These privileges and immunities furnish no excuse to the staff members who enjoy them for non-performance of their private obligations or failure to observe laws and police regulations. In any case where these privileges and immunities arise, the staff member shall immediately report to the Secretary-General, with whom alone it rests to decide whether they shall be waived. Regulation 1.9: Members of the Secretariat shall subscribe to the following oath or declaration: "I solemnly swear (undertake, affirm, promise) to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience the functions entrusted to me as an international civil servant of the United Nations, to discharge these functions and regulate my conduct with the interests of the United Nations only in view, and not to seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of my duties from any Government or other authority external to the Organization." Regulation 1.10: The oath or declaration shall be made orally by the Secretary-General at a public meeting of the General Assembly. All other members of the Secretariat shall make the oath or declaration before the Secretary-General or his authorized representative. Article II Classification of posts and staff Regulation 2.1: In conformity with principles laid down by the General Assembly, the Secretary-General shall make appropriate provision for the classification of posts and staff according to the nature of the duties and responsibilities required. Article III Salaries and related allowances Regulation 3.1: Salaries of staff members shall be fixed by the Secretary-General in accordance with the provisions of annex I to the present Regulations. Regulation 3.2: (a) The Secretary-General shall establish terms and conditions under which an education grant shall be available to a staff member residing and serving outside his or her recognized home country whose dependent child is in full-time attendance at a school, university or similar educational institution of a type that will, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, facilitate the child's reassimilation in the staff member's recognized home country. The grant shall be payable in respect of the child up to the end of the fourth year of post-secondary studies or the award of the first recognized degree, whichever is the earlier. The amount of the grant per scholastic year for each child shall be 75 per cent of the admissible educational expenses actually incurred, subject to a maximum grant as approved by the General Assembly. Travel costs of the child may also be paid for an outward and return journey once in each scholastic year between the educational institution and the duty station, except that in the case of staff members serving at designated duty stations where schools do not exist that provide schooling in the language or in the cultural tradition desired by staff members for their children, such travel costs may be paid twice in the year in which the staff member is not entitled to home leave. Such travel shall be by a route approved by the Secretary-General but not in an amount exceeding the cost of such a journey between the home country and the duty station; (b) The Secretary-General shall also establish terms and conditions under which, at designated duty stations, an additional amount of 100 per cent of boarding costs subject to a maximum amount per year as approved by the General Assembly may be paid in respect of children in school attendance at the primary and secondary levels; (c) The Secretary-General shall also establish terms and conditions under which an education grant shall be available to a staff member serving in a country whose language is different from his or her own and who is obliged to pay tuition for the teaching of the mother tongue to a dependent child attending a local school in which the instruction is given in a language other than his or her own; (d) The Secretary-General shall also establish terms and conditions under which an education grant shall be available to a staff member whose child is unable, by reason of physical or mental disability, to attend a normal educational institution and therefore requires special teaching or training to prepare him or her for full integration into society or, while attending a normal educational institution, requires special teaching or training to assist him or her in overcoming the disability. The amount of this grant per year for each disabled child shall be equal to 100 per cent of the education expenses actually incurred, up to a maximum amount approved by the General Assembly; (e) The Secretary-General may decide in each case whether the education grant shall extend to adopted children or stepchildren. Regulation 3.3: (a) An assessment at the rates and under the conditions specified below shall be applied to the salaries and such other emoluments of staff members as are computed on the basis of salary, excluding post adjustments, provided that the Secretary-General may, where he deems it advisable, exempt from the assessment the salaries and emoluments of staff members engaged at locality rates; (b) (i) The assessment shall be calculated at the following rates for staff members whose salary rates are set forth in paragraphs 1 and 3 of annex I to the present Regulations: Assessment Total assessable payments (United States dollars) Staff assessment rates for purposes of pensionable remuneration and pensions (percentage) Up to 20 000 per year . 20 001 to 40 000 per year . 40 001 to 60 000 per year . 60 001 and above per year . Staff assessment rates used in conjunction with gross base salaries Staff member with a dependent spouse or a dependent child Staff member with neither a dependent spouse nor a dependent child First 15 000 per year . Next 5 000 per year . Next 10 000 per year . Next 15 000 per year . Next 20 000 per year . Remaining assessable payments .... (ii) The assessment shall be calculated at the following rates for staff members whose salary rates are established under paragraph 7 of annex I to the present Regulations: (iii) The Secretary-General shall determine which of the scales of assessment set out in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) above shall apply to each of the groups of personnel whose salary rates are established under paragraph 5 of annex I to the present Regulations; (iv) In the case of staff members whose salary scales are established in currencies other than United States dollars, the relevant amounts to which the assessment applies shall be fixed at the local currency equivalent of the above-mentioned dollar amounts at the time the salary scales of the staff member concerned are approved; (c) In the case of a person who is not employed by the United Nations for the whole of a calendar year or in cases where there is a change in the annual rate of payments made to a staff member, the rate of assessment shall be governed by the annual rate of each such payment made to him or her; (d) The assessment computed under the foregoing provisions of the present regulation shall be collected by the United Nations by withholding it from payments. No part of the assessment so collected shall be refunded because of cessation of employment during the calendar year; (e) Revenue derived from staff assessment not otherwise disposed of by specific resolution of the General Assembly shall be credited to the Tax Equalization Fund established by General Assembly resolution 973 A (X); (f) Where a staff member is subject both to staff assessment under this plan and to national income taxation in respect of the salaries and emoluments paid to him or her by the United Nations, the Secretary-General is authorized to refund to him or her the amount of staff assessment collected from him or her provided that: (i) The amount of such refund shall in no case exceed the amount of his or her income taxes paid and payable in respect of his or her United Nations income; (ii) If the amount of such income taxes exceeds the amount of staff assessment, the Secretary-General may also pay to the staff member the amount of such excess; (iii) Payments made in accordance with the provisions of the present regulation shall be charged to the Tax Equalization Fund; (iv) A payment under the conditions prescribed in the three preceding subparagraphs is authorized in respect of dependency benefits and post adjustments, which are not subject to staff assessment but may be subject to national income taxation. Regulation 3.4: (a) Staff members whose salary rates are set forth in paragraphs 1 and 3 of annex I to the present Regulations shall be entitled to receive dependency allowances for a dependent child, for a disabled child and for a secondary dependant at rates approved by the General Assembly as follows: (i) The staff member shall receive an allowance for each dependent child, except that the allowance shall not be paid in respect of the first dependent child if the staff member has no dependent spouse, in which case the staff member shall be entitled to the dependency rate of staff assessment under subparagraph (b) (i) of regulation 3.3; (ii) The staff member shall receive a special allowance for each disabled child. However, if the staff member has no dependent spouse and is entitled to the dependency rate of staff assessment under subparagraph (b) (i) of regulation 3.3 in respect of a disabled child, the allowance shall be the same as the allowance for a dependent child in (i) above; (iii) Where there is no dependent spouse, a single annual allowance shall be paid for a secondary dependant in respect of either a dependent parent, a dependent brother or a dependent sister; (b) If both husband and wife are staff members, one may claim, for dependent children, under subparagraph (a) (i) and (ii) above, in which case the other may claim only under subparagraph (a) (iii) above, if otherwise entitled; (c) With a view to avoiding duplication of benefits and in order to achieve equality between staff members who receive dependency benefits under applicable laws in the form of governmental grants and staff members who do not receive such dependency benefits, the Secretary-General shall prescribe conditions under which the dependency allowance for a child specified in subparagraph (a) (i) above shall be payable only to the extent that the dependency benefits enjoyed by the staff member or his or her spouse under applicable laws amount to less than such a dependency allowance; (d) Staff members whose salary rates are set by the Secretary-General under paragraph 5 or paragraph 6 of annex I to the present Regulations shall be entitled to receive dependency allowances at rates and under conditions determined by the Secretary-General, due regard being given to the circumstances in the locality in which the office is located; (e) Claims for dependency allowances shall be submitted in writing and supported by evidence satisfactory to the Secretary-General. A separate claim for dependency allowances shall be made each year. Article IV Appointment and promotion Regulation 4.1: As stated in Article 101 of the Charter, the power of appointment of staff members rests with the Secretary-General. Upon appointment each staff member, including a staff member on secondment from government service, shall receive a letter of appointment in accordance with the provisions of annex II to the present Regulations and signed by the Secretary-General or by an official in the name of the Secretary-General. Regulation 4.2: The paramount consideration in the appointment, transfer or promotion of the staff shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible. Regulation 4.3: In accordance with the principles of the Charter, selection of staff members shall be made without distinction as to race, sex or religion. So far as practicable, selection shall be made on a competitive basis. Regulation 4.4: Subject to the provisions of Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter, and without prejudice to the recruitment of fresh talent at all levels, the fullest regard shall be had, in filling vacancies, to the requisite qualifications and experience of persons already in the service of the United Nations. This consideration shall also apply, on a reciprocal basis, to the specialized agencies brought into relationship with the United Nations. Regulation 4.5: (a) Appointment of Under-Secretaries-General and of Assistant Secretaries-General shall normally be for a period of five years, subject to prolongation or renewal. Other staff members shall be granted either permanent or temporary appointments under such terms and conditions consistent with the present Regulations as the Secretary-General may prescribe; (b) The Secretary-General shall prescribe which staff members are eligible for permanent appointments. The probationary period for granting or confirming a permanent appointment shall normally not exceed two years, provided that in individual cases the Secretary-General may extend the probationary period for not more than one additional year. Regulation 4.6: The Secretary-General shall establish appropriate medical standards that staff members shall be required to meet before appointment. Article V Annual and special leave Regulation 5.1: Staff members shall be allowed appropriate annual leave. Regulation 5.2: Special leave may be authorized by the Secretary-General in exceptional cases. Regulation 5.3: Eligible staff members shall be granted home leave once in every two years. However, in the case of designated duty stations having very difficult conditions of life and work, eligible staff members shall be granted home leave once in every twelve months. A staff member whose home country is either the country of his or her official duty station or the country of his or her normal residence while in United Nations service shall not be eligible for home leave. Article VI Social security Regulation 6.1: Provision shall be made for the participation of staff members in the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in accordance with the regulations of that Fund. Regulation 6.2: The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme of social security for the staff, including provisions for health protection, sick leave and maternity leave, and reasonable compensation in the event of illness, accident or death attributable to the performance of official duties on behalf of the United Nations. Article VII Travel and removal expenses Regulation 7.1: Subject to conditions and definitions prescribed by the Secretary-General, the United Nations shall in appropriate cases pay the travel expenses of staff members, their spouses and dependent children. Regulation 7.2: Subject to conditions and definitions prescribed by the Secretary-General, the United Nations shall pay removal costs for staff members. Article VIII Staff relations Regulation 8.1: (a) The Secretary-General shall establish and maintain continuous contact and communication with the staff in order to ensure the effective participation of the staff in identifying, examining and resolving issues relating to staff welfare, including conditions of work, general conditions of life and other personnel policies; (b) Staff representative bodies shall be established and shall be entitled to initiate proposals to the Secretary-General for the purpose set forth in subparagraph (a) above. They shall be organized in such a way as to afford equitable representation to all staff members, by means of elections that shall take place at least biennially under electoral regulations drawn up by the respective staff representative body and agreed to by the Secretary-General; (c) Cancelled. Regulation 8.2: The Secretary-General shall establish joint staff/management machinery at both local and Secretariat-wide levels to advise him regarding personnel policies and general questions of staff welfare as provided in regulation 8.1. Article IX Separation from service Regulation 9.1: (a) The Secretary-General may terminate the appointment of a staff member who holds a permanent appointment and whose probationary period has been completed, if the necessities of the service require abolition of the post or reduction of the staff, if the services of the individual concerned prove unsatisfactory, or if he or she is, for reasons of health, incapacitated for further service; The Secretary-General may also, giving his reasons therefor, terminate the appointment of a staff member who holds a permanent appointment: (i) If the conduct of the staff member indicates that the staff member does not meet the highest standards of integrity required by Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter; (ii) If facts anterior to the appointment of the staff member and relevant to his suitability come to light that, if they had been known at the time of his appointment, should, under the standards established in the Charter, have precluded his appointment; No termination under subparagraphs (i) and (ii) shall take place until the matter has been considered and reported on by a special advisory board appointed for that purpose by the Secretary-General; Finally, the Secretary-General may terminate the appointment of a staff member who holds a permanent appointment if such action would be in the interest of the good administration of the Organization and in accordance with the standards of the Charter, provided that the action is not contested by the staff member concerned; (b) The Secretary-General may terminate the appointment of a staff member with a fixed-term appointment prior to the expiration date for any of the reasons specified in subparagraph (a) above, or for such other reason as may be specified in the letter of appointment; (c) In the case of all other staff members, including staff members serving a probationary period for a permanent appointment, the Secretary-General may at any time terminate the appointment if, in his opinion, such action would be in the interest of the United Nations. Regulation 9.2: Staff members may resign from the Secretariat upon giving the Secretary-General the notice required under the terms of their appointment. Regulation 9.3: (a) If the Secretary-General terminates an appointment the staff member shall be given such notice and such indemnity payment as may be applicable under the Staff Regulations and Staff Rules. Payments of termination indemnity shall be made by the Secretary-General in accordance with the rates and conditions specified in annex III to the present Regulations; (b) The Secretary-General may, where the circumstances warrant and he considers it justified, pay to a staff member terminated under the final paragraph of staff regulation 9.1 (a) a termination indemnity payment not more than 50 per cent higher than that which would otherwise be payable under the Staff Regulations. Regulation 9.4: The Secretary-General shall establish a scheme for the payment of repatriation grants within the maximum rates and under the conditions specified in annex IV to the present Regulations. Regulation 9.5: Staff members shall not be retained in active service beyond the age of sixty years or, if appointed on or after 1 January 1990, beyond the age of sixty-two years. The Secretary-General may, in the interest of the Organization, extend this age limit in exceptional cases. Article X Disciplinary measures Regulation 10.1: The Secretary-General may establish administrative machinery with staff participation which will be available to advise him in disciplinary cases. Regulation 10.2: The Secretary-General may impose disciplinary measures on staff members whose conduct is unsatisfactory. He may summarily dismiss a member of the staff for serious misconduct. Article XI Appeals Regulation 11.1: The Secretary-General shall establish administrative machinery with staff participation to advise him in case of any appeal by staff members against an administrative decision alleging the non-observance of their terms of appointment, including all pertinent regulations and rules. Regulation 11.2: The United Nations Administrative Tribunal shall, under conditions prescribed in its statute, hear and pass judgement upon applications from staff members alleging non-observance of their terms of appointment, including all pertinent regulations and rules. Article XII General provisions Regulation 12.1: The present Regulations may be supplemented or amended by the General Assembly, without prejudice to the acquired rights of staff members. Regulation 12.2: Such staff rules and amendments as the Secretary-General may make to implement the present Regulations shall be provisional until the requirements of regulations 12.3 and 12.4 below have been met. Regulation 12.3: The full text of provisional staff rules and amendments shall be reported annually to the General Assembly. Should the Assembly find that a provisional rule and/or amendment is inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the Regulations, it may direct that the rule and/or amendment be withdrawn or modified. Regulation 12.4: The provisional rules and amendments reported by the Secretary-General, taking into account such modifications and/or deletions that may be directed by the General Assembly, shall enter into full force and effect on 1 January following the year in which the report is made to the Assembly. Regulation 12.5: Staff rules shall not give rise to acquired rights within the meaning of regulation 12.1 while they are provisional. Annex I SALARY SCALES AND RELATED PROVISIONS 1. The Secretary-General shall establish the salary of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and the salaries of United Nations officials in the Director category and above, in accordance with amounts determined by the General Assembly, subject to the staff assessment plan provided in staff regulation 3.3 and to post adjustments wherever applied. If otherwise eligible, they shall receive the allowances that are available to staff members generally. With effect from 1 January 1998, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme shall receive a gross salary of US$ 175,344 per annum. 2. The Secretary-General is authorized, on the basis of appropriate justification and/or reporting, to make additional payments to United Nations officials in the Director category and above to compensate for such special costs as may be reasonably incurred, in the interests of the Organization, in the performance of duties assigned to them by the Secretary-General. Similar additional payments in similar circumstances may be made to heads of offices away from Headquarters. The maximum total amount of such payments is to be determined in the programme budget by the General Assembly. 3. Except as provided in paragraph 5 of the present annex, the salary scales and the scales of post adjustment for staff members in the Professional and higher categories shall be as shown in the present annex. 4. Subject to satisfactory service, salary increments within the levels set forth in paragraph 3 of the present annex shall be awarded annually, except that any increments above step XI of the Associate Officer level, step XIII of the Second Officer level, step XII of the First Officer level, step X of the Senior Officer level and step IV of the Principal Officer level shall be preceded by two years at the previous step. The Secretary-General is authorized to reduce the interval between salary increments to ten months and twenty months, respectively, in the case of staff subject to geographical distribution who have an adequate and confirmed knowledge of a second official language of the United Nations. 5. The Secretary-General shall determine the salary rates to be paid to personnel specifically engaged for short-term missions, conference and other short-term service, to consultants, to Field Service personnel and to technical assistance experts. 6. The Secretary-General shall fix the salary scales for staff members in the General Service and related categories, normally on the basis of the best prevailing conditions of employment in the locality of the United Nations Office concerned, provided that the Secretary-General may, where he deems it appropriate, establish rules and salary limits for payment of a non-resident allowance to General Service staff members recruited from outside the local area. The gross pensionable remuneration of such staff shall be determined in accordance with the methodology specified in article 54 (a) of the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and are shown in the salary scales applicable to such staff. 7. The Secretary-General shall establish rules under which a language allowance may be paid to staff members in the General Service category who pass an appropriate test and demonstrate continued proficiency in the use of two or more official languages. 8. In order to preserve equivalent standards of living at different offices, the Secretary-General may adjust the basic salaries set forth in paragraphs 1 and 3 of the present annex by the application of non-pensionable post adjustments based on relative costs of living, standards of living and related factors at the office concerned as compared to New York. Such post adjustments shall not be subject to staff assessment. 9. No salary shall be paid to staff members in respect of periods of unauthorized absence from work unless such absence was caused by reasons beyond their control or duly certified medical reasons. SALARY SCALE FOR STAFF IN THE PROFESSIONAL CATEGORY AND ABOVE* Annual gross salaries and net equivalents after application of staff assessment Effective 1 March 1998 S T E P S Level I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV Under-Secretary-General USG Gross Net D Net S Assistant Secretary-General ASG Gross Director D-2 Gross Principal Officer D-1 Gross Senior Officer P-5 Gross First Officer P-4 Gross Second Officer P-3 Gross Associate Officer P-2 Gross Assistant Officer P-1 Gross D = Rate applicable to staff members with a dependent spouse or child. S = Rate applicable to staff members with no dependent spouse or child. * = This scale will be implemented in conjunction with a consolidation of 3.1 per cent of post adjustment. There will be consequential adjustments in the post adjustment indices and multipliers at all duty stations, effective 1 March 1998. Thereafter, changes in post adjustment classifications will be effected on the basis of the movements of the consolidated post adjustment indices. Annex II LETTERS OF APPOINTMENT (a) The letter of appointment shall state: (i) That the appointment is subject to the provisions of the Staff Regulations and of the Staff Rules applicable to the category of appointment in question and to changes which may be duly made in such regulations and rules from time to time; (ii) The nature of the appointment; (iii) The date at which the staff member is required to enter upon his or her duties; (iv) The period of appointment, the notice required to terminate it and period of probation, if any; (v) The category, level, commencing rate of salary and, if increments are allowable, the scale of increments, and the maximum attainable; (vi) Any special conditions which may be applicable; (b) A copy of the Staff Regulations and the Staff Rules shall be transmitted to the staff member with the letter of appointment. In accepting appointment the staff member shall state that he or she has been acquainted with and accepts the conditions laid down in the Staff Regulations and in the Staff Rules; (c) The letter of appointment of a staff member on secondment from government service signed by the staff member and by or on behalf of the Secretary-General, and relevant supporting documentation of the terms and conditions of secondment agreed to by the Member State and the staff member, shall be evidence of the existence and validity of secondment from government service to the Organization for the period stated in the letter of appointment. Annex III TERMINATION INDEMNITY Staff members whose appointments are terminated shall be paid an indemnity in accordance with the following provisions: (a) Except as provided in paragraphs (b), (c) and (e) below and in regulation 9.3 (b), the termination indemnity shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule: Months of gross salary, less staff assessment, where applicablea or Months of pensionable remuneration less staff assessment, where applicableb Temporary Temporary appointments appointments Completed which are for a fixed years of Permanent not for a term exceeding service appointments fixed term six months Less than 1 . Not applicable Nil ) One week for each month 1 . Not applicable 1 ) of uncompleted service 2 . 3 1 ) subject to a minimum of 3 . 3 2 ) six weeks' and a 4 . 4 3 ) maximum of three months' 5 . 5 4 ) indemnity pay 15 or more . 12 12 12 a For staff in the Professional and higher categories and in the Field Service category. b For staff in the General Service and related categories. (b) A staff member whose appointment is terminated for reasons of health shall receive an indemnity equal to the indemnity provided under paragraph (a) of the present annex reduced by the amount of any disability benefit that the staff member may receive under the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund for the number of months to which the indemnity rate corresponds; (c) A staff member whose appointment is terminated for unsatisfactory services or who for disciplinary reasons is dismissed for misconduct other than by summary dismissal may be paid, at the discretion of the Secretary-General, an indemnity not exceeding one half of the indemnity provided under paragraph (a) of the present annex; (d) No indemnity payments shall be made to: A staff member who resigns, except where termination notice has been given and the termination date agreed upon; A staff member who has a temporary appointment that is not for a fixed term and that is terminated during the first year of service; A staff member who has a temporary appointment for a fixed term that is completed on the expiration date specified in the letter of appointment; A staff member who is summarily dismissed; A staff member who abandons his or her post; A staff member who is retired under the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund; (e) Staff members specifically engaged for conference and other short-term service or for service with a mission, as consultants or as experts, and staff members who are locally recruited for service in established offices away from Headquarters may be paid termination indemnity if and as provided in their letters of appointment. Annex IV REPATRIATION GRANT In principle, the repatriation grant shall be payable to staff members whom the Organization is obligated to repatriate and who at the time of separation are residing, by virtue of their service with the United Nations, outside their country of nationality. The repatriation grant shall not, however, be paid to a staff member who is summarily dismissed. Eligible staff members shall be entitled to a repatriation grant only upon relocation outside the country of the duty station. Detailed conditions and definitions relating to eligibility and requisite evidence of relocation shall be determined by the Secretary-General. Staff member with neither a spouse nor dependent child at time of separation Staff member with a Years of continuous spouse or dependent Professional General service away from child at time and higher Service home country of separation categories category Weeks of gross salary, less staff assessment, where applicablea or Weeks of pensionable remuneration less staff assessment, where applicableb 12 or more . 28 16 14 98-11372 (E) 220598 -17- 