%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|MOROCCO|INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS|TREATY-MONITORING BODIES|SPECIAL PROCEDURES|

United Nations A/HRC/WG.6/13/MAR/2 General Assembly Distr.: General 12 March 2012 Original: English/French Human Rights Council Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Thirteenth session 21 May - 4 June 2012 Compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in accordance with paragraph 5 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21 Morocco The present report is a compilation of the information contained in the reports of treaty bodies, special procedures, including observations and comments by the State concerned, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and other relevant official United Nations documents. It is presented in a summarized manner due to word-limit constraints. For the full text, please refer to the document referenced. This report does not contain any opinions, views or suggestions on the part of OHCHR, other than those contained in public reports issued by the Office. It follows the general guidelines adopted by the Human Rights Council in its decision 17/119. Information included herein has been systematically referenced in endnotes. The report has been prepared taking into consideration the periodicity of the review and developments during that period. A. Scope of international obligations Universal human rights treaties Status during previous cycle Action after review Not ratified/not accepted Ratification, accession or succession ICERD (1970) ICESCR (1979) ICCPR (1979) CEDAW (1993) CAT (1993) CRC (1993) OP-CRC-SC (2001) OP-CRC-AC (2002) ICRMW (1993) CRPD (2009) ICCPR-OP 2 OP-CAT CED (signature only, 2007) Reservations, declarations and/or understandings ICERD, art. 22 CEDAW Declarations: arts. 2, 15 (4); Reservations: arts. 9 (2), 16, 29 CAT, art. 30 (1) ICRMW, art. 92 (1) Withdrawal of reservations to CEDAW, arts. 9 (2), 16 Complaint procedures A table in the previous UPR compilation contained the following information under Recognition of specific competences of treaty bodies: Individual complaints: ICERD art. 14, CAT art. 22, ICRMW art. 77; Inquiry procedure: CAT art. 20; Inter-State complaints: ICCPR art. 41, CAT art. 21, ICRMW art. 76. ICERD, art. 14 (2006) CAT, art. 22 (2006) OP-CRPD (2009) OP-ICESCR CED, art. 31 ICRMW, art. 77 ICCPR-OP 1 OP-CEDAW ICCPR, art. 41 CRC-OPIC (signature only, 2012) Other main relevant international instruments Not ratified Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide 1951 Refugee Convention and 1967 Protocol 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. Palermo Protocol Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Additional Protocols I and II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I); and Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II). Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (signature only) 1954 and 1961 Conventions on stateless persons and statelessness 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (First Convention); Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (Second Convention); Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (Third Convention); and Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (Fourth Convention). For the official status of ratifications, see Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland, at www.eda.admin.ch/eda/fr/home/topics/intla/intrea/chdep/warvic.html. ILO fundamental conventions International Labour Organization Convention No. 29 concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour; Convention No. 105 concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour; Convention No. 98 concerning the Application of the Principles of the Right to Organise and to Bargain Collectively; Convention No. 100 concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value; Convention No. 111 concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation; Convention No. 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment; Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour. Additional Protocol III to the 1949 Geneva Conventions Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem (Protocol III). ILO Convention No. 87 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education ILO Convention No. 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries ILO Convention No. 189 concerning decent work for domestic workers 1. In 2011, the Committee against Torture welcomed the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and of its Optional Protocol in 2009 and of the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, in 2011, the recognition of the Committee's competence to receive and consider individual communications, the withdrawal of various reservations to a number of international conventions, including reservations to article 14 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 2. In 2009, the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances (WGEID) urged Morocco to ratify the CED and to recognize the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances. In 2010, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) made similar comments. 3. In 2011, the Committee against Torture invited Morocco to consider acceding to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. 4. In 2011, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recommended that Morocco accede to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. B. Constitutional and legislative framework 5. In 2011, the Independent Expert in the field of cultural rights commended Morocco's work over the last decade to recognize, respect and promote human rights. She welcomed the adoption of the new Constitution which provided a reinforced framework for protecting and promoting human rights, including those of the most vulnerable populations. 6. In February 2012, the Working Group on the Issue of Discrimination against Women in Law and in Practice urged the Government of Morocco to further consolidate and advance the country's decade-long achievements on equality and women's rights by prioritizing the drafting of the law to establish the Authority for Parity, involving all the relevant stakeholders. The Working Group called on the authorities to accelerate deliberations on bills on domestic violence, domestic workers and migrant workers. C. Institutional and human rights infrastructure and policy measures 7. The Committee against Torture took note with satisfaction of the establishment in March 2011 of the National Human Rights Council, which took the place of the Consultative Council for Human Rights. 8. In 2010, the United Nations Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee on Human Rights Education in the School System UNIACC) reported that Morocco had made a major effort to integrate human rights education into school curricula, programmes and manuals and raise awareness about its national programme. 9. In 2011, the Independent Expert in the field of cultural rights expressed concern that funds from the National Human Development Initiative (INDH) spent on infrastructure were much higher than those allocated to human development projects. She was also concerned that the application procedure was cumbersome, in particular for associations in rural areas. National human rights institution For the list of national human rights institutions accredited by the International Coordination Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (ICC) as at August 2011, see http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/NHRI/Chart_Status_NIs.pdf. Status during present cycle National Human Rights Council A (2007), as Consultative Council for Human Rights A (2010), as Consultative Council for Human Rights To be reviewed in second half of 2012 II. Cooperation with human rights mechanisms A. Cooperation with treaty bodies 1. Status of reporting Treaty body Concluding observations included in previous review Latest report submitted since previous review Latest concluding observations Reporting status CERD March 2003 August 2010 Nineteenth to twenty-first reports due 2013 CESCR May 2006 Fourth report overdue since 2009 HR Committee November 2004 Sixth report overdue since 2008 CEDAW July 2003 January 2008 Fifth to sixth reports due 2014 CAT November 2003 November 2011 Fifth report due 2015 CRC June 2003 Third to fourth report overdue since 2009; initial OPSC report received 2003; initial OPAC report pending consideration CMW Initial report overdue since 2004 CRPD Initial report overdue since 2011 2. Responses to specific follow-up requests by treaty bodies Concluding observations Due Subject Submitted Legal safeguards for detainees; prompt, impartial and effective investigations; prosecution of suspects and punishment of perpetrators of torture or ill-treatment; guarantee for victims of torture and ill-treatment of the fullest possible compensation Promotion of Amazigh language and culture, legal framework for asylum procedures, discrimination against non-citizens Overdue Views Number of views Status CAT/C/46/D/419/2010. Awaiting response B. Cooperation with special procedures Current status Standing invitation No Visits undertaken Sale of children (28 Feb. - 3 Mar. 2000) Migrants (19 - 31 Oct. 2003) Education (27 Nov. - 5 Dec. 2006) Disappearances (22 - 25 June 2009) Cultural rights (5 - 16 Sept. 2011) Discrimination against women in law and in practice (13 - 20 Feb. 2012) Visits agreed to in principle Adequate housing Water and sanitation Visits requested Arbitrary detention (2011) Trafficking (Oct. 2010) Freedom of peaceful assembly and of association (16 Sept. 2011) Responses to letters of allegations and urgent appeals During the period under review, 29 communications were sent. The Government replied to 21 communications 10. In 2011, the Committee against Torture recommended that Morocco increase its cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms by, inter alia, authorizing visits on the part of such mechanisms as the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children, and the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association. C. Cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 11. Morocco contributed financially to OHCHR from 2008 to 2011, including to the Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture and the Voluntary Fund for the Implementation of the UPR. III. Implementation of international human rights obligations A. Equality and non-discrimination 12. In 2009, the ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations (ILO Committee of Experts) encouraged Morocco to establish mechanisms to enable it to assess in what areas progress had been made and in which areas more concerted efforts were needed to promote equality between men and women. 13. In 2010, CERD recommended that Morocco take all necessary steps to ensure that the Family Code is applied fully and uniformly throughout the country, and that none of the more vulnerable segments of the population, particularly women and children living in remote areas, suffer multiple discrimination. 14. CERD also recommended that Morocco either amend its legislation or adopt new legislation specifically prohibiting racial discrimination, as well as incorporate in its Criminal Code provisions that make the dissemination of racist ideology a specific offence, and make racist motives an aggravating circumstance in racial discrimination. 15. CERD was concerned that racist stereotypes persist and that the Amazigh, Sahraouis, Blacks, non-nationals, refugees and asylum-seekers continue to be viewed in a negative light by the rest of the Moroccan population. It recommended, inter alia, that Morocco continue its efforts to raise public awareness and knowledge of the importance of cultural diversity, understanding and tolerance. B. Right to life, liberty and security of the person 16. In 2011, the Committee against Torture noted with satisfaction that there was a de facto moratorium on the enforcement of death sentences, but expressed concern about the conditions under which prisoners were held on death row. It recommended that Morocco consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to the abolition of the death penalty and, in the meantime, maintain the moratorium and consider commuting death sentences. 17. In 2009, the WGEID noted that, while the Criminal Code contained provisions related to enforced disappearance, there was no article specifically criminalizing the practice. It recommended that the text of the new Criminal Code not only define the offence but also specify penalties proportionate to its extreme seriousness. It also reiterated that effective legislative and other appropriate measures be taken to put an end to the impunity of perpetrators, as a first step towards ensuring that enforced disappearances do not recur in the future. 18. With regard to the definition of torture, in 2011 the Committee against Torture recommended that the scope of the definition in the current Criminal Code be broadened in line with article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Morocco was also urged to ensure that anyone who committed or attempted to commit acts of torture, or was complicit or otherwise participated in the commission of such acts, could be prosecuted and punished without the possibility of benefiting from any statute of limitations. 19. With regard to conditions of detention, in 2011 the Committee against Torture recommended that Morocco continue its efforts to build new prisons and renovate existing ones, continue to increase the resources allocated to running the prison system, especially for food and medical care, amend its laws to permit the use of alternatives to detention, and allow local and international observers to carry out regular, independent, unannounced and unrestricted visits to places of detention. Morocco was also urged to investigate all prison deaths and to prosecute those responsible, if any. 20. The Committee against Torture expressed concern about the lack of legislation providing for the prevention and punishment of acts of violence against women and for the protection of victims and witnesses of such violence. It urged Morocco to enact such legislation as soon as possible and to amend the Criminal Code in order to criminalize marital rape and to ensure that rapists did not evade criminal prosecution by marrying their victims. 21. The Committee against Torture also recommended that Morocco step up its efforts to prevent and combat trafficking in women and children, to have all allegations of trafficking investigated, and to ensure that the perpetrators were brought to justice and punished. In this connection, in 2011, the ILO Committee of Experts urged Morocco to ensure that the national strategy to prevent and combat the sexual exploitation of children would be implemented as soon as possible. 22. In 2011, the ILO Committee of Experts also requested Morocco to intensify its efforts to ensure that thorough investigations and robust prosecutions of persons who subject children under 18 years of age to forced or hazardous domestic labour were carried out, and that sufficiently effective and dissuasive penalties were imposed in practice. 23. The Committee against Torture noted the lack of legislation prohibiting the use of corporal punishment within the home, at school and in institutions that provide child protection services. It recommended that Morocco prohibit the use of corporal punishment and raise public awareness of positive, participatory and non-violent forms of discipline. C. Administration of justice, including impunity, and the rule of law 24. In 2011, the Committee against Torture noted with satisfaction that Morocco had embarked upon a reform of its legal system in order to bring its laws and practices into line with its international obligations. 25. The Committee against Torture also recommended that Morocco take the necessary steps to ensure that criminal convictions were based on evidence other than confessions by the persons charged, particularly when such persons retracted their confessions during the trial, and that statements made under torture were not admitted as evidence in court, except in cases involving charges of torture. 26. In 2009, the WGEID stressed that deprivation of liberty other than in an official facility should be prohibited and made a criminal offence. 27. The Committee against Torture took note of the information provided by Morocco on work done between 2003 and 2005 by the transitional justice mechanism, the Equity and Reconciliation Commission, on human rights violations that took place in Morocco between 1956 and 1999. The Committee noted that those efforts had shed light on a number of such violations and had led to the award of various types of compensation to many victims. It recommended, in particular, that Morocco ensure that the National Human Rights Council, which had been assigned the task of completing the Commission's work, continued its efforts to establish the facts surrounding the cases of enforced disappearance that had not been resolved, including those related to the situation in Western Sahara, and to step up efforts to ensure that victims of torture and ill-treatment received equitable, sufficient compensation and support for as full a rehabilitation as possible. 28. In 2010, CERD was concerned that vulnerable segments of the population who do not speak Arabic, particularly the Amazigh, Sahraouis, Blacks, non-nationals, refugees and asylum-seekers, continue to encounter communication difficulties in their contact with the judiciary. It recommended that Morocco, inter alia, ensure that litigants from those vulnerable population groups benefit from the proper administration of justice which could avoid violations of their right to equal treatment, protection and effective redress before the courts. D. Right to privacy, marriage and family life 29. In 2010, CERD was unclear as to the meaning and scope of the concept of "Moroccan name" referred to in Act No. 37 - 99 of 2002 on civil status, the application of which continues to prevent civil registrars from registering certain names, including Amazigh names. The Committee recommended that Morocco clarify the meaning and scope of this concept and that its civil registrars adhere fully to the provisions of the Ministry of Internal Affairs Circular of March 2010 on choice of given names, which stipulates that all citizens will have the right to register the names of their choice, including Amazigh names. In 2011, the Independent Expert in the field of cultural rights made similar comments. E. Freedom of religion or belief, expression, association and peaceful assembly, and right to participate in public and political life 30. In 2011, UNESCO stated that the political climate in the country contributed to weakening the full enjoyment of the rights to freedom of thought, opinion and expression, and that criticism of Islam, the King and the monarchical system is not permitted. In order to develop and protect freedom of expression and information, UNESCO recommended, inter alia, that the press code be revised to meet international standards as well as to provide for the effective application of the principles of freedom stipulated in the Constitution; provisions be added to existing legislation to guarantee freedom of information in line with international standards; journalists be sensitized on their rights, as recognized in the Constitution, and given the means to ensure they are fully respected; the quality of journalism education be improved. F. Right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work 31. In 2011, the ILO Committee of Experts requested Morocco to take the necessary steps to amend the 1958 Royal Decree (Dahir) to grant prison officials, lighthouse workers and water and forestry workers the right to organize and to engage in collective bargaining, since they are not public servants engaged in the administration of the State or members of the police or armed forces. G. Right to education 32. In 2011, UNESCO stated that the adoption of a new Constitution guaranteeing better access to the right to education was an achievement and that the country had achieved quick progress in improving literacy with each generation of schoolchildren, but had not managed to reduce the gap between the two sexes. The Independent Expert in the field of cultural rights made similar comments in 2011 about the high dropout rates, in particular among girls, despite efforts undertaken. UNESCO also stated that access to basic education remained incomplete and unfair, and a significant number of children and young people continued to be outside of the educational system, deprived of educational opportunities, both formal and informal. The Moroccan educational system was facing a crisis of deficient quality, the levels of learning outcomes were low, and although many efforts were underway to create a more equitable and inclusive educational system, the results were not yet sufficiently significant. 33. In 2010, the ILO Committee of Experts urged Morocco to redouble its efforts to increase the enrolment rate, particularly among children aged between 12 and 14 years, in order to prevent them from working, particularly on their own account and in the informal sector. H. Cultural rights 34. In 2011, the Independent Expert in the field of cultural rights informed that the new Constitution placed greater emphasis on cultural rights and diversity and conferred an official status to the languages of the Amazigh population. She called on the Government to operationalize these commitments by passing relevant by-laws without delay. She also called on the Government to further promote the use of Amazigh languages at all levels of Government and schooling. She encouraged the Government to ensure that cultural diversity is reflected in State narratives, school curricula, especially the history taught, and the composition of all relevant committees dealing with the preparation, revision and approval of textbooks. I. Minorities and indigenous peoples 35. In 2010, CERD was concerned that some Amazighs continue to suffer racial discrimination in accessing employment and health services, as well as in other areas, especially if they do not speak Arabic. The Committee recommended that Morocco, inter alia, step up its efforts to promote the Amazigh language and culture, particularly through the teaching of this language and culture; take additional steps to ensure that Amazighs are not subject to racial discrimination, in particular as regards access to employment and health services; provide literacy training for the Amazigh in their own language; give special attention to the development of regions inhabited by Amazighs. J. Migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers 36. In 2011, the Committee against Torture stated that it had received individual complaints against Morocco under article 22 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment regarding extradition requests and that it was concerned by the decisions and action taken by Morocco in those cases. It recommended that Morocco fulfil its international obligations and act in accordance with the Committee's final and provisional decisions in respect of individual cases brought before it in order to avoid acting in violation of article 3 of the Convention. 37. The Committee against Torture also took note of the information received from Morocco regarding the expulsion of undocumented migrants. It remained concerned by reports that hundreds of migrants had been left in the desert without water or food. It deeply regretted the State party's failure to provide information on those events or on any inquiries that might have been made into the violence committed by law enforcement personnel against undocumented migrants in 2005. 38. In 2011, UNHCR recommended that Morocco establish a national asylum framework and develop institutional and administrative capacities for its implementation. CAT made similar observations in 2011. 39. UNHCR also stated that refugees did not have formal access to the labour market, housing or public services. UNHCR recommended that Morocco enhance efforts to ensure that civil, economic and social rights, such as access to employment, housing and social services, of refugees and asylum-seekers are respected in accordance with international refugee law and the international human rights instruments to which Morocco is a party. In 2010, CERD made similar comments. K. Human rights and counter-terrorism 40. In 2010, CERD recommended that Morocco take steps to ensure that persons suspected of terrorist activity benefit from fundamental legal safeguards, particularly when the suspects were foreign nationals. In 2011, the Committee against Torture added that Morocco should ensure that no one who was at any time under its control became the object of an "extraordinary rendition", that effective, impartial investigations were conducted and that any cases of "extraordinary rendition" involving Morocco were fully investigated and the perpetrators prosecuted and punished. 41. In 2011, the Committee against Torture recommended that Morocco revise its anti-terrorism law of 2003 in order to improve the definition of terrorism set forth therein, reduce the maximum amount of time during which a person could be held in police custody to the absolute minimum and allow access to a lawyer from the start of the period of detention. It added that Morocco should take substantive steps to investigate acts of torture, prosecute and punish those who had committed such acts and ensure that law enforcement officers, especially the police, prison staff and members of the National Surveillance Directorate, did not engage in torture. 42. The Committee against Torture was also particularly concerned by allegations that secret places of detention were located inside official detention facilities, that those secret detention centres were not monitored or inspected by any independent body, and that a new secret prison had been built near Rabat to hold persons suspected of having ties to terrorist movements. L. Situation in or in relation to specific regions or territories 43. In 2011, the Security Council called on the parties to continue negotiations with a view to achieving a just, lasting, and mutually acceptable political solution, which would provide for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, noting the role and responsibilities of the parties in this respect. While recalling that the United Nations had no staff on the ground to address human rights issues, the Secretary-General stated that both parties had responsibilities to ensure the protection of human rights in the Territory. 44. The Secretary-General reported about the Moroccan security operation launched in November 2010 to dismantle the Gdim Izik camp, which was set up by Saharan protesters with the intention of making socio-economic demands on the Moroccan authorities concerning, in particular, their right to work and to adequate housing and for an end to the marginalization and inequitable distribution of resources in the territory. The Secretary- General further reported on allegations of torture or ill-treatment, including threats of or actual sexual violence during the operation or while in detention. 45. In that regard, the Committee against Torture took note that most of the people who had been arrested had later been released pending trial, but it remained concerned by the fact that those trials were to take place before military tribunals. The Committee stated that it was also concerned by the fact that no impartial, effective investigation had been undertaken to determine what responsibility might be borne by law enforcement officers. 46. In 2011, the Secretary-General noted that Saharan human rights defenders and activists continued to report impediments to their ability to operate, and referred to the trial of seven well-known Saharan activists charged in relation to activities undertaken in October 2009. Notes 