%%%LANDMINES|MINE CLEARANCE|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|

APLC/MSP.12/2012/WP.3 Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction 27 September 2012 Original: English Twelfth Meeting Geneva, 3-7 December 2012 Item 10 of the provisional agenda Consideration of the general status and operation of the Convention Achieving the aims of the Cartagena Action Plan: The Geneva Progress Report 2011-2012 Submitted by the President-Designate of the Twelfth Meeting of the States Parties Section #1 Introduction, Universalization, Stockpile Destruction Introduction 1. From 30 November to 4 December 2009, the international community gathered at a high level in Cartagena, Colombia to reaffirm the commitment of States, international organisations and civil society to ending the suffering caused by anti-personnel mines and to achieving a world free of mines. At this historic event - the Cartagena Summit on a Mine-Free World - the States Parties to the Convention on the prohibition of the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-personnel mines and on their destruction, while inspired by their collective achievements, expressed their will to strengthen their efforts to overcome remaining challenges. 2. With the aim of supporting enhanced implementation and promotion of the Convention in the five year period following the Cartagena Summit, the States Parties adopted the Cartagena Action Plan 2010-2014 and pledged to translate this action plan into sustainable progress while acknowledging their respective local, national and regional circumstances with regard to its practical implementation. 3. To ensure the effectiveness of the Cartagena Action Plan, the States Parties appreciate the need to regularly monitor progress of the application of the actions contained within it. The purpose of the Geneva Progress Report 2011-2012 is to support the application of the Cartagena Action Plan by measuring progress made during the period 2 December 2011 to 7 December 2012 and, in doing so, to highlight priority areas of work for the States Parties in the period between the 2012 Twelfth Meeting of the States Parties (12MSP) and the 2013 Thirteenth Meeting of the States Parties (13MSP). It is the third in a series of annual progress reports prepared by the States Parties in advance of the 2014 Third Review Conference. Universalization 4. Since the 2011 Eleventh Meeting of the States Parties (11MSP), Finland on 9 January 2012, deposited its instrument of accession as did Somalia on 16 April 2012. There are now 160 States that have ratified, acceded or succeeded to the Convention. Two (2) of the Convention's 133 signatories have not yet ratified, accepted or approved the Convention: the Marshall Islands and Poland, notwithstanding that, in accordance with Article 18 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, these signatories are obliged to refrain from acts which would defeat the object and purpose of the Convention. 5. Given their resolve to achieve universal adherence to the Convention and its norms, the States Parties agreed at the Cartagena Summit to seize every opportunity to promote ratification of and accession to the Convention, particularly in regions with low adherence to the Convention and to promote and encourage adherence to the norms of the Convention. In light of the universalization challenges noted in Cartagena and commitments made to overcome these challenges, His Royal Highness Prince Mired Raad Al-Hussein of Jordan continued to serve as a Special Envoy for the Convention. In 2012, Prince Mired continued to promote the universalization of the Convention by travelling to Libya as part of a delegation headed by Jordan's Prime Minister as well as engaging Kazakhstan and Sri Lanka regarding the possibility of high level visits. 6. The 11MSP President continued efforts to promote the universalization of the Convention, focusing particularly on South East Asia. In follow-up to his 2011 engagement of leaders from Singapore and Viet Nam, the 11MSP President met with the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Myanmar on 11 July 2012 in Phnom Penh. At this meeting, Myanmar's Minister of Foreign Affairs said that his government is seriously considering all key disarmament treaties, including the Convention, as part of its State reforms, and was optimistic that his government would positively consider the treaty. 7. In September 2012, the Permanent Mission of Poland informed the 12MSP President-Designate that Poland was still on track to ratify the Convention in 2012. 8. Other States Parties continued their efforts to promote acceptance of the Convention, including through Belgium's ongoing efforts as Coordinator of the informal Universalization Contact Group. 9. The States Parties continued to use the annual resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations (UNGA) on the universalization and implementation of the Convention as one measure of States' acceptance of the Convention's norms. On 2 December 2011, this resolution was adopted by 162 votes to none, with 18 abstentions. The following 19 States not parties voted in favour of this resolution: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, China, Finland, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Oman, Poland, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Tonga and the United Arab Emirates. It was noted that, whereas in 2010 Saudi Arabia had for the first time voted in favour of this resolution, in 2011 Saudi Arabia abstained. 10. At the Cartagena Summit, the States Parties agreed to encourage and support the universalization efforts of all relevant partners, including international, regional and non-governmental organizations. The International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) and its member organisations continued to promote acceptance of the Convention by States not parties, including in Azerbaijan, Egypt, Georgia, India, Israel, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Myanmar, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Poland, Sri Lanka, Syria, United States of America and Viet Nam. In addition, the ICBL, in collaboration with the Colombian organisation Fundación Arcángeles and the United Nations Mine Action Team (UNMAT), led the "Lend Your Leg" campaign which saw thousands of ordinary people join with celebrities, including the United Nations Secretary General, in making the symbolic gesture of rolling up a pant leg or shirt sleeve to express their determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties caused by anti-personnel landmines. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies continued to engage national authorities in universalization efforts around the world, including in Poland, Sri Lanka and United States of America. 11. The 11MSP, in noting the value of engagement by States not parties at all levels, including at a high level, requested that the Convention's depository, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, write to each State not party to the Convention to strongly encourage these States to ratify or accede to the Convention. On 29 February 2012, the 11MSP President wrote to the Secretary-General of the United Nations to transmit this request, noting that the Secretary-General's pre-eminent role in promoting peace and security, strengthening international law and serving as the Convention's depository makes the Secretary-General well-placed to advance the cause of universalization. 12. On 4 April 2012, the President of the European Parliament issued a statement calling upon Poland, the last remaining EU member State which has not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention, to make good on its pledge to join the Convention during 2012. On the same day, the EU Presidency made a declaration appealing to States which have not yet acceded to the Convention to do so as soon as possible. 13. On 5 June 2012, the 42nd General Assembly of the Organisation of American States adopted a resolution to urge States which have not yet done so to ratify or consider acceding to the Convention as soon as possible to ensure its full and effective implementation. 14. At the Cartagena Summit, the States Parties agreed to condemn and continue to discourage in every possible way any production, transfer and use of anti-personnel mines by any actor. Since the 11MSP, Syria made new use of anti-personnel mines. Several States Parties joined the 11MSP President, the ICBL and others in expressing deep concern and in calling for Syria to cease the use of anti-personnel mines. 15. At the Cartagena Summit, the States Parties agreed to encourage States not parties, particularly those that have professed support for the humanitarian objectives of the Convention, to participate in the work of the Convention. In 2012, in keeping with the States Parties' tradition of openness, all States not parties were invited to participate in the Intersessional Work Programme and the 12MSP and its preparations. Ten (10) States that had not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention registered to take part in the May 2012 Intersessional Work Programme and [...] States not parties attended the 12MSP as observers. 16. At the Cartagena Summit, the States Parties agreed to continue promoting universal observance of the Conventions' norms by condemning and taking appropriate steps to end the use, stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-personnel mines by armed non-State actors. Since the 11MSP, one additional armed non-State actor signed the Geneva Call's "Deed of Commitment for Adherence to a Total Ban on Anti-Personnel Mines and for Cooperation in Mine Action", and 42 armed non-State actors have now made this commitment. Nevertheless, the view was expressed that when engagement by non-governmental organizations of armed non-State actors is considered, vigilance is required to prevent terrorist organizations from exploiting the Ottawa Process for their own goals. Some States Parties continue to be of the view that when engagement with armed non-state actors is contemplated, States Parties concerned should be informed and their consent would be necessary in order for such an engagement to take place. One State Party reiterated its concern regarding the engagement on the basis of one previous signing of the "Deed of Commitment" of Geneva Call as inconsistent with the above view. Stockpile destruction 17. At the close of the 11MSP there were four (4) States Parties for which the obligation to destroy stockpiled anti-personnel mines remained relevant, including Belarus, Greece, and Ukraine which had been non-compliant with respect to their Article 4 stockpile destruction obligation since 2008, 2008 and 2010 respectively, and South Sudan, with a deadline for the destruction of stockpiled mines in 2015, which informed the 11MSP that it had discovered stocks of anti-personnel mines. At the close of the 11MSP, 154 States Parties no longer held stocks of anti-personnel mines other than small quantities of previously unknown stocks discovered after deadlines had expired and anti-personnel mines that States Parties are permitted to retain under Article 3, either because they never held stocks or because they had completed their destruction programmes. As of 2 December 2011, together the States Parties had reported the destruction of over 44.5 million AP mines. 18. Since the 11MSP, Belarus, Greece, and Ukraine continued their efforts to ensure the destruction of their stockpiles. In addition since the 11MSP, the Convention entered into force for Finland, a State which previously had indicated it would need to destroy stockpiled anti-personnel mines. As well, since the 11MSP, no additional information was provided by South Sudan regarding the destruction of stockpiled anti-personnel mines. Hence, there are five (5) States Parties for which the obligation to destroy stockpiled anti-personnel mines remains relevant (in addition to one State Party, Guinea-Bissau, which as noted below has reported a small quantity of previously unknown stocks discovered after its deadline had expired). In addition there is one (1) State Party, Somalia, for which the Convention entered into force on 1 October 2012, which is required to report by 28 March 2013 regarding whether there are stockpiled anti-personnel mines that it owns or possesses or that are under its jurisdiction or control. There are 154 States Parties which now no longer hold stocks of anti-personnel mines. Of these, two (2) States Parties which are presumed not to hold stocks - Equatorial Guinea and Tuvalu - have not yet officially confirmed this by submitting initial transparency information as required in accordance with Article 7. Equatorial Guinea is more than 12 years overdue in providing such information. 19. The 11MSP's Phnom Penh Progress Report again acknowledged that the complexity of destruction of PFM1-type anti-personnel mines combined with the limited number of entities capable of destroying these mines, the vast numbers of these mines held by Belarus and Ukraine, the inadvisability of transferring these mines for destruction and the high cost of destruction had resulted in a compelling implementation challenge for both States Parties. The Phnom Penh Progress Report also recalled that the destruction of PFM mines is significantly more challenging and complex, technically and financially, than the destruction of other anti-personnel mines. 20. The Phnom Penh Progress Report recorded that at the close of the 11MSP, Belarus had 3,356,636 stockpiled PFM-1 type anti-personnel mines that remained to be destroyed. As of 21 May 2012 Belarus possessed the same number of stockpiled anti-personnel mines remaining to be destroyed. 21. On 21 May 2012, Belarus informed the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction that it was continuing to work with the Spanish company EXPAL, which is acting as the contractor for the EU-funded project "Destruction of PFM-1 series ammunition in Belarus." Belarus indicated that EXPAL has received residential status in Belarus and has been granted the necessary licenses to operate with explosives. Belarus further indicated that work on a destruction facility was continuing at an ammunition base near Rechitsa in south-east Belarus. Belarus noted that this process was more complicated and time consuming than EXPAL had originally predicted, with numerous pieces of equipment needing to be delivered to the destruction site from Spain and Germany, and with the transfer of explosives, detonators and detonation cords requiring special licenses, permits and user certificates in order to comply with international export control practices. In addition, unfavourable weather conditions during the winter delayed construction and gas, electricity and water supply maintenance at the site required that additional time be taken. Belarus further noted that its licensing authorities issued all required licenses and permits on time and that all imported items were cleared by Belarus' custom authorities without custom duties. 22. Belarus further informed the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction that to effectively solve all pending issues pertaining to stockpile destruction, the Government of Belarus and the European Commission (EC) established, the "Steering Committee", which met three times in 2012 to address issues related to legislation, licensing, construction documents, permits, industrial certification procedures, customs clearance, visa issues, environmental expertise, and waste treatment. Belarus indicated that the Steering Committee has been helpful in addressing issues that have delayed the destruction of stockpiled mines. 23. In terms of the construction of the destruction facility, Belarus informed the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction that the manufacturing house and the detonation chamber have been installed, that it was expected that the contractor would receive the necessary permits and finalise the construction documentation within two months (i.e., by mid-July), and that by mid-June the off-gas treatment machine was expected to arrive to the destruction site. Belarus indicated that before destruction proceeds, the Contractor will complete an environmental impact assessment to be implemented by an agency authorised in conformity with Belarus' legislation, with this taking approximately one month. Belarus further indicated that upon the completion of the environmental impact assessment, the assessment report would be presented for a public hearing for an additional one month's time. Belarus emphasised that both the Government and EXPAL are dedicated to ensuring that the treatment of hazardous liquid and gaseous waste during the destruction process be conducted in an environmentally friendly manner and that the Government of Belarus and EXPAL would bear full responsibility in promoting the safety and security of the destruction site. 24. Belarus further indicated that the destruction of all stockpiles in accordance with Article 4 would be complete in 2013. 25. The Phnom Penh Progress Report recorded that, at the close of the 11MSP, Greece had 953,285 stockpiled anti-personnel mines that remained to be destroyed. On 21 May 2012, Greece informed the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction that, since the 11MSP, there has been no further progress in the destruction of the remaining stockpiled mines, pending a court decision pertaining to the legal dispute between Greece and Hellenic Defence Systems (EAS). Greece recalled (a) that on 16 June 2010, following a ministerial decision and an arbitral award, the contract between the Greek State and EAS was revoked, on the basis that the EAS had violated the terms of the contract due to delays in the destruction process, (b) that on 18 December 2010, EAS filed a request for suspension of the execution of the arbitral award to the Administrative Court of Appeals, and (c) that on 8 February 2011 the Administrative Court of Appeals issued an order which suspended the execution of the arbitral award of 2010 until the final decision of the Court of Appeals is issued. Greece informed the Standing Committee that the main proceeding of the Administrative Court of Appeals is scheduled to take place on 27 September 2012 and that Greece's Ministry of Defence has requested an expedition of this proceeding in order that it can take place sooner. 26. Information provided by Ukraine in 2012 in accordance with its Article 7 transparency obligations indicates that as of 31 December 2011, Ukraine had 5,939,905 stockpiled anti-personnel mines that remained to be destroyed, including 5,786,704 PFM mines. On 21 May 2012, Ukraine informed the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction that 6,720 PFM-1 and PFM-1S mines have been destroyed in 2012, implying that 5,933,185 stockpiled anti-personnel mines remained. Ukraine also informed the Standing Committee that by mid-July it would have financed the destruction of 4,000 OZM-4 type anti-personnel mines. 27. Ukraine further informed the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction that the timeline for the completion of destruction is still to be defined. Ukraine indicated that with US$ 1 million in funds provided by Norway the incinerator facility at the Pavlograd Chemical Plant has been modernised, that final tests on this site were carried out on 26 August 2011 and that when appropriate funding is provided the Pavlograd plant will be able to destroy more than one million PFM-1 mines per year. It was also recalled that the 10MSP's Geneva Progress Report recorded that the destruction of anti-personnel mines had been identified as a priority that could be financed under the European Union's European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI). 28. Ukraine also informed the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction that the destruction of 3 million anti-personnel mines has been included in the second phase of a NATO Partnership for Peace Trust Fund project in Ukraine, and that in February 2012 all necessary legislative procedures were completed to endorse an implementation agreement with the NATO Maintenance and Supply Agency (NAMSA) to supervise the procedure and costs. Ukraine also expressed its appreciation that the EC has reserved funds for the destruction of stockpiled anti-personnel mines by Ukraine, indicated that costs for this phase of destruction would be shared with the EU covering 60 per cent of costs and Ukraine 40 per cent of costs, and called for all parties involved in the destruction process to implement "additional coordination measures" so that the necessary funding would arrive and destruction could begin. 29. States Parties again expressed concern that three States Parties have failed to comply with the four-year deadline to destroy or ensure the destruction of stockpiled anti-personnel mines owned, possessed or under their jurisdiction or control. They encouraged the early completion of stockpile destruction programmes and recalled that the Cartagena Action Plan provides guidelines for getting back into the status of compliance. It was recalled that at the Cartagena Summit, it was agreed that States Parties that have missed their deadlines for completion of obligations under Article 4 will provide an expected completion date. It was noted that some States Parties in question have not yet done so. It was also noted that all States Parties have a role in being vigilant in ensuring that those with stockpile destruction programmes are on track to meet their obligations, including through the provision of international cooperation and assistance. In addition, it was again noted that Belarus, Greece and Ukraine each have expressed a deep commitment to the Convention and the fulfilment of their obligations. 30. At the 21 May 2012 meeting of the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction, it was recalled that at the 11MSP South Sudan reported that, while it did not possess any stockpiled anti-personnel mines originally, it had uncovered stocks that had been abandoned in former military camps and that it would destroy these mines during the dry season in 2012. 31. At the 21 May 2012 meeting of the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction, it was recalled that, at the Cartagena Summit, it was agreed that all States Parties will, when previously unknown stockpiles are discovered after stockpile destruction deadlines have passed, report such discoveries in accordance with their obligations under Article 7, paragraphs 1(b) and 2 of the Convention and take advantage of other informal means to share such information as soon as possible and destroy these anti-personnel mines as a matter of urgent priority. 32. At the 21 May 2012 meeting of the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia recalled that at the 11MSP it reported that its armed forces, in an effort to determine what munitions would need to be destroyed in accordance with obligations under the Convention on Cluster Munitions, had discovered eight containers containing PFM-1S type anti-personnel mines. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia informed the Standing Committee that, on 10 May 2012, it destroyed this previously unknown stockpile, which included 1,248 PFM-1S mines. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia thanked the Implementation Support Unit (ISU) and the Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian Demining (GICHD) for their support in the destruction process. 33. At the 21 May 2012 meeting of the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction, Nigeria, in noting that it is a country that has experienced civil war and thus had munitions stored in numerous locations throughout its territory, indicated that, following a ministerial directive, the Nigerian military is taking steps to reassess the munitions in its inventory to determine whether previously unknown stocks exist. Nigeria reaffirmed that, should such stocks be found, it will comply with its obligations and its Cartagena Action Plan commitments. 34. At the 21 May 2012 meeting of the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction, it was recalled that, at the 11MSP, Guinea-Bissau indicated that a small stockpile of anti-personnel mines had been found in Quebo and Gabu military bases during a joint assessment mission conducted by Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) to identify the quantity of Guinea-Bissau storage ammunitions. It was further recalled that 7 PMN type mines and two original boxes of POMZ-2 type mines were found and that Guinea-Bissau had indicated that it would destroy these mines as soon as possible but no later than 31 March 2012. 35. On 30 August 2012, the Philippines indicated that in 2011, the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) Munitions Control Centre (MCC) disposed a total of 334 pieces of newly discovered anti-personnel mine during the conduct of its ammunition surveillance and inspection of the various ammunition depots in the Philippines as mandated by the AFP hierarchy. 36. In 2012, the Co-Chairs of the Standing Committee on Stockpile Destruction, Germany and Romania, sought to act upon the commitment the States Parties made in the Cartagena Action Plan to "seize every opportunity to promote and encourage adherence to the norms of the Convention". They did so by encouraging States not parties to participate in the 21 May 2012 meeting of the Standing Committee and by providing States not parties with an opportunity to share information on steps they are taking to adhere to the norms of the Convention (i.e., by volunteering information on stockpiles they possessed). While no State not party provided additional information, the Co-Chairs recalled that some States not parties have voluntarily provided information on the stocks in their possession and that others have provided what they refer to as voluntary Article 7 reports although in some of these documents no information on stockpiled anti-personnel mines has been provided and in other instances it is ambiguous. The Co-Chairs noted in particular the following: (a) Poland has regularly voluntarily furnished information on stockpiles, indicating most recently that it has 200,013 stockpiled anti-personnel mines in its possession. Poland has also voluntarily provided information that indicates that it has progressively reduced its stockpile of anti-personnel mines with mines withdrawn from its inventories and dismantled. (b) Mongolia, in 2007, voluntarily reported that it possesses 206,417 anti-personnel mines. In addition, at the 10MSP Mongolia reported that it had destroyed 100 anti-personnel mines at a test destruction, bringing its number of stockpiled anti-personnel mines down to 206,317. As well Mongolia informed the 10MSP that it would destroy another 380 stockpiled anti-personnel mines in 2011. (c) The Lao People's Democratic Republic, 2011, voluntarily reported that it has a small stockpile of anti-personnel mines but has not provided information on the types and quantities of the mines held. (d) Azerbaijan, in 2008 and 2009, voluntarily provided information on various aspects of the landmine situation in Azerbaijan but it did not include information on stockpiles held. (e) Morocco has regularly voluntarily provided information on various aspects of the landmine situation in Morocco to the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs but has not included information on stockpiles held other than to say that it does not possess stockpiled anti-personnel mines which could be destroyed. At the May 2012 meetings of the Standing Committees, Morocco stated that it does not possess stockpiled anti-personnel mines but only retains inert anti-personnel mines for training purposes. (f) Sri Lanka in 2005 voluntarily provided information on various aspects of the landmines situation in Sri Lanka but with respect to stockpiled anti-personnel mines indicated that "the information is not furnished in the present report" and that "with regard to future reports, the position will be reviewed, taking into account all relevant factors." 