%%%AGENDA|

TD UNITED NATIONS United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Distr. GENERAL TD/B/COM.1/EM.6/1 1 April 1997 Original : ENGLISH TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT BOARD Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities Expert Meeting on Strengthening the Capacity for Expanding the Tourism sector in Developing Countries, with Particular Focus on Tour Operators, Travel Agencies and Other Suppliers Geneva, 8-10 June 1998 Item 2 of the provisional agenda PROVISIONAL AGENDA AND ANNOTATIONS I. Provisional agenda 1. Election of officers 2. Adoption of the agenda 3. Strengthening the capacity for expanding the tourism sector in developing countries 4. Adoption of the outcome of the Meeting. GE.98-50368 Page II. Annotations to the provisional agenda Item 1: Election of officers 1. is recommended that the Expert Meeting elect a Chairperson a Vice-Chairperson-Rapporteur Item 2: Adoption of the agenda 2. The provisional agenda for the meeting is contained in section I above. The schedule of meetings for the three days is attached to this document. Documentation TD/B/COM.1/EM.6/1 Provisional agenda and annotations Item 3: Strengthening the capacity for expanding the tourism sector in developing Countries 3. Under this item, the Meeting will examine ways and means to strengthen the capacity for expanding the tourism sector in developing countries, with particular focus on tour operators, travel agencies and other suppliers. The Expert Meeting will have before it a background note prepared by the UNCTAD secretariat entitled "International trade in tourism-related services: Issues and options for Developing Countries," (TD/B/COM.1/EM.6/2). In addition, it is expected that experts will submit papers to be circulated at the Meeting. TD/B/COM.1/EM.6/2 International trade in tourism-related services: Issues and options for Developing Countries: background note by the UNCTAD secretariat Item 4: Adoption of the outcome of the Meeting The Expert Meeting will adopt its recommendations/findings/conclusions at the end of the Meeting. The final report will be compiled under the authority of the Chairperson after the conclusion of the Meeting. Schedule of meetings Monday 8 June Tuesday 9June Wednesday 10 June 10 a.m. Plenary Opening statement Elections/agenda Informals Item 3 Informals (cont'd) Consideration of outcome 3 p.m. Plenary (closing) Adoption of the outcome 