%%%BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS|CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|FOCAL POINTS|

BWC/MSP/2012/2/Add.1 Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction 7 December 2012 Original: English 2012 Meeting Geneva, 10 - 14 December 2012 Item 11 of the provisional agenda Annual report of the Implementation Support Unit 2012 Report of the Implementation Support Unit Submitted by the Implementation Support Unit Addendum 1. This addendum contains updates, new developments, and information provided or revised since 15 November 2012. II. Administrative support for the Convention Documentation services 2. An important part of the ISU's mandate is "providing administrative support to and preparing documentation for meetings agreed by the Review Conference". Efficient and timely preparation and publication of official documents is a fundamental requirement for the effective conduct of BWC meetings. Documentation services are provided for BWC meetings by the United Nations, on the basis of the annual General Assembly resolution (most recently A/RES/67/77), which requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations "to render the necessary assistance to the depositary Governments of the Convention" and "to provide such services as may be required for the implementation of the decisions and recommendations of the review conferences". The cost of the documentation services provided by the United Nations, however, is paid for entirely by BWC States Parties, which pay assessed contributions based on cost estimates prepared by the United Nations and approved by States Parties. Essentially, the BWC States Parties contract the United Nations to provide documentation and other conference services for their meetings. BWC meetings are not United Nations meetings as such, and BWC documents are not United Nations documents. 3. The ISU works with the Documents Management Service (DMS) of the Division of Conference Management at UNOG to manage the preparation and publication of BWC documents on behalf of States Parties. While this has generally worked reasonably smoothly, there have been a number of problems related to the occasional incompatibility of BWC documentation requirements with the official documentation rules and procedures of the United Nations. These rules and procedures have been developed for the United Nations General Assembly and its subsidiary bodies, and they do not always suit the needs and working patterns of the BWC States Parties. In past years, it has usually been possible to reach an informal arrangement with DMS on special handling for BWC documents, but significant budget cuts to conference services in the United Nations have led to DMS being obliged to apply the United Nations rules more strictly. This has in turn started to affect the ability of the ISU to ensure that BWC States Parties are provided with documentation services suited to their needs - and for which they are paying. 4. In light of this, the ISU recommends that BWC States Parties specify formally and clearly their requirements for the documentation services that they are contracting the United Nations to provide. Such a specification could set out timelines for submission, translation and processing; any limits on length of documents; procedures for publication and distribution; and any other aspect that States Parties consider important. The specification could also state explicitly that only the BWC States Parties may impose rules and restrictions on the provision of documentation services for their meetings, and that rules adopted by the General Assembly do not apply unless also adopted by the BWC States Parties. The specification would provide a clear guide that would allow DMS to ensure that the necessary translation and processing resources were secured in good time. If desired, the ISU could report annually to States Parties on the performance of DMS in meeting the specification. III. Implementation of the Convention 5. As of 3 December 2012, 80 States Parties had nominated a national point of contact as requested by the Sixth and Seventh Review Conferences. Two additional States Parties had updated the details of the national point of contact. See Annex II (in English only). IV. Confidence-Building Measures (CBMs) 6. As of 3 December 2012, 68 States Parties (40% of States Parties) had submitted a CBM in 2012, covering the calendar year 2011 (see Annex III, in English only). This compares to 70 States Parties submitting in 2011. VI. Database for assistance requests and offers 7. As at 6 December 2012, the database contains: (a) Seventeen offers of assistance, from three States Parties; (b) Two requests for assistance, from two States Parties. [ENGLISH ONLY] National Points of Contact I. States Parties 1. Insert new entry after Germany to read State Contact Ghana Mr. Kwamena Essilfie Quaison Coordinator, Biological and Chemical Weapons Conventions, Ministry of Environment, Sciecen and Technology P.O. Box M 232 Accra 2. Correct entry for Republic of Korea to read Republic of Korea Mr. Hyan-sang Ahn First Secretary Disarmament and Nonproliferation Division, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 37 Sejongno Jongno-gu Seoul 3. Correct entry for Sweden to read Sweden Mr. Jan Lodding Deputy Director Department for Disarmament and Non-Proliferation, Ministry for Foreign Affairs Stockholm 10339 Report on participation in the Confidence-Building Measures Updated provisional summary of participation in 2012 Key: D = declaration submitted; ND = nothing to declare; NN = nothing new to declare. Note: The revised CBM forms adopted by the Seventh Review Conference no longer contain a Form D. Only those States Parties which submitted CBMs in 2012 using the old forms will have any indication under the Form D column in the table below. CBM Form State Party A1 A2 B C D E F G Additional Information Argentina ND NN Australia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bhutan Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iraq Italy Japan Kenya Latvia Lebanon Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malaysia Malta Mexico Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of Moldova Romania Russian Federation Serbia Singapore Slovakia Slovenia South Africa Spain Switzerland Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Ukraine United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Uzbekistan Yemen Zimbabwe 