%%%DISARMAMENT NEGOTIATIONS|WORKING GROUPS|

CD/1933/Rev.1 Conference on Disarmament 14 March 2012 Original: English Revised draft Decision on a programme of work for the 2012 Session Submitted by the President The Conference on Disarmament Takes the following decision for the establishment of a programme of work for the current session: 1. To establish a working group under agenda item 1 entitled "Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament" to deal with nuclear disarmament. The working group shall meet for five working days during the week commencing 19 March 2012 and for four working days during the week commencing 28 May 2012 under the chairmanship of Mr. Hisham Badr, Ambassador of Egypt. Pursuant to its mandate, the working group shall take into consideration, without prejudice, all relevant views and proposals past, present and future. The working group shall present a report on the progress of its work before the end of the current session. 2. To establish a working group under agenda item 1 entitled "Cessation of the nuclear arms race and nuclear disarmament" to deal with elements of a multilateral treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices on the basis of the document CD/1299 of 24 March 1995 and the mandate contained therein, while dealing with all related matters. The working group shall meet for five working days during the week commencing 26 March 2012 and for four working days during the week commencing 4 June 2012 under the chairmanship of Mr. Alexandre Fasel, Ambassador of Switzerland. 3. To establish a working group under agenda item 3 entitled "Prevention of an arms race in outer space" to discuss substantively, without limitation, all issues related to the prevention of an arms race in outer space. The working group shall meet for five working days during the week commencing 21 May 2012 and for four working days during the week commencing 25 June 2012 under the chairmanship of Mr. Antonio José Vallim Guerreiro, Ambassador of Brazil 4. To establish a working group under agenda item 4 entitled "Effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons" to discuss substantively, without limitation, with a view to elaborating recommendations dealing with all aspects of this agenda item, not excluding those related to an internationally legally binding instrument. The working group shall meet for four working days during the week commencing 14 May 2012 and for five working days during the week commencing 11 June 2012 under the chairmanship of Mr. Md. Abdul Hannan, Ambassador of Bangladesh 5. To appoint Mr. Mikhail Khvostov, Ambassador of Belarus as a special coordinator under agenda item 5 entitled "New types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons; radiological weapons" to seek the views of its Members on the most appropriate way to deal with this issue. The special coordinator shall take into consideration all relevant views and proposals past, present and future. The Conference requests the special coordinator to present a report before the end of the current session. 6. To appoint Mr. Pedro Oyarce, Ambassador of Chile as a special coordinator under agenda item 6 entitled "Comprehensive programme of Disarmament" to seek the views of its Members on the most appropriate way to deal with this issue. 7. To appoint Mr. Hellmut Hoffmann, Ambassador of Germany as a special coordinator under agenda item 7 entitled "Transparency in armaments" to seek the views of its members on the most appropriate way to deal with the questions related to this item. The special coordinator shall take into consideration all relevant view and proposals past, present and future. 