%%%UNEMPLOYMENT|EMPLOYMENT CREATION|

Substantive session of 2012 New York, 2-27 July 2012 High-level segment: annual ministerial review Statement submitted by China Energy Fund Committee, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. As the largest developing country in the world, China's population reaches as high as 1.3 billion and will be reaching 1.4 billion in the near future. As time elapses, the employment-related problem will become more and more urgent, the reasons being as below: (a) The sharp imbalance between the supply and demand of the labour force. It is estimated by demographers that the tendency of the labour force to increase will not cease until the end of 2020, and the supply of jobs will heavily lag behind the increased rates of the labour force; (b) The unemployment rate in urban areas will be going up. It is roughly assessed that the rate will reach as high as 10 per cent; (c) The surplus labour force coming from rural areas is very large, thus greatly increasing pressure on the job situation; (d) The quality of the labour force is not high, and the related conflicting structural problems are very serious. Therefore, a lot of people will not be able to find proper jobs, and lots of enterprises will also not be able to find the required talents; (e) The market-oriented job mechanism still remains to be set up and improved. In order to meet the requirements for building and promoting employment and decent work to eradicate poverty in the context of inclusive, sustainable and equitable economic growth at all levels for achieving the Millennium Development Goals, the organization would like to launch initiatives at the substantive session of the Economic and Social Council. The organization could find out how foreign countries solve the employment problem. Examples are listed below: (a) Resort to measures of finance and tax reduction to stimulate the economy and promote employment (United States of America); (b) Upgrade employment by investing in manufacturing, draft special policies for employment and support small and medium enterprises to solve the problem (Japan); (c) Innovate the social security system and fulfil "individualized" employment service (France). Of course, China has a saying that is: "Solve the developing problem through developing". The organization also has to promote employment and decent work through development: (a) Increase the speed of economic development and fulfil the sustainable development of jobs; (b) Pay more attention to the development of small and medium enterprises to absorb the surplus of the labour force, especially third industry development; (c) Improve labour force quality and accelerate the pace of job training; (d) Accelerate urbanization and the development of the third industry; (e) Set up a comprehensive and regulated social security system. 