%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2013 regular session 21-30 January and 17 February 2013 Quadrennial reports for the period 2008-2011 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Contents Page Agence de développement économique et culturel nord-sud Association d'équipements collectifs La Castellane Centre indépendant de recherches et d'initiatives pour le dialogue Coordination française du lobby européen des femmes Femmes solidaires Fondation Ostad Elahi: éthique et solidarité humaine International Movement of Apostolate in the Independent Social Milieus Jeunesse horizon Médecins du monde (international) Ordre des avocats de Paris (Paris Bar Association) Organisation de Bender Djedid pour le développement socioéconomique Organisation mondiale des experts-conseils arbitres Organisation pour la communication en Afrique et de promotion de la coopération économique internationale Plateforme pour le développement durable des Caraïbes 1. Agence de développement économique et culturel nord-sud Special, 2008 Introduction The Agence de développement économique et culturel nord-sud contributes to United Nations missions in the fields of economy, education and culture by organizing missions and meetings between businesses abroad. The Agency participates in the social progress and economic and cultural development of the countries with which it works by offering opportunities to French institutions such as businesses, universities and institutes. This is a win-win working method. During these missions, 49 agreements and partnerships have been signed with a view to the establishment of exchange programmes for students and teachers, know-how and technology transfers, commercial activity and joint ventures or associations. The Agency's international network enables it to process internship applications from French and foreign students in order to foster exchanges and promote the mobility of young people and charity and voluntary work. The Agency spoke at an international conference on the theme: "The concept of further deepening the democratic reforms and establishing civil society in Uzbekistan", held in Tashkent on 22 and 23 April 2011. The conference was also attended by international organizations, including the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Participation in meetings of the United Nations The Agency submitted a written contribution, in which it described a project aimed at establishing a faculty of dental surgery in Mali, to the Annual Ministerial Review of the Economic and Social Council in 2009. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations The Agency has cooperated with the United Nations with a view to industrial development in France in order to facilitate transfers of know-how and trade flows. It has also requested assistance from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in order to establish a faculty of dental surgery in Mali, a project that was not successful owing to a lack of support. Initiatives taken by the organization in support of the Millennium Development Goals The Agency's activities support Goals 1, 7 and 8 of the Millennium Development Goals. Agreements between universities in France, Hungary, Uzbekistan and Turkey were signed during missions for the purpose of ensuring high-quality education and facilitating access to employment. Agreements between a Turkish university and a French company have been signed in order to develop integrated farming through satellite technology transfers. Agreements between the Hungarian Government and a French company have been signed in order to step up environmental protection and water management efforts in Hungary. A partnership between four French institutions (businesses and universities) and the Ministry of Agriculture of Uzbekistan has been signed in order to expand the Uzbek agricultural sector. French companies are working with the Government of Uzbekistan to improve water management, including in the Aral Sea, and promote sustainable development. The developing countries with which the Agency works receive many transfers of technology and know-how: contracts for French aeronautics and automotive subcontractors have been signed in Turkey; transfers of know-how in the aerospace industry have been carried out in Uzbekistan; training exchanges between the Hungarian aeronautics cluster and the French union of industrial workers have been implemented; the Agency has been involved in negotiating commercial and financial agreements between Uzbekistan and France; French health care workers have participated in the Agency's missions to Hungary, Uzbekistan and Turkey in order to conclude partnership agreements; and transfers of information and communication technologies have been carried out in Uzbekistan and Turkey thanks to the Agency's missions. Additional information The Agency is organizing a mission to Azerbaijan; six general agreements on university exchanges have been signed; and it is providing support for a drinking water production system in drought-ridden countries. 2. Association d'équipements collectifs La Castellane The Association is a community-based organization that focuses on the day-to-day development and implementation of social development projects with and for the population of the Castellane low-income housing project in France. The population of the Castellane housing project comprises more than 20 different communities and nearly 7,000 residents. The values fostered by the Association are based on consideration and respect for the individual, irrespective of his or her origins and social position, values that are upheld by the United Nations. The Association's areas of action are extremely diverse and their goal is social progress. They focus on various themes, including solidarity; openness to the world; respect for the environment; hygiene and health; and access to culture for all and to employment, housing, new technologies, sports and leisure. The activities and projects carried out are based on consideration of the needs and concerns of local residents. They build on a strong, effective partnership network that allows different institutions to establish a sustainable presence in the housing project. The experience gained over many years of work is beneficial and rewarding for everyone, and every effort has been made to communicate and share that experience. Through its overall objective of social progress and its areas of activity, the Association contributes to the goals of the United Nations. First, the children-and-the-family unit has developed a health unit that carries out prevention activities and disseminates information daily. Information on sexually transmitted infections, vaccinations and hygiene is provided daily. A mother-and-child care group holds sessions every Thursday in the community centre, allowing 100 children and parents to be monitored and treated every month. Through the integration unit, the Association helps to promote gender equality in employment and to empower women. Job-hunting sessions are held in the community centre. The environment and quality of life activities seek to increase residents' awareness of the need to respect the environment and help them to feel more at ease in their community. For example, the annual "Clean Castellane Day" focuses on the environment and includes various activities such as, inter alia, collecting and sorting rubbish and raising risk awareness. Every year, some 400 people take part. In 2011, several activities were carried out: - Street furniture: installation of tables and benches to brighten up residents' surroundings; - Refurbishment of apartment building lobbies: young people painted the lobbies; - Restoration of the Jougarelle football pitch, which included painting a mural with the name of the pitch and installing street furniture; and - Raising awareness of water issues: debates and exhibits on the theme of water. Lastly, international solidarity and trips for young people are key activities that encourage openness to the world and solidarity. Since 2008, many projects have been carried out. In 2008, trips to European countries were organized for young people. These trips gave them mobility and independence and allowed them to learn about preparing for a trip, planning an itinerary and sharing experiences. In 2009, a trip to Algeria on the theme of water was organized. In collaboration with another organization, the Association implemented a construction project that gave a village in the Kabylie region of Algeria access to water. The project involved digging a channel for the water. In France, the project led to the holding of awareness-raising days that included a screening on the importance of water on earth, a film showing the construction site in Algeria and young people sharing their experiences. In 2010, the Association rallied to help those affected by earthquakes in Italy, Algeria and Morocco. Efforts included donations of school supplies, clothes and health products. European internships were also organized in partnership with INFA Europe. In 2011, projects for the installation of street furniture were implemented, after which the young people visited Portugal. 3. Centre indépendant de recherches et d'initiatives pour le dialogue The Centre indépendant de recherches et d'initiatives pour le dialogue is a non-profit non-governmental organization (NGO). Based in Geneva, the Centre has offices in West, Central and East Africa. Its primary mission is peaceful conflict management. Its activities focus on peacebuilding, international migration and sustainable development. Aims and purposes of the organization The organization promotes peacebuilding and endeavours to achieve peaceful conflict management. Within this framework of activities, the Centre trains young leaders on African and international issues, communication and the creation of forums for dialogue. The organization promotes economic and social development in countries emerging from conflict through its specialized agencies: :: The Agence africaine des relations économiques et diplomatiques internationales :: The Janusz Korczak Prize Burundi for the rights of the child and academic excellence :: The International Tanganyika Forum. The organization has worked primarily with the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations agencies in Burundi, including UNESCO and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). In Geneva, it participates regularly in the discussions of the Human Rights Council by proposing needed actions and resolutions. The Centre works in cooperation with the UNESCO Office in Burundi, with UNICEF and with other public and private stakeholders in promoting and encouraging scientific research on the rights of the child and academic excellence in higher education in Burundi. During the reporting period, the organization initiated an internal reform process in Burundi in 2008 and developed a strategic action plan for strengthening activities to promote the Peacebuilding Commission's principle of good governance in Burundi. In 2008, it also undertook to promote a project on platforms for dialogue in Burundi, launched jointly by the Government and the United Nations. The organization urged the international community to engage in a dialogue on African migration at the twelfth session of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva in September 2009. During the sixteenth session of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva in March 2011, the organization questioned the Human Rights Council about the humanitarian situation in Somalia and the need for the Security Council to support the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The organization continued to promote dialogue within Burundian institutions in order to renew the process of peace and dialogue by establishing a roadmap for a national forum for dialogue, held in Bujumbura in July 2011, collaborating with the Peacebuilding Commission in Burundi on the principle of good governance. During the reporting period, the organization continued to contribute to achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, particularly Goals 3 and 8. With its project, "Boulangeries du peuple" (The People's Bakeries), it undertook to empower rural women in Burundi by launching a special initiative that allows many women to earn a guaranteed daily income that makes them financially independent. The Centre is a founding member of the first umbrella organization for African organizations in Switzerland, the African Diaspora Council Switzerland. It is also a founding member of the first youth network for members of the African diaspora who live in Council of Europe member States, the African Diaspora Youth Network in Europe. 4. Coordination française du lobby européen des femmes Special, 2000 The Coordination française du lobby européen des femmes works with Governments, politicians and regional, national, European and international institutions to promote real equality between women and men. The organization's goals are to encourage decision-makers to take women's interests into consideration, combat gender discrimination in the economy and politics, defend social rights and combat all forms of violence. It provides member associations with a forum for discussion and joint action by facilitating communication at the local, European and global levels. It disseminates information on policies that directly affect its membership and helps members to launch awareness-raising, information and action campaigns. Significant changes in the organization In January 2011, the organization was elected to the Board of the Conference of Non-Governmental Organizations in Consultative Relationship with the United Nations. The organization participated in the fifty-second and fifty-fifth sessions of the Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York. It hosted several side events during these sessions, including a Francophone workshop on the exchange of best practices concerning the Millennium Development Goals and a workshop on access to education for all girls, including "invisible" girls who have no legal identity. The organization took part in the annual Civil Society Development Forum, held in Geneva on 30 September and 1 October 2010 on the theme of "Women's Human Rights and Development: Inclusion, Participation and Equality". On 19 May 2010, the organization participated in a meeting on the Goals. During the inauguration of its new headquarters on 17 September 2010, it took part in an event on development and women's rights and issued a statement on the event. On 14 May 2008, the organization submitted alternative shadow 2007 report within the framework of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. On 4 May 2010, it made a statement on the French National Action Plan to implement Security Council resolutions on women, peace and security before the National Human Rights Advisory Committee. The organization was one of the signers of the ten proposals marking the tenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). 5. Femmes solidaires Special, 2004 In 2008, the organization contributed to the fifty-second session of the Commission on the Status of Women. In 2010, it contributed to the Geneva preparatory meetings for the fifty-fourth session, which was held in New York. It also helped to organize workshops on the empowerment of women with regard to traditions, customs and religions and on the empowerment of women by giving them control of their bodies, which included issues such as prostitution, contraception and abortion. In 2011, the organization participated in the fifty-sixth session of the Commission, held in New York, for which it organized parallel workshops with the NGO, Coalition against Trafficking in Women, and contributed to a report on gender equality prepared by the United Nations Office at Geneva. In 2008, the organization was elected Vice-President of the French Coordination française du lobby européen des femmes. It also participated in the European Feminist Initiative conference, "Feminists for a Secular Europe", together with 140 feminist activists from 20 European and North African countries. During the reporting period, it affiliated itself with the Inter-African Committee for the eradication of female genital mutilation. In 2009, the organization participated in the general assembly of the European Women's Lobby, which took place in Lyon, France. In October 2009, it contributed to the preparations in Geneva for the 15-year review of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. It sent a delegation of six members to those preparations. It also contributed to the forum on migrant women in the Mediterranean, held in Marseille, France. In 2010, in cooperation with the Coalition against Trafficking in Women, it set up a network and website denouncing the smuggling and trafficking of women for purposes of prostitution. The organization publishes a magazine that reports on women's rights in France and around the world. On International Women's Day, it organizes many initiatives throughout France in order to protest against gender inequality. In 2008, the Femmes solidaires national congress on the theme of "Feminism: a contemporary adventure" was held. It included an international panel discussion with women from Algeria, Colombia, India, Lebanon, Poland and Sweden. In 2009, the organization sent a delegation to Ethiopia to launch a campaign sponsoring 90 uncircumcised girls. The organization also met with the Union nationale des femmes sahraouies. In Paris, the organization hosted a delegation of women from Viet Nam, seven women from the Occupied Palestinian Territory and one woman from Israel. It sent representatives to the Occupied Palestinian Territory and Israel to gather testimony from refugees. In 2009, the organization met with Synnov Skorge, director of a shelter for battered women in South Africa. It supported Aung San Suu Kyi by organizing debates with the association, Info Birmanie. It took part in the French Senate's open debate on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; entitled "Thirty years after the Convention, where are we?", the debate was organized by Femmes solidaires and the Ligue du droit international des femmes. In 2010, the organization supported a project that built a health centre in Ethiopia, hosted Kurdish women and screened a film. The organization participated in an international forum on women and resistance in Sahrawi refugee camps. It also established a partnership with and organized a visit by the Indian association, Sruti, and helped Indian women to make objects for the organization to sell to fund the education of girls in India. The organization mobilized against rape as part of a campaign entitled "La honte doit changer de camp" (Shame must change sides). The organization took part in the Senate debate on the status of elected representatives in France and in the campaign for the national priority concern in 2005: combating violence against women. It organized a demonstration calling for access to abortion. The organization participated in the drafting of the Act of 9 July 2010 on protection orders. In 2011, the organization was involved in raising awareness of and disseminating information on the Act on protection orders. The organization was granted observer status with the Plateforme pour la solidarité avec le peuple du Sahara occidental. Following the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, it launched a campaign in support of the Japan Federation of Women's Organizations (FUDANREN). It also took part in the Congress of the Union nationale des femmes sahraouies. The organization met with Leyla Zana, a Kurdish member of Parliament, in Paris and established a working group to combat impunity for acts of violence against women around the world. It launched a national campaign entitled "A la télé pas de filles hors jeu" (No girls sidelined on television), and a public education campaign throughout France on the theme of women and sport. The organization signed the petition calling for the adoption of a law against prostitution and developed a network to combat the smuggling and trafficking of women for purposes of prostitution. 6. Fondation Ostad Elahi: éthique et solidarité humaine The Fondation has helped to promote tolerance and intercultural solidarity by organizing the following conferences, which are listed on its website; the participants' contributions have been published: :: 10 September 2011, Paris, Institut de France: "Quelle sagesse pour notre temps?" ("What Wisdom for Our Time?"), under the aegis of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques :: 11 September 2010, Paris, Institut de France: "Spirituel et rationnel, les alliances paradoxales" ("Spiritual and Rational, the Paradoxical Alliances"), under the aegis of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques :: 12 September 2009, Paris, Palais du Luxembourg: "Comment la littérature change le monde" ("How Literature Changes the World"), under the aegis of the Council of Europe and the Ministry of Culture :: 13 September 2008, Paris, Palais du Luxembourg: "Comment la littérature change l'homme" ("How Literature Changes Humanity"), under the aegis of the Council of Europe and the Ministry of Culture. The Fondation's contribution over the reporting period includes the following activities on the promotion and development of ethical teaching and research initiatives: :: International conference on ethics and the family, jointly with the Centre de recherche sens, éthique, société and in partnership with the Union nationale des associations familiales, held in Paris on 17 and 18 March 2011; two publications and the establishment and coordination of an international research network on the topic :: 2008 and 2010: first and second ceremonies to present the ethical teaching and research prizes, under the aegis of the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research :: Development of ethics teaching modules for the Université Paris-Descartes, the Conservatoire national des arts et métiers and the École supérieure de commerce extérieur :: Creation of an online television channel on ethical conduct, including interviews with leading figures and recordings of research seminars. The Fondation also contributed to the tenth session of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva from 2 to 27 March 2009, for which it prepared a written statement on globalization, human rights and international contracts. The Fondation participated in the following meetings: :: The 2011 annual ministerial review, for which it prepared a written statement on developing progress indicators for well-being at school (E/2011/NGO/2) :: The 2010 annual ministerial review, for which it prepared a written statement on how to achieve professional equality (E/2010/NGO/3) :: The 2009 annual ministerial review, for which it prepared a written statement on medical and health care ethics and achieving the health-related Millennium Development Goals (E/2009/NGO/2) :: The 2008 annual ministerial review, for which it organized a panel discussion on the exercise of responsible citizenship and its impact on sustainable development and the Millennium Development Goals, held in Paris at the Conseil économique, social et environnemental on 11 April 2008 (E/2008/NGO/8). During the reporting period, the organization participated in meetings on various topics, including sense and sustainable development, management and businesses' ethical capital, ethics and the financial crisis, and business ethics. 7. International Movement of Apostolate in the Independent Social Milieus Special, 1996 The organization, established in 1963, brings together 20,000 people from 30 countries in Africa, North America, South America, Asia, Europe and the Middle East. Its members are laypersons and have various responsibilities. Its goals include affirmative action to help the poor; spreading the word of Jesus Christ; respect for human dignity and rights; and promoting peace, solidarity and justice. Its representatives can make statements at the United Nations Office at Geneva and the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. A general assembly is held every four years. During the reporting period, Benin and the Niger joined the organization. The organization participates in the reviews conducted by the Human Rights Council and in the universal periodic review process. In April 2010, it took part in a meeting on challenges to be met. Following an oral statement on French prisons, made in 2008, it was asked to provide an assessment of the action taken by France. The report showed that France had a long way to go in adapting its policies and implementing United Nations recommendations. The organization has strengthened its contacts with the Syrian Arab Republic. Since 2009, when it held meetings in the towns where it has offices, it can confirm that the situation in that country has deteriorated dramatically. Life is extremely difficult; many are being forced to leave the country, job opportunities (trade) are disappearing and it is difficult to move around the country. Only the desire to make peace with all sides in the country will lead to a favourable outcome. With regard to the rights of the child, the organization participated in the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It also took part in a panel discussion on rehabilitating adults who were traumatized as children and a debate on restoring the dignity of street children, who are stigmatized, and reintegrating them into society, held at the Palais des Nations in Geneva. On the question of domestic workers, the organization participated in a discussion on the employment and social protection of migrant workers with a view to ratification and implementation of the Migrant Workers Convention and to the adoption of an international standard on the rights of migrant workers. It submitted to the Human Rights Council a draft statement on Malagasy women who are "invited" to Lebanon and are then exploited and forced into domestic servitude. In September 2011, it attended a meeting, held at the Palais des Nations in Geneva, on the national and international causes and consequences of poverty and ways to foster international solidarity, implement human rights decisions and empower women. No additional information to report. 8. Jeunesse horizon During the reporting period, the organization participated regularly in online forums in preparation for the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Geneva and organized by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and UNESCO. In 2009, the organization participated in an online discussion on women and the economy, moderated by the World Bank, which took place from 23 November to 21 December 2009. That discussion, which covered several secondary themes, was organized to mark the 15-year review of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. In 2011, the organization submitted a written statement on the theme: "The right to development: measures and policies needed to make the right to development a reality" to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) as a contribution to the Social Forum of the Human Rights Council on the right to development, held in Geneva from 3 to 5 October 2011. Every year, the organization commemorates the "days" established by the United Nations, including Human Rights Day, commemorated annually on 10 December in collaboration with the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms of Cameroon. On these occasions, the organization often receives technical support from the United Nations Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa and the United Nations Information Centre. In June 2010, the organization obtained from the Ministry of Secondary Education of Cameroon an authorization to organize awareness-raising on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in schools and colleges. This project, entitled "One pupil -- one Declaration", has received several hundred documents from the aforementioned Centres. In 2008, the organization's Executive Director participated in the civil society forum held in Doha from 24 to 29 November in preparation for the United Nations Conference on the Financing of Development. After taking part in that forum, a panel discussion on the theme of youth and corruption was held on 14 January 2009 to raise awareness of the detrimental effects of corruption on young people among decision-makers, young people and the media. In 2009, the organization's Executive Director participated in the Durban Review Conference following the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action at the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance. The Durban Review Conference was held at the Palais des Nations in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009. This involvement allowed the organization to meet other organization and to initiate human rights education projects. Since its establishment, the organization has been working to enrol children in school. In total, more than 30 children from impoverished families have received assistance. In partnership with the Front interscolaire et universitaire pour la sensibilisation sur les maladies sexuellement transmises/SIDA, the organization held several workshops in schools in Yaoundé to continue to educate young people about HIV/AIDS. Condoms were distributed for the protection of sexually active young people. In 2010, the organization organized a training workshop on human rights education in partnership with a collective of trained young people. The workshop, held at the Don Bosco centre in Yaoundé from 31 August to 1 September 2010, ensured ongoing human rights awareness-raising among young people and the dissemination of several human rights documents, including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. From September 2010 to March 2011, the organization worked with representatives of the inmates of the main prison in the town of Mfou in order to educate them and to learn how it could help the young inmates. During that period, the organization donated over $650 worth of medicines to the infirmary. 9. Médecins du monde (international) General, 1996 The organization manages 342 programmes in some 76 countries. Its international network includes 15 associations in as many countries (Argentina, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America). Médecins du monde is an international aid organization which seeks to: :: Provide care for the most vulnerable people in situations of crisis or exclusion anywhere in the world, including France :: Encourage doctors, other health professionals and professionals from other disciplines to volunteer their services free of charge in support of its work; :: Ensure that the expertise required for the success of its mission is available; :: Maintain close ties at all times to the people receiving its care. The organization maintains regular contact with United Nations agencies working in its area of operations. The organization and United Nations agencies have implemented nearly 50 operational and financial partnership contracts on the ground. The organization is one of the 40 NGOs that were invited to participate in the Global Humanitarian Platform. The last meeting was held in Geneva on 1 December 2010. The organization's Director-General in France represented NGOs at the launch of the United Nations Humanitarian Appeal 2011 in Geneva. Cooperation with United Nations bodies In France, the organization participates in meetings of the Global Health Cluster. In France and Spain, it is involved in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC) Task Force on HIV/AIDS in Emergency Settings and the IASC Task Force on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings. It helped draft the guidelines developed by the IASC Task Force on Mental Health and disseminated them at the annual meeting of the European Community Humanitarian Office in 2010. In France, it maintains regular bilateral contact with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNICEF and the World Health Organization (WHO). Lastly, it receives many donations in kind (UNFPA and UNICEF kits). The organization supports the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals through advocacy in France and Europe, and through its field activities in Africa, South America, Asia and the Middle East. The organization, together with 14 other European NGOs, was a founding member of the Action for Global Health network, established in 2006. The network, which is made up of institutions working on various aspects of health, calls on European Governments, NGOs, institutions and businesses to take urgent action to attain the health-related Millennium Development Goals by ensuring that the necessary funds are made fully available, that priority is given to robust health systems, that women's right to health and to health care are placed at the centre of all plans and strategies, that research and development on diseases prevailing in poor countries are undertaken and that the macroeconomic conditionalities established by the International Monetary Fund are relaxed so that developing countries are able to fund their public services. The organization supports the achievement of health-related Millennium Development Goals in Africa, South America, Asia and Europe through its health programmes. It carries out programmes in collaboration with UNICEF, UNFPA, UNDP, WHO, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the World Bank, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). 10. Ordre des avocats de Paris (Paris Bar Association) The Paris Bar is a professional association that protects the common interests of the legal profession and is made up of more than 24,000 lawyers. It is managed by a Bar Council and led by an elected President, who represents the association in all public transactions. The Paris Bar Council has 42 members who are elected by their peers and has 170 paid staff members to manage its day-to-day activities. Under the President's leadership, the organization deals with matters relating to the legal profession, including its regulation and future, and with the administration of justice. The organization endeavours to give the most vulnerable people access to justice and provides thousands of free consultations throughout the capital, particularly to those most in need (by means of a legal aid bus that travels the city streets). The organization protects fundamental freedoms, human rights advocates and colleagues at risk throughout the world (through legal support and direct, specific assistance, such as funding initiatives to ensure medical care for imprisoned colleagues). Over the past three years, with funds from the European Union, the Paris Bar has been able to conduct a significant number of legal observation missions and to provide support to colleagues in jeopardy throughout the world. From 2009 to 2011, it actively contributed to the development of a training kit on human rights and the right to due process, which is freely available in three languages and aims to encourage our colleagues around the world to implement the regional and international human rights instruments. On-site training sessions were held in Algeria, Armenia and Colombia in order to instruct lawyers in the use of these tools. The organization, which is a founding member of the World Coalition against the Death Penalty, is also very actively involved in the effort to eliminate the death penalty and in international criminal justice issues. During the reporting period, a Paris Bar assistance fund was created with the objectives of strengthening and better coordinating ongoing pro bono activities; encouraging Paris Bar members to contribute financial, legal or logistical assistance for pro bono social and humanitarian initiatives; and promoting such activities. The Paris Bar supports social integration; each year, it expands its methods of facilitating access to justice for the most vulnerable groups. It also promotes democracy and human rights. During the reporting period, the organization participated in a campaign in support of a United Nations General Assembly resolution calling for a moratorium on the death penalty. It was also involved in: :: Drafting six reports of the World Coalition against the Death Penalty on the six countries (Armenia, El Salvador, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania and Liberia) that were cited in the reports of the Universal Periodic Review Working Group; :: The campaign conducted by the World Coalition against the Death Penalty calling for ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty. The Paris Bar supports gender equality with a view to genuine application of the principle of parity between men and women in the allocation of responsibilities and in remuneration and has set up an observatory on parity. In the area of employment, the Paris Bar created the first incubator for lawyers. 11. Organisation de Bender Djedid pour le développement socioéconomique During the reporting period, at the national level, the Organisation de Bender Djedid pour le développement socioéconomique focused on providing training, education and aid to the poorest and establishing a transparent financial management system. At the international level, it carried out initiatives in support of sustainable development, good governance and conflict management capacity-building. In order to achieve its goals, it updated and modernized its infrastructure, which serves as evidence of its ability to adapt to future directions. The new equipment has enhanced the organization's functioning and effectiveness and the Internet offers incomparable opportunities to access information and training. In terms of social assistance, the reporting period included many significant charitable events, such as the distribution of clothing and mutton to the poorest families during the Eid celebration. In addition, for the first time, free school supplies were provided to more than 120 poor children who needed them in order to successfully complete their studies. Three wells were built in Douloul, in the Tadjourah region of Djibouti, enhancing the water supply available to a drought-ridden rural population. Lastly, the organization coordinated a seminar on the regional conference, Women's Leadership for Peace and Security in the Horn of Africa. The seminar, which brought together people from many countries and was chaired by the Prime Minister of Latvia, was a real success. The organization also coordinated a seminar on maintaining dialogue between civil society and the Djibouti National Human Rights Commission as well as a workshop for national institutions on the problem of violence against women. The organization's priorities include providing education, promoting good governance, defending human rights and promoting gender equality and health. The organization has improved and updated its rules of procedure. The organization has contributed to the work of the United Nations through its participation in many activities organized by the United Nations system at the national and regional levels. With regard to cooperation with the United Nations system, the organization has supported United Nations development programmes at the national and regional levels. It has also participated in various Djibouti-based studies requested by United Nations offices in Djibouti, including those of UNICEF, the World Food Programme (WFP) and UNDP. The organization has resource persons who act as consultants. The UNDP Regional Bureau for Arab States in Beirut held a seminar in Amman on 26 and 27 October 2012. Many representatives of Arab civil society, including the organization, participated in this important meeting. The organization participated in the seventy-sixth session of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, held in Geneva from 22 to 27 February 2010. The organization attended the launch of the African Women's Decade and the launch of the "Africa United" campaign, organized by the secretariat of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. The organization participated in a regional conference on combating corruption in Arab countries, organized by UNDP and held in Gammart, Tunisia, in September 2011. Initiatives taken by the organization include: :: Access to water for 3,000 residents of the rural town of Douloul in northern Djibouti; :: Humanitarian assistance in the form of food and nutrition provided to 9,996 families; most of the beneficiaries were women and children; :: Education of some 400 preschool children; :: Training for young people, most of them girls. The organization would like, and would thus be very honoured, to strengthen its cooperation with the Economic and Social Council. Lastly, owing to serious limitations on the mobilization of financial resources, the organization was unable to participate in the Council's recent initiatives although it attaches great importance to its activities. 12. Organisation mondiale des experts-conseils arbitres The Organisation was the brainchild of generous men and women who recognized the important role played by experts, lawyers and magistrates from all countries in the development of global society and, in particular, the societies of third world countries that are Members States of the United Nations. The organization was launched in 1991 as French non-profit and quickly evolved into an NGO involved in the relevant sector of the United Nations. In 2010 and 2011, the organization participated in the Bureau meetings following the ordinary sessions of the UNESCO General Conference. The organization attended a meeting for small, medium-sized and large French enterprises, held in Bahrain from 27 February to 2 March 2011. 13. Organisation pour la communication en Afrique et de promotion de la coopération économique internationale The organization's mission is to create a funding line for projects focused on education, training and social and professional reintegration for marginalized children and disadvantaged youth living on the street based on its universal framework for the reintegration of marginalized children, which was adopted at the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Tunis in 2005, with a view to coordinated action. The organization amended its charter of principles and the functions related to the management of funds and drafting of financial reports. It has also added new affiliates. During the reporting period, the organization held its annual International Forum for Non-governmental Organizations on Women's Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. It also organized various panel discussions and round tables on the following topics: :: Human rights, peace and reconciliation: the case of Côte d'Ivoire and Morocco; :: Violations of the rights of women and children in conflict zones: the case of Kashmir, Côte d'Ivoire, Libya and the Democratic Republic of the Congo; :: Human rights, peace and security in Africa; :: Violations of the rights of women and children in conflict situations: the case of Kashmir, Côte d'Ivoire, Libya, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia; :: Human rights violations and gender inequality; :: Women and children's rights in armed conflict zones. In addition to contributing oral and written statements to several meetings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the organization launched a training and education project for women producers and exporters of raw agricultural materials (cacao, coffee, tea) from Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana and Nigeria. Training and education activities will be conducted over a two-year period in partnership with UNCTAD, which will provide technical and material assistance. The organization launched a "Day of Dialogue with Street Children", during which it donated clothing, essential medicines, shoes and food to street children. A similar initiative was conducted in February 2011 for street children in Douala, Cameroon. A pilot project to educate, train and reintegrate marginalized children has been under way since 2009 in the rural town of Kongso, Cameroon. In 2005, the organization was selected non-governmental organization of the month by the International Institute for the Rights of the Child. 14. Plateforme pour le développement durable des Caraïbes The aims of the organization are: :: To promote and encourage the exchange of experience and information by all available means; :: To organize conferences, seminars, symposiums and meetings and to publish and/or disseminate articles, reviews, books, audiovisual materials and informational bulletins with a view to promoting sustainable development, human rights and the achievement of Agenda 21 and the Millennium Development Goals at the local level; :: To work for the benefit of impoverished persons without distinction and to fight against discrimination in all its forms; :: To explore, develop, implement and maintain sustainable development activities with a view to revitalizing the economic and social fabric. During the reporting period, the organization opened an office in Canada. The organization moderated a discussion on the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development and the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development. It supports the development of international inter-city partnerships and promotes processes aimed at implementing Agenda 21 at the local level. In 2009, it participated in the first interdepartmental effort -- between Guadeloupe and Martinique, France (7,500 residents) -- to implement Agenda 21. In 2010, it participated in the first inter-territorial implementation effort: between Saint-Louis de Marie-Galante, Guadeloupe and Saint-Colomban, Canada (15,000 residents). Every year, the NGO coordinates events commemorating International Youth Day, the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, the International Day of Older Persons, the International Day for Natural Disaster Reduction and the International Day of La Francophonie. In 2010 and 2011, the organization worked with the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs in the context of the international millennium conference on the Millennium Development Goals. On 25 September 2010, in New York, a representative of the organization contributed oral and written statements to discussions regarding agenda item 20 (b) of the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, entitled "Sustainable development: follow-up to and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States". In 2010 and 2011, the organization conceptualized and co-organized the first international millennium conference, held in Quebec, Canada on the theme of access to fundamental rights for all in the context of the Millennium Development Goals, which included 200 volunteers and 850 participants. In 2010, the organization was involved in the creation and overall coordination of the informal network of stakeholders for sustainable solutions, cities and communities in the French-speaking Americas in order to contribute to achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. In 2010, the organization participated in the drafting of the Laval Millennium Declaration in Quebec, Canada. In 2010 and 2011, the organization conceptualized and co-organized the second international millennium conference, held in Martinique, France, which included 60 volunteers and 400 participants. The conference focused on the sustainable development of support networks for all with a view to achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and was attended in person by the head of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Since 2008, the organization has promoted the development of inter-island partnerships in the French Caribbean on issues concerning the Millennium Development Goals, sustainable development and knowledge-sharing. From 15 to 26 January 2010, the NGO conducted an emergency mission to Haiti following the January 2010 earthquake. In August 2011, the organization helped coordinate the "Caribbean Solidarity" campaign, under which it provided supplies for schools in Haiti. In 2009 and 2010, the organization explored potential partnerships with 11 First Nations peoples. The head of the Assembly of First Nations of Quebec and Labrador, Canada, participated in the international conference on the Millennium Development Goals co-organized by the organization. 