%%%CRIMINAL STATISTICS|STANDARDS|STATISTICAL CLASSIFICATIONS|CAPACITY BUILDING|DATA COLLECTION|DATA ANALYSIS|

Statistical Commission Forty-fourth session 26 February-1 March 2013 Item 3 (j) of the provisional agenda* Items for discussion and decision: crime statistics Report of the National Institute of Statistics and Geography of Mexico and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on a road map to improve the quality and availability of crime statistics at the national and international levels Note by the Secretary-General In accordance with a request of the Statistical Commission at its forty-third session (see E/2012/24-E/CN.3/2012/34, chap. I.A), the Secretary-General has the honour to transmit the report of the National Institute of Statistics and Geography of Mexico (INEGI) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime on crime statistics. The report describes a road map to improve the quality and availability of crime statistics by identifying a number of objectives and related actions. A gradual and coordinated implementation of listed actions over the next decade is suggested, subject to available resources. The constituent elements of the road map are the development of an international classification of crime, the development of statistical tools for difficult-to-measure crimes, the promotion of victimization surveys and the strengthening of national statistical systems on crime, in which national statistical offices should play a strategic role to facilitate coordination among concerned national institutions, implement statistical standards and ensure data quality. In the context of a wide-ranging road map, a number of priority activities are proposed. The present report contains points for discussion and consideration for the future work of the Commission in this area. Page Introduction Development of new standards and methodology to improve crime statistics Building an international classification of crime for statistical purposes Difficult-to-measure crimes Data-collection tools Mainstreaming gender into crime statistics Improving the capacity to produce and disseminate crime data The role of national statistical offices Capacity-building Successful model of the Centre of Excellence Improving international data collections and analyses United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and Operations of Criminal Justice Systems International data repositories and reporting on crime Implementing the road map, a joint effort of the Statistical Commission and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Points for discussion Annex Road map on crime statistics 1. The manner in which the production, dissemination and analysis of statistical data on crime is currently undertaken faces several challenges, some of which relate to the growing demand for generating knowledge on the fast-evolving dynamics of criminal activities and organizations. 2. Given the highly sensitive nature of information related to crime, it is important that crime and criminal justice statistics are accurate, transparent and independent. They also need to be relevant and timely in order to provide the basis for solid research, inform the public and be an operative tool for targeting policies and programmes in the areas of crime prevention, the rule of law and criminal justice reforms. Comparability of data across countries is also a particularly important element of crime statistics, given the increasingly transnational nature of crime. 3. Member States and the international community have been engaged in the production and dissemination of crime data for decades and although progress has been made on many fronts, several challenges remain, particularly in relation to the measurement of complex forms of crime that have emerged in recent decades, such as organized crime, trafficking in persons, corruption and cybercrime. In those fields, the lack of official data has spurred the creation of indices or indirect estimates that tend to monopolize the attention of data users, irrespective of evident issues of with the quality of the data. 4. Comprehensive knowledge on trends and levels of crime and criminal justice requires a broad range of statistics covering the nature of criminal events and the characteristics of victims and perpetrators through the entire process, from when the crime is committed to the conviction and rehabilitation of offenders and the provision of necessary support to the victims of crime. This involves the collection of data at different stages: investigation, arrest, prosecution, conviction and imprisonment, and the use of different data sources, from administrative records to general population or business surveys, to measure crime that is not reported to the authorities. 5. The challenges faced in the collection, dissemination and analysis of crime statistics were discussed at the forty-third session of the Statistical Commission, in March 2012, on the basis of a report presented by the National Institute of Statistics and Geography of Mexico (INEGI) (E/CN.3/2012/3). 6. As a result of the discussion, the Statistical Commission requested INEGI and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to present to the Commission, at its forty-fourth session, a proposal for a road map to further develop crime statistics and to suggest a mechanism for cooperation between the Statistical Commission and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (see E/2012/24/-E/CN.3/2012/34, chap. I.B). The Commission also asked the two organizations to report on the feasibility of developing an international classification of crime for statistical purposes. 7. Following the discussions of the Statistical Commission at its forty-third session and of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-first session (see E/2012/30-E/CN.15/2012/24 and Corr.1 and 2, chap. I.B), the Economic and Social Council adopted a resolution on improving the quality and availability of statistics on crime and criminal justice for policy development (resolution 2012/18), in line with the recommendations made by both Commissions. The present report responds to the requests of the two Commissions and the resolution of the Council. 8. The objectives of the report are to provide a comprehensive overview of existing challenges with regard to crime statistics and to suggest activities to be undertaken at the international level to address them. The proposed road map is quite ambitious and covers a range of activities, which the international community may envisage implementing within a decade. Most of the proposed actions require funding from and cooperation of and between Member States and regional and international organizations. The annex summarizes all activities and outputs and suggests a subset to be considered on a priority basis. II. Development of new standards and methodology to improve crime statistics 9. One aspect that limits the comparability of crime statistics across countries and the capacity to measure the occurrence and the response to crime is the lack of methodological standards. Some of the challenges faced in the definition of statistical concepts for the production of crime data are discussed below and activities and methodological work for the improvement of existing data-collection tools are proposed. A. Building an international classification of crime for statistical purposes 10. The idea of developing a standard classification of crime is not new: in 1951, the Social Commission of the United Nations highlighted the importance of preparing "a standard classification of offences" so that "Governments might submit statistical returns on criminality, on standard schedules". Since the 1950s, discussions on developing such an international crime classification were inconclusive, owing to difficulties in standardizing national legislations on crime, which are the basis of national crime statistics, into a standard international classification. A different approach was adopted in 2009, when a Task Force of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Economic Commission for Europe was established, under the auspices of the Conference of European Statisticians, to look into the possibility of developing a crime classification framework based on behavioural descriptions rather than legal codes. The Task Force developed the first international crime classification framework which was approved by the Conference of European Statisticians at its sixtieth plenary session, held in June 2012 (see ECE/CES/83). 11. The various categories and layers of the international crime classification framework are created by aggregating subordinate criminal event categories into combined categories, taking into account such factors as the target of the act/event, its seriousness, the intent of the perpetrator and the affected policy area. Why is a statistical classification of crime needed? A crime classification for statistical purposes primarily responds to the need to organize and aggregate crime data for descriptive and analytical purposes. The advantage of a crime classification is to have a meaningful hierarchical structure where data on all forms of crime can be mapped into categories that have a certain degree of similarity in relation to conceptual, analytical and policy areas. A standard classification of crime for statistical purposes is an important tool to improve the comparability and the quality of data at both the national and international levels. At the national level, the structure provided by a classification can better organize the data related to single offences as defined by legal codes, which are usually difficult to use for analytical purposes. The classification can also be an essential tool for harmonizing the collection and dissemination of data across the different criminal justice institutions (police, prosecution, courts and prisons), across subnational entities, which may adopt different legal frameworks or organizing principles, and across different data sources (administrative records and statistical surveys). A common classification of crime and criminal justice data improves the consistency of national data. At the international level, the adoption of a statistical classification of crime is necessary to enhance the comparability of crime data across countries, which is a major issue for improving the analysis of global and regional trends and levels. While other challenges to achieving a high level of data comparability between countries remain (different registration practices, disparate counting rules, technical and organizational capacities, etc.), the use of harmonized concepts, nomenclatures, and aggregating criteria constitutes an important step to improve statistical comparability. 12. The benefits of the approach taken in the international crime classification framework were discussed during the forty-third session of the Statistical Commission and the twenty-first session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (see para. 7 above), and the request was made that the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and INEGI explore the feasibility of developing an international classification of crime for statistical purposes. Following this request, a first testing of the framework was conducted between July and September 2012, involving 16 volunteer countries from Europe, the Americas and Asia. The testing produced very encouraging results and demonstrated that an international classification of crime is feasible. 13. During the testing, participating countries were able, to a great extent, to map their existing crime data into the international crime classification framework and to provide some information on additional attributes concerning the nature of the crimes, their victims and perpetrators. Experts involved in the testing met in October 2012 and discussed necessary changes to the framework. They developed a revised list of first-level categories (see figure 1) and a skeleton of subordinate levels. The next steps in the elaboration of a full classification require a broader consultation process to ensure an inclusive representation of different crime information systems. Figure 1 Proposed framework for an international crime classification system (as revised at a consultation meeting) Categories for Level 1 Acts leading to death or intending to cause death Acts causing harm to the person Injurious acts of a sexual nature Acts against property involving violence against a person Acts against property only Acts involving controlled psychoactive substances or other drugs Acts involving fraud, deception or corruption Acts against public order or authority Acts against public security Acts against the natural environment Other criminal acts not elsewhere classified Objective 1 Produce an international classification of crime for statistical purposes, to be submitted to the Statistical Commission in 2015 Proposed actions and outputs (a) Establishment of a group of experts to steer the development and finalization of the international classification of crime. The group shall include statisticians and experts from national statistical offices, other national government institutions and regional and international organizations involved in the recording and dissemination of data regarding crime and criminal justice, and will work in collaboration with the Expert Group on International Statistical Classifications. Regional commissions are to be involved to ensure adequate representation of different national statistical systems on crime (first quarter of 2013) (b) Development of a first draft of the international classification of crime following a broad consultation process with national experts and the EGISC (second quarter of 2013) (c) Testing of the draft international classification of crime in volunteer countries (fourth quarter of 2013) (d) Meeting of the group of experts to review results of the testing and finalize the international classification of crime (first half of 2014) (e) Development of a manual for the implementation of the international classification of crime (second half of 2014) (f) Submission of the international classification of crime to the forty-sixth session of the Statistical Commission (to be held in 2015) B. Difficult-to-measure crimes 14. A number of non-conventional crimes, such as transnational organized crime, cybercrime, corruption, money laundering, the smuggling of migrants, trafficking in persons and environmental crimes have become prevalent in recent decades. Many of these crimes have a transnational dimension and the international community has developed regional and international instruments to facilitate international legal cooperation and provide the basis for the design of a common strategy to combat such crimes. However, no international standards have been developed on how to measure such complex crimes and collect statistics on their levels and trends. Unconventional forms of crime are characterized by very low detection rates and while statistics based on cases reported to the authorities provide relevant information on government response to the crime, they heavily underestimate the size of the phenomena. 1. The challenges 15. Many offences committed by organized criminal groups (such as homicide and assaults) are quite visible and they are usually recorded through conventional crime information systems. But many other forms of crime perpetrated by organized criminal groups are not reported or do not come to the attention of the authorities. This may be as a result of fear on the part of the victims or due to the fact that criminal organizations are well integrated into the national fabric and can operate illicit operations undisturbed. Therefore, producing statistics on organized crime requires tools that go beyond traditional data-collection systems. 16. On trafficking in persons, official statistics can provide valuable information on detected cases but do not constitute a good measure of the level of this crime. This is primarily due to the complex nature of the crime and the fact that the trafficking process can take different forms in countries of origin, transit and destination. Trafficking in persons also has different characteristics according to the different types of exploitation: for example, the phenomenon of child soldiers is very different from that of forced prostitution. Finally, in most forms of trafficking, the victims' level of awareness of being in such a position is often low, which makes the detection and recording of such crimes even more difficult. 17. It is also difficult to estimate the number of crimes relating to the smuggling of migrants, owing to low detection rates caused by the fact that both smugglers and smuggled migrants tend to remain beyond the reach of law enforcement. Moreover, detected cases of smuggled migrants are often difficult to distinguish from other forms of irregular migration. 18. Recent regional and international data collections on trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants have defined a list of key indicators in these areas, but while the indicators can explain some characteristics of the phenomena and their transnational dimension, they remain focused on detected cases, which do not encompass the entire magnitude of the crime. 19. Cybercrime, or computer-related crime, encompasses a number of diverse offences, such as illegal access to computer data and systems (hacking), content-related offences (such as child pornography or xenophobic materials), copyright-related offences and other computer-related offences (such as phishing or digital identity theft). In all cases, data from administrative records are affected by low reporting and detection rates for reasons such as: the lack of direct victims (as in the case of copyright-related crimes), the existence of sophisticated systems for hiding the crime or its perpetrators, the reluctance of victims to report the crime for fear of negative repercussions (for example, in the case of a financial institution targeted by hackers). 20. Money-laundering encompasses all financial activities that disguise money of illicit origin and is particularly difficult to measure as it is embedded into a system of licit finance where it is challenging to distinguish transactions originating from illicit activities. Some statistical approaches have been developed to describe money-laundering: producing national indicators on the risk or vulnerability to money-laundering or applying indirect methods to estimate the global volume of illicit financial flows related to specific areas. 21. Corruption includes a number of offences, such as bribery, embezzlement, abuse of functions and trading in influence, which affect public procurement, delivery of government services and public functions. Measurement challenges relate to the fact that borders between licit and illicit behaviours are often blurred and victims and offenders are often co-responsible for the crime. A variety of solutions are required to measure corruption because it involves a number of modalities. Estimating the extent of corruption in the delivery of services, for example, requires the implementation of large-scale data-collection tools covering the entire population (or a sample of it) who access the services. On the other hand, estimating corruption in public procurement requires information that targets a small number of entities (large businesses, public managers, public expenses records) but with a greater challenge in accessing their relevant information. 22. Collecting data on environmental crime entails a different dimension, which has often been neglected in traditional data-collection systems. Traditional forms of crime can be detected by collecting information from victims, perpetrators or national authorities and can be counted using such statistical units as number of people involved (victims or perpetrators) or the amount of financial resources involved. The impact of environmental crime cannot be measured with traditional statistical units, since it relates, for example, to land, flora, fauna or air quality, all of which are outside the scope of current crime information systems. Data-collection tools also go beyond population or business surveys or administrative records and may require new methodology, which can, for example, exploit satellite information systems. 2. Addressing the challenges 23. Given the lack of statistical information from official sources, the requirement for information on complex crimes is often met by unofficial data, in the form of estimates through indirect methods, composite indicators or on the basis of expert opinions. Examples of such data include the perception indicators on corruption produced by non-governmental organizations or international organizations, or the attempts to build indicators of organized crime or of vulnerability to it. 24. Developing standards to collect statistical information on complex forms of crime and facilitating their analysis should include a combination of four strategies: (a) Improvement of existing data-collection tools to better measure complex crimes, by, for example: (i) defining statistical concepts and recording practices to ensure that existing registration systems include complex forms of crime; and (ii) improving existing surveys to better cover unconventional crimes; (b) Development of new data-collection tools to measure a crime component which is not covered in other sources. This includes, for example, the design of specialized surveys to measure the experience of corruption among the population or businesses; (c) Development of standard estimation methods based on empirical data and scientific research to measure the hidden size of the criminal phenomenon. Such estimates are needed, for example, to understand the number of victims of crimes such as trafficking in persons or smuggling of migrants, or the volume of financial resources involved in money-laundering; (d) Development of statistical frameworks to describe dimensions/topics that have a direct or indirect bearing on the crime and to identify statistical data and indicators that can illustrate them. Objective 2 Improved data-collection methodologies and statistical frameworks for the measurement of difficult-to-measure crimes The table below describes activities which can be undertaken in order to advance the measurement of the so-called "difficult-to-measure crimes". Given the complexity of the tasks and activities involved, expert group meetings should be held periodically to review the work implemented in the different areas, assist in defining new concepts and provide expert advice in developing the proposed outputs. Type of crime Relevant parties Organized crime :: Improvement of existing administrative data to provide counts of conventional offences committed by organized criminal groups (homicides, assaults, robberies, etc.), and dissemination of good practices in that regard :: Development, testing and dissemination of a statistical indicator framework on organized crime with the following components: - Structure, dimension and composition of organized criminal groups - Illicit and licit activities of organized criminal groups - Measures to prevent and respond to organized crime - Direct and indirect enablers of organized crime, including social inequalities, economic structure, rule of law and efficiency of criminal justice systems National statistical offices and national criminal justice institutions, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, regional organizations, the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), Centre of Excellence, academia Corruption :: Improvement of existing administrative data to provide figures on offences, victims and perpetrators that come to the attention of authorities in relation to all forms of corruption, and dissemination of good practices in that regard :: Development of data-collection tools and estimation methods on the following corruption areas: - Corruption affecting citizens: refinement of methodology and production of guidelines to measure corruption with population surveys - Corruption affecting businesses: refinement of methodology and dissemination of good practices for measuring corruption with business surveys - Corruption affecting public administration: development of statistical surveys on public officials, development of indicators and estimation methodologies based on empirical data - Corruption affecting political processes: development of statistical surveys, development of indicators and estimation methodologies based on empirical data National statistical offices, national criminal justice and anti-corruption institutions, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, regional organizations, Centre of Excellence Trafficking in persons :: Improvement of existing administrative data to provide counts on offences, victims and perpetrators that come to the attention of authorities :: Development and testing of statistical surveys on trafficking by targeting vulnerable population groups (migrant workers and illegal migrants in destination countries, selected communities in origin countries) National statistical offices and national criminal justice institutions, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Organization for Migration, the International Labour Organization, regional organizations Smuggling of migrants :: Improvement of existing administrative data to provide counts on offences, smuggled migrants and migrant smugglers that come to the attention of authorities :: Development and testing of statistical surveys on smuggling of migrants by targeting vulnerable population groups (migrant workers and illegal migrants in destination countries, selected communities in origin countries) National statistical offices and national criminal justice institutions, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Organization for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Labour Organization, regional organizations Cybercrime :: Improvement of existing administrative data to count all offences perpetrated through computers or computer systems, and dissemination of good practices in that regard :: Development and testing of statistical surveys or modules (respectively on population and businesses) to collect data on specific forms of cybercrime :: Development of estimation methods based on information and communications technology and surveillance systems to provide data on certain forms of cybercrime (such as hacking, botnet, copyright crimes) National statistical offices and national criminal justice institutions, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Telecommunication Union, regional organizations Money-laundering :: Improvement of existing financial and crime-related administrative data to improve comparability and coverage of data on suspected illicit financial transactions :: Development of estimation methodologies based on empirical data on illicit activities National statistical offices, national criminal justice institutions and financial authorities, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Monetary Fund, regional organizations Environmental crime :: Improvement of existing administrative data, including the use of data on regulatory and administrative offences, for better statistical coverage of offences against the environment :: Testing the use of new technologies, such as satellite imagery and remote sensing, to measure certain forms of crime such as illegal logging, illegal mining and waste dumping, and dissemination of good practices in that regard National statistical offices, national criminal justice and environment protection institutions, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Environment Programme, the World Bank, regional organizations C. Data-collection tools 25. A fundamental aspect in improving statistics on crime is enhancing the capacity of statistical data-collection methods to accurately measure crime. 1. Administrative data on crime 26. The administration of justice is a core function of the modern state and its organization is usually built around three main areas: policing (mainly police and other law enforcement agencies), access to justice (mainly prosecution and courts) and punishment and rehabilitation of offenders (mainly prison administration). As figure 2 shows, each of the four institutions is responsible for one part of the process, which starts after a crime is committed and ends after the convicted person has served the sentence and, where relevant, completed the rehabilitation programme. Statistical data are generated at the various stages of this process by the four institutions of the criminal justice system, police, prosecution, courts and prisons, as a reflection of the multiple activities that the State performs to respond to crime. Figure 2 Simplified layout of the criminal justice procedure and responsible institutions Among the various sources, police data on recorded/ detected crime are the closest to the crime event and they are often used to approximate crime levels and patterns, though their accuracy in depicting crime typically depends on three factors: :: Public trust in authorities, which affects to what extent crime is reported :: Capacity of authorities to detect crime :: Practices in recording and counting reports of crime. Only the third factor is within the reach of statistical work, which should focus on ensuring an accurate and complete recording of all crime coming to the attention of authorities. The main challenges of administrative crime statistics involve: :: Incomplete recording of cases (often due to the lack of digitized systems) :: Heterogeneous quality of the information recorded by the different criminal justice institutions :: Lack of consistency in standards used to record crime across different criminal justice institutions :: Inadequacy of administrative records to record unconventional crimes :: Lack of international relevance and comparability, which limits the measurement of transnational crime. Manual for the Development of a System of Criminal Justice Statistics provides guidance on organizational arrangements and statistical principles to be used by national criminal justice systems in generating statistics of a high quality. Practical implementation of such principles constitutes a challenge for several countries, which would benefit from the exchange of experiences and dissemination on good practices, for example in relation to (a) rules to record and count crimes; (b) standards to record and count offences related to unconventional crimes; and (c) data-sharing between institutions of the criminal justice system. 28. Despite these challenges, statistics produced by criminal justice systems can provide valuable information to monitor how the state performs important functions, such as crime prevention, access to justice and efficiency of criminal justice systems. But statistical standards have not yet been developed to guide the generation of data at the national level and to improve international comparability. For example, there are no standards on how to calculate conviction rates (where the reference population could be people brought into court or those arrested or prosecuted), or pretrial detention rates (where pre-detention could relate to prisoners who are waiting for the first trial or prisoners for whom a definitive sentence has not yet been pronounced by a judge). Objective 3 (a) Improved and comparable statistical indicators on the functioning of the criminal justice system (b) Improved coverage, accuracy and comparability of administrative crime statistics (a) Produce guidelines on statistical indicators generate by the criminal justice system, which include: (i) Expert consultations on defining indicators on crime prevention, access to justice and efficiency of the criminal justice system based on statistical data from the criminal justice system (ii) Pilot data-collections in selected countries and regions (b) Produce a compendium of good practices on methods to improve coverage, accuracy and comparability of administrative statistics on crime and criminal justice 2. Sample surveys on crime 29. Sample surveys that collect information on the victims' experience of crime provide a complementary perspective to administrative data. These surveys typically provide accurate information on a number of well-defined offences, for example, conventional forms of property and violent crimes, and they produce data on the prevalence of crime victimization, the characteristics of victims and perpetrators, crime reported to authorities, crime not reported to authorities (the so-called "dark figure of crime"), perception of safety and satisfaction about police performance. 30. The methodology for conducting victimization surveys has consolidated over time and the joint Economic Commission for Europe/United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Manual on Victimization Surveys is the international reference to provide detailed guidance on the full cycle of implementing a victimization survey, from the design to the implementation, data processing and data analysis to the dissemination stage. 31. While a set of best practices on key aspects in the implementation of victimization surveys has accumulated over time, there are still open issues in relation to the design and use of victimization surveys and there are three main elements that need to be addressed by the international community, as described below. 32. The promotion of a wider implementation of victimization surveys within the scope of official statistics to enhance the knowledge base on crime for the design of effective crime and criminal justice policies and better targeting of crime prevention measures. This requires the provision of technical assistance, the implementation of training courses and the development of e-learning training tools. 33. The establishment of a consortium of national statistical offices that implement victimization surveys to discuss and develop methodology, create a virtual library to take stock of the work done worldwide and provide easy access for national statistical offices and other data providers to the wealth of research and best practices accumulated over time. 34. The production of international standards on the design and conduct of new types/modules of victimization surveys that can complement the Manual on Victimization Surveys by addressing certain offences that respondents find more difficult to disclose, such as corruption or cybercrime (see sect. B above), or by targeting other entities such as businesses. While sharing the same approach as victimization surveys targeting the population, business crime surveys have specific methodological challenges, related for example to the greater variety of crimes that can be experienced and the need to collect information on crimes that are inherently complex, such as extortion, fraud, corruption or cybercrime. The promotion of business victimization surveys started in the 1990s but only a few national surveys have been conducted. 35. Besides victimization surveys, which offer the perspective of crime victims, a complementary viewpoint can be obtained from so-called self-reported delinquency surveys, where the focus is on the personal experience of crime, as perpetrator, and other deviant behaviours. Such surveys, usually targeting youth populations and conducted in typical youth settings, such as schools, have a certain tradition in criminological research, where they aim to identify possible correlations between deviant and criminal behaviours. The obvious methodological challenge thereto is to elicit information on illicit or socially unacceptable behaviours. Objective 4 (a) Consolidate the international know-how on victimization surveys (b) Promote the undertaking of victimization surveys in the business sector (c) Broaden the knowledge of crime by looking at the different perspectives of victims and offenders through strengthening awareness concerning self-reported delinquency surveys (a) Establish a repository and website containing methodological documentation on victimization surveys (b) Produce guidelines on business victimization surveys (c) Collect documentation on self-reported delinquency surveys and produce a state-of-the-art research paper 3. Other data sources on crime 36. Besides traditional sources, such as police data and victimization surveys, information on criminal events can be tracked in other recording systems. For example, information on property crimes can be derived from insurance claim registration systems; indirect indicators on illicit financial flows can stem from the system of financial transactions; Internet security service providers can be a useful source of information on certain forms of cybercrime; and additional information on intentional homicides can be provided by public health institutions, through the cause-of-death registration system. 37. Accessibility to such data sources can vary significantly and their utilization should be carefully assessed on criteria of strict quality and the protection of confidentiality. These sources can substantially increase the amount of information available on selected forms of crime and they could be considered as important tools to improve the coverage of existing data. 38. The use of satellite imagery and remote sensing technologies is another approach that can complement traditional sources of crime data. This method is already used to assess the cultivation of illicit crops, such as opium poppy in South Asia and coca leaf in the Andean region. Applications of this methodology could be tested for other crimes with similar characteristics, for example in the field of crime against the environment where certain activities, such as illegal logging, mining or waste dumping, have specific physical and geographical connotations. Objective 5 Increase knowledge of the use of non-conventional sources of data on crime, from the private sector and/or from government institutions (a) Collect and disseminate documentation on good practices to measure crime through alternative data sources (b) Produce guidelines on the use of alternative sources of data on crime D. Mainstreaming gender into crime statistics 39. Major differences exist in how crime affects men and women, while there are also gender disparities in how crime is committed and how offenders are prosecuted and convicted. Offenders and victims are predominantly men for most types of crime, but women are more likely to be the victims of some specific crimes, particularly in relation to domestic and sexual violence. Traditional gender roles and discriminatory attitudes against women can also make them more vulnerable when accessing criminal justice. As reported by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) in "Progress of the World's Women: In Pursuit of Justice" (2011-2012), justice often remains out of reach when women access the justice system, particularly when crime is committed within the domestic sphere. 40. One of the first steps to make the access to justice more gender-responsive is to improve the gender relevance of crime and criminal justice statistics and obtain data that can better reflect the different roles that men and women have in committing or being victims of crime. Mainstreaming gender into crime and criminal justice statistics can also improve understanding of the reasons behind gender differences, especially when they are rooted in traditional gender roles or gender inequalities. 41. Mainstreaming gender into crime and criminal justice statistics involves two aspects: (a) ensuring that all data related to victims and offenders are disaggregated by sex; and (b) improving the collection and dissemination of data on areas where gender disparity is the element that triggers crime or where there is gender discrimination in accessing criminal justice. 42. Violence against women and girls is an extreme manifestation of gender disparity and substantial progress has been made at the international level in producing methodological guidelines on the generation of data. The Statistical Commission has developed a first set of statistical indicators to measure this type of violence and the United Nations Statistics Division is currently finalizing guidelines on how to produce data on violence against women, using population-based sample surveys. However, methodological work on how to improve the quality of administrative data (originating from the police, the criminal justice system, surveillance systems, etc.) on violence against women has not yet been undertaken at the international level. For example, to date, there is no uniform approach on how to define and count femicides. 43. Making crime statistics more gender-sensitive has often focused on the areas of violence against women and trafficking in persons. While those areas remain of great relevance and in need of attention, it should be recognized that the entire area of crime statistics needs improved gender relevance. In many cases, the data provided on victims and offenders related to arrests, prosecutions, convictions and imprisonments are not disaggregated by sex, limiting any possibility to monitor gender inequality in such areas as community safety, security, access to justice, the efficiency of the justice system and the treatment of prisoners. Contextual information on crimes (such as the relationship between victims and perpetrators) is often lacking and this hampers the possibility of measuring crime with a gender motive. 44. In order to address such shortcomings, methodological guidelines are needed to make crime statistics more gender-relevant and to mainstream gender into traditional indicators of crime and criminal justice so that prevention policies can be better targeted and equal access to justice is ensured. Objective 6 Improve the gender-relevance of crime and criminal justice statistics (a) Collect information on good practices to mainstream gender in crime and criminal justice data (b) Conduct consultations and produce a manual on "engendering" crime statistics III. Improving the capacity to produce and disseminate crime data 45. As already indicated in the report presented by INEGI at the forty-third session of the Statistical Commission, the production of statistical data on crime is still at an early stage of development in several countries for reasons of insufficient coordination among responsible agencies, insufficient implementation of statistical standards and insufficient capacity to develop and implement victimization surveys. 46. In many countries, what is referred to as a national crime and criminal justice statistical system often does not have the characteristics of a statistical system with harmonized concepts and procedures. The first step in improving the generation and public dissemination of statistical data should be the establishment or strengthening of national mechanisms for the coordination of statistical processes on crime and criminal justice. A. The role of national statistical offices 47. While the concrete forms and mechanisms to improve coordination at the national level would clearly depend on national circumstances, the national statistical office has an important role as coordinator of the national statistical system and as the promoter of statistical standards and data quality. Together with all institutions active in the field of crime statistics, the national statistical office can promote the establishment of a national statistical system on crime, where mechanisms of coordination are set up to promote: (a) The use of standard concepts and nomenclatures and the development of a national statistical classification of crime; (b) The exchange of information on recording practices and data-processing methods, and their gradual standardization; (c) Mechanisms of transmission and sharing of data; (d) Joint dissemination and publication of statistical data; (e) The inclusion of crime and criminal justice statistics in national statistical plans and strategies; (f) The capacity to produce analytical products based on crime and criminal justice data; (g) Consultation with additional data users, including research institutions, academia and other government sectors (in addition to criminal justice institutions) to further improve the quality and relevance of crime statistics. 48. While in many countries the national statistical offices have not been active in the field of crime statistics, the national statistical systems on crime could be greatly strengthened by those offices providing their technical expertise, promoting the implementation of international standards, and ensuring high levels of quality of data, including transparency and soundness of methodologies used to produce crime data. B. Capacity-building 49. Capacity-building programmes are an important element for upgrading crime statistics. Several international and regional organizations have been active in this field, including the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the World Bank, and regional organizations such as the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and have made great contributions to increasing the quality of crime statistics produced at the national level. Further strengthening and coordination of such activities are needed in order to ensure that the international community provides a uniform approach and to promote the same standards around the following five main themes: (a) Promotion of victimization surveys (targeting population and businesses); (b) Promotion of national statistical classifications in line with the international classification of crime; (c) Improvement of administrative statistics, including for unconventional crimes; (d) Provision of support to national coordination mechanisms from across national institutions involved in producing crime statistics; (e) Long-term sustainability of improved crime statistics processes, with a focus on fostering the implementation of international statistical standards. 50. The development of training curricula is a way to optimize the use of resources and promote crime statistics through standard materials that can be used by a wide range of stakeholders. While important work has been done in the area of training materials for victimization surveys, the development of similar training formats for administrative data on crime and of e-learning training platforms are additional ways to strengthen national technical capacities in crime statistics. C. Successful model of the Centre of Excellence 51. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime-INEGI Centre of Excellence for Statistical Information on Governance, Victimization, Public Security and Justice, located in Mexico City, was established at the end of 2010 to support countries in improving data collection, dissemination and analysis of statistical information in the area of crime statistics, through training and methodological research on emerging issues. In little more than a year, the Centre of Excellence has been the promoter of many initiatives that have advanced regional and global methodological work on crime statistics and have successfully supported countries in the region. Among many activities, the Centre of Excellence organized the First International Conference on Government, Public Safety, Victimization and Justice Statistics and training workshops, and provided support for the development of the international classification of crime. 52. The Centre of Excellence represents good practice, which could possibly be replicated in other regions, so that a network of regional hubs can be established to respond to the specific needs of countries, considering the various actors of national systems of crime statistics (national statistical offices, criminal justice institutions, researchers and academia). Objective 7 (a) Strengthen national coordination of parties responsible for crime and criminal justice statistics, with a view to establishing national statistical systems on crime (b) Reinforce the role of national statistical offices in the coordination of crime statistics and the implementation of surveys that can complement data from administrative sources (c) Increase national capacities to produce, disseminate and analyse crime statistics (d) Establish regional hubs to support crime statistics (a) Establish national coordination mechanisms on crime statistics at the national level (b) Include crime statistics processes and outputs in national statistical plans (c) Promote the development and implementation of regional capacity-building programmes to promote the conduct of victimization surveys and the improvement of administrative data on crime (d) Explore partnerships to build regional hubs on crime statistics (e) Develop training curricula on victimization surveys (f) Develop training curricula on administrative statistics on crime and criminal justice IV. Improving international data collections and analyses A. United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and Operations of Criminal Justice Systems 53. As noted by the Statistical Commission and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is the focal point for statistics related to crime and criminal justice in the United Nations system. The global data collection on crime and criminal justice is managed by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime through the United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and Operations of Criminal Justice Systems, which started in the 1970s and is supported by a number of resolutions adopted by the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly. The questionnaire, which is submitted to Member States every year, is composed of five main sections (police, prosecution, courts, prisons and victimization surveys) plus two specialized modules, which change every year. Data collected through the survey are regularly disseminated for public use on the website of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and are used in analytical publications such as the Global Study on Homicide. 54. While efforts have been made to improve the data-collection mechanism, the level of response to the survey is still unsatisfactory: on average, less than 50 per cent of countries return the survey every year. Given the range of data requested in the survey, its compilation involves a number of national institutions, from police, prosecutor offices, courts and prisons. In order to ensure consistency, the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 2012/18, requested Member States to appoint a national focal point to act as coordinator of the different institutions providing data and to ensure their quality and completeness. The appointment of national focal points has proven to be a useful instrument in obtaining higher response rates and quality of data. However, only 91 countries have so far appointed a focal point, of which 30 selected the national statistical office as the coordinator for the survey. 55. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has partnered with OAS to facilitate data reporting from the Americas through the training of relevant national institutions from selected countries and joint data collection. The Office is also in discussions with Eurostat regarding the coordination of data collection in Europe and the possibility of undertaking a joint data collection to reduce the response burden on countries. 56. Improving the response rate to the survey requires a reinvigorated effort by the Statistical Commission and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to encourage countries to regularly submit data to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. There is also a need to develop new partnerships with regional organizations in Africa and Asia, where the response rate is particularly low. An increased involvement of national statistical offices could also improve the needed coordination at the national level. While improving country coverage of data collected through the survey is an objective that can be achieved in the mid term, addressing the evident issues of international comparability of available data requires long-term strategies, the first element of which is the development and gradual implementation of the international classification of crime. Objective 8 Increase availability and quality of country data on crime at the international level (a) Promote the appointment of national focal points for the survey (b) Establish joint data collections on crime with regional organizations (c) Further improve accessibility to and use of data collected through the survey by means of improved web-based dissemination systems of crime statistics B. International data repositories and reporting on crime 1. Homicide statistics 57. The information on crime collected through the United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and Operations of Criminal Justice Systems produces data series that are incomplete in terms of country coverage and suffer from limited international comparability. Therefore, in 2011, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime launched the creation of a global data collection on intentional homicide which, among all forms of crime, is the one with the most valuable data series in terms of their availability, comprehensiveness and comparability. The Homicide Statistics dataset covers 207 countries/territories and is regularly updated from a variety of sources, both national and international, from either the criminal justice or the public health-care system. There are some issues regarding quality as related to discrepancies between sources and lack of data over time for some countries, and efforts need to be focused on improving the quality of data in Africa and some parts of Asia. The availability of data disaggregated by, among other factors, sex, age, modality or context, as it relates to homicide, is also limited since many countries cannot provide such a level of detail. That aspect needs substantial attention, since data on homicide, disaggregated by relevant characteristics, can provide useful information on the underlying causes of homicide and can better target programmes to prevent it. 2. Expanding the international repository of crime data with global coverage 58. The availability of a solid data set on homicide has allowed the international community to have a quantitative reference for measuring crime. But, while homicide may provide good proxy information for violent crime, it does not cover other forms of crime, which are equally in need of being measured on a global scale. Gradually, with the improvement of data availability and comparability on other forms of crime produced by administrative sources, and the gradual expansion of data from victimization surveys, international data series for global analyses and reporting on crime trends are set to improve and increase. 59. Violence against women is an area that should also be considered for inclusion in global data repositories on crime. Thanks to some recent initiatives, data on violence against women are now available for selected countries and on selected forms of violence. However, there is not yet a global data repository that is updated on a regular basis and where data on a range of various types of violence against women can be easily accessed and retrieved. One of the first steps to improve the global coverage of data on violence against women could be the refining of data on homicide to distinguish femicide. 3. Global analysis on crime levels and trends 60. Many intergovernmental bodies (including the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice) have requested the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to provide crime trend analysis, and the Office published the first Global Study on Homicide in 2011, on the basis of the Homicide Statistics dataset. The study included a comparative statistical analysis of homicide at the regional and global scale, which described the population groups most at risk of violent crime and highlighted the relationship between violent crime and development, organized crime, firearms and domestic violence. The study proved to be a useful tool for disseminating the dataset and extracting statistical information relevant to policymaking. 61. The regular publication of reports based on statistical analysis of crime is an important activity for making global datasets on crime more accessible and relevant to users. Such efforts can also trigger processes at the national and international levels to enhance the quality and coverage of existing data. 4. Instruments for monitoring security, justice and the rule of law in the context of the development agenda beyond 2015 62. The development agenda beyond 2015 has not yet been defined, but there are ongoing formal and informal discussions on how the new development framework may be structured and what major goals could be put at its core. While proposals have not yet been agreed upon, security, access to justice and the rule of law are among the themes that are being discussed as constituent parts of a new development agenda. If these topics are to be included in the new development framework, it is important that statistics are ready to provide an adequate baseline for possible targets and indicators at the national and international levels. 63. To reach this purpose it would be beneficial to convene an expert group meeting composed by statisticians and analysts from national statistical offices, national criminal justice institutions, regional and international organizations, research institutions and academia to discuss concepts, statistical methods, data and indicators related to the areas of security, access to justice and the rule of law. The result of such a consultation could be presented to as part of relevant processes and to actors engaged in shaping the development framework beyond 2015. Objective 9 (a) Improve the geographical and thematic coverage of international datasets on crime and criminal justice (b) Provide global statistical analysis of crime and criminal justice (c) Provide tools to monitor security, access to justice and the rule of law to inform the debate on the development framework beyond 2015 (a) Expand coverage and comprehensiveness of the Homicide Statistics Dataset to cover specific forms of homicide, such as femicide (b) Expand data series on other forms of crime to reach global coverage (c) Conduct training workshops on the United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and Operations of Criminal Justice Systems and homicide data, with priority given to training in Africa and Asia (d) Develop a global repository of data regarding violence against women (e) Continue the regular production of the Global Study on Homicide (f) Produce reports that can provide statistical analysis of data collected at the regional or global level (g) Expert group meeting on concepts, statistical methods, data and indicators related to the areas of security, access to justice and the rule of law (h) Proposal for statistical indicators and related methodology in the areas of security, access to justice and the rule of law for the development framework beyond 2015 V. Implementing the road map, a joint effort of the Statistical Commission and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 64. The road map outlined in the present paper proposes that several activities and a considerable number of outputs be produced through the coordinated action of a number of stakeholders, both at the national and international levels. It is acknowledged that the successful roll-out of the proposed plan is subject to the availability of sufficient resources and the commitment of relevant counterparts. 65. At the international level, numerous organizations are active in fields related to crime statistics and will be involved, according to their mandates and areas of expertise, including UNDP, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the institutes of the crime prevention and criminal justice programme network, the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and regional organizations such as regional commissions, the European Commission, OAS and IADB. 66. At the national level, the group of stakeholders that needs to be involved to ensure substantial improvement in statistical processes on crime includes the national statistical offices, the institutions of the criminal justice system (police, prosecutors, courts and prisons) and other relevant bodies such as anti-corruption agencies, national financial authorities and public health authorities, which are relevant for specific forms of crime. 67. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime-INEGI Centre of Excellence for Statistical Information on Governance, Victimization, Public Security and Justice is a privileged partner for the implementation of the road map, especially in promoting methodological research on crime statistics, facilitating the production of methodological standards and guidelines and for capacity-building programmes. The creation of other centres of the kind is needed to boost the implementation of the road map. 68. A biennial international conference on crime statistics can also support the implementation of the road map. Considering the success of the first international conference on crime statistics, this could be a forum where all national and international constituencies (research institutions, national statistical offices, national crime and criminal justice institutions, non-governmental organizations and international organizations) can informally discuss the key elements of the road map. 69. Following the request made by the Statistical Commission and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to find mechanisms where the two commissions can cooperate, it is proposed that the road map be reviewed jointly by the two commissions and that the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime regularly report to both commissions on the state of implementation of the road map. 70. Furthermore, it is proposed that expert group meetings be organized regularly under the auspices of two commissions. It is expected that statisticians or analysts from national statistical offices, national government institutions, regional and international organizations and from academia and research institutions who are involved in the recording, dissemination and analysis of crime and criminal justice data would discuss and review the activities developed under the road map and provide their expert advice at the meetings. VI. Points for discussion 71. The Statistical Commission may wish to: (a) Recommend the implementation of the proposed road map and indicate priority areas and ways to facilitate the coordination of the numerous stakeholders involved; (b) Review and approve the proposed course of action to develop and finalize the International Classification of Crime, due to be submitted to the Statistical Commission at its forty-sixth session, in 2015; (c) Invite national statistical offices to consider their role and mandate in the production and dissemination of crime statistics, to promote initiatives to foster the coordination of national institutions involved in crime statistics and to implement victimization surveys, in view of promoting the establishment or strengthening of national statistical systems on crime; (d) Review the proposed mechanism to foster the collaboration with the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice and consider ways to further strengthen such a partnership with a view to improving the quality of statistics on crime and criminal justice; (e) Support the organization of the second international conference on crime statistics in 2014; (f) Ask the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to report to the Statistical Commission, at its forty-sixth session, on the state of implementation of the road map. Actions and outputs with higher priority Areas Topics Proposed actions/outputs Lead Other relevant stakeholders Improving methodologies International Classification of Crime :: Development, testing and finalization of the international classification of crime (to be endorsed in 2015) United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Statistical Commission, United Nations Statistics Division, Centre of Excellence, regional commissions, regional organizations :: Organized crime: development of statistical framework United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Centre of Excellence National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) :: Corruption: guidelines for population-based sample surveys National statistical offices, anti-corruption and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, United Nations Development Programme, World Bank :: Trafficking in persons: good practices to improve administrative data National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, International Organization for Migration, International Labour Organization :: Environmental crime: improvement of administrative data and testing of new approaches to produce data National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, United Nations Environment Programme Administrative data :: Guidelines on statistical indicators for access to justice, efficiency of the criminal justice system and crime prevention National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, international and regional organizations, Centre of Excellence Sample surveys on crime :: Guidelines for business victimization surveys National statistical offices of interested countries :: Library of methodological documentation on victimization surveys Centre of Excellence National statistical offices, regional commissions, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Gender in crime data :: Manual on "engendering" crime statistics United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), national statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, regional commissions Improving the capacity National level :: National coordination mechanisms on crime statistics National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries Regional and international levels :: Development of training curricula on victimization surveys and administrative data National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, regional organizations :: Promoting regional capacity-building programmes Regional organizations National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Centre of Excellence Improving international data collection and analysis :: Appointment of national focal points National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of Member States :: Partnership with regional organizations :: Improvement of geographical and thematic coverage of statistics on homicide and other forms of crime National statistical offices, criminal justice and public health institutions of interested countries, World Health Organization, regional organizations, research centres, INTERPOL :: Development of a global repository of data regarding violence against women UN-Women :: Regular production of Global Study on Homicide National statistical offices, criminal justice and public health institutions of interested countries :: Proposal on statistical indicators in the areas of security, access to justice and the rule of law for the development framework beyond 2015 United Nations Development Programme, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, World Health Organization, UN-Women, national statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries, regional organizations Road map implementation Milestones :: Report to the forty-sixth session of the Statistical Commission and twenty-fourth session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (2015) Statistical Commission, Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, United Nations Statistics Division :: Report to forty-eighth session of the Statistical Commission and twenty-sixth session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (2017) Statistical Commission , Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice :: Second international conference on crime statistics Volunteer country (to be identified) Regional organizations, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Centre of Excellence :: Organized crime: improvement of existing administrative data United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, (INTERPOL) :: Corruption: improvement of existing administrative data and development of methodologies regarding corruption as it affects business, public administration and political processes :: Trafficking in persons: development of statistical surveys :: Smuggling of migrants: improvement of administrative data and testing of statistical surveys :: Cybercrime: improvement of administrative data and testing of statistical surveys National statistical offices and other stakeholders of interested countries, International Telecommunication Union, regional organizations, Centre of Excellence :: Money-laundering: improvement of administrative data and development of indirect estimation methods National statistical offices and other stakeholders of interested countries, International Monetary Fund, regional organizations :: Compendium on good practices to improve administrative data on crime :: Review of self-reported delinquency surveys Research centres Other data sources on crime :: Good practices on the use of alternative sources of data on crime Centre of Excellence, national statistical offices and criminal justice institutions of interested countries :: Include crime statistics in national statistical master plans National statistical offices and criminal justice institutions at country level Regional and international level :: Establish regional hubs on crime statistics Centre of Excellence, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other partners :: Improve accessibility to crime data through web-based dissemination database :: Conduct training workshops (priority in Africa and Asia) :: Production of other studies on crime, at the global and regional levels 