%%%AGEING|AGEING PERSONS|POVERTY MITIGATION|

Commission for Social Development Fifty-first session 6-15 February 2013 Follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development and the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly: priority theme: promoting empowerment of people in achieving poverty eradication, social integration and full employment and decent work for all Statement submitted by International Federation on Ageing, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. The International Federation on Ageing is a global membership network of Governments, non-governmental organizations, industry, academia and individuals that aims to improve the quality of life of older people through advocacy for policy change. Through its biennial conferences and regional meetings, the Federation creates platforms for the exchange of information and creation of new and innovative partnerships on ageing-related issues. Some 17 years ago, the World Summit for Social Development recognized that people living in poverty and vulnerable groups must be empowered through organization and participation in all aspects of political, economic and social life, in particular in the planning and implementation of policies that affected them. This goal has yet to be reached. The position of older persons in many societies throughout the world has been undermined by such factors as emigration of younger family members both within their home countries and to other nations, the increase in the nuclear family and perceived barriers to the employment of older workers, to mention but a few. The result has been a devaluing of the knowledge and experience of older persons and, as a consequence, a reduction in their societal roles and their disempowerment. Empowerment has many interpretations, both in concept and in practice. For older persons, however, it is usually dependent upon their ability to provide for themselves and to make choices about their lives and priorities. While the empowerment of older persons has in general been affected by the above-mentioned societal changes, there is also an almost impenetrable barrier to achieving empowerment on the part of older people who live in poverty. Poverty is more than a lack of financial resources. It isolates and marginalizes. It is a serious threat to the well-being of older persons and to their physical and mental health, their dignity and their ability to participate fully in society. Moreover, it has a strong gender dimension. In 2001, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights defined poverty as a human condition characterized by sustained or chronic deprivation of the resources, capabilities, choices, security and power necessary for the enjoyment of an adequate standard of living and other civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights (see E/C.12/2001/10, para. 8). In its recent publication Ageing in the Twenty-First Century: A Celebration and a Challenge, the United Nations Population Fund states that, on average, existing studies suggest that older people, and people living in households with an older person, face levels of poverty higher than the 20 per cent of the world's population who live below the poverty line. A review of existing survey evidence from Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa indicates that older persons are overrepresented among the poor in the majority of the countries surveyed. Other studies have shown a relationship between elderly poverty and social exclusion, including that of political participation and of social networks. Moreover, as further indicated in the publication, an increasing number of older people across geographic regions face discrimination, isolation and neglect. Without specific measures to guarantee inclusion and autonomy, older people cease to exercise or enjoy their human rights. In 2002, the representatives of Governments meeting at the Second World Assembly on Ageing in Madrid issued a political declaration in which they recognized that persons, as they aged, should enjoy a life of fulfilment, health, security and active participation in the life of their societies (art. 5) and stated that the empowerment of older persons and the promotion of their full participation were essential elements for active ageing (art. 12). They undertook to promote independence, accessibility and the empowerment of older persons to participate fully in all aspects of society (art. 14). The Second World Assembly on Ageing also produced the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, which sets forth goals to help to achieve the commitments endorsed by Member States. It has the eradication of poverty as one of its main objectives, since older persons in many parts of the world are excluded from policies and programmes focused on poverty eradication. There is a need for innovative programmes to empower older persons, especially women, while reducing poverty among the elderly overall. If older persons are to be full citizens and participating members of their societies, they must have a standard of living that enables them to become participants. Living in poverty overwhelms their ability to achieve this status. Unless the issue of elder poverty is addressed, there remains the very real fact that empowerment of the world's growing older population will become a reality for too few. 