%%%GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE|

Commission on the Status of Women Fifty-seventh session 4-15 March 2013 Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and to the special session of the General Assembly entitled "Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century": implementation of strategic objectives and action in critical areas of concern and further actions and initiatives Statement submitted by Dhammakaya Foundation, a nongovernmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. Meditation as an integral part of the healing and regenerative process in the elimination and prevention of violence against women and girls According to Luang Phaw Dhammajayo, the president of the Dhammakaya Foundation, Thailand, all people are from one family. Accordingly, we breathe the same air, drink water under a single sky, behold the same sun, moon and stars and will live together in this world from our birth until the last second of our lives. The issues to be examined in the five panel presentations are both timely and thought-provoking. Statistical evidence corroborates the alarming extent of violence against women throughout the world. Rates of recidivism also indicate that offenders do not reform but continue to violate the law. The fifty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status of Women provides compelling evidence, offers strategies for combating the growing violence against women and girls and highlights steps leading towards gender equality. Effective educational models remain seminal. Analysis of research needs to be supported and continued. The inclusion of youth in global forums needs to be expanded. A critical element appears to be lacking in all the solutions posited. At the same time, we need to examine the causes of repeated offences against women. Policies and laws may serve as deterrents to persons of conscience, but how does one penetrate the mind of a person operating from a cycle of generational violence? Some might argue that the focus should perhaps be on the offenders rather than on the victims. An offender might perhaps be led to reform if able to see the connectivity between self, family, community and world through a meditation model that is accessible and attainable. In order to advance to that goal, we need to turn to the personal level: the child or woman who was violated, mutilated or otherwise fractured. What corrective measures can be provided to ensure a successful reintegration into society, not only for that child or woman but also for her family, community and world? How can she become whole again? How can we anticipate the problem by creating awareness, a methodology and a model for implementation? It is our contention that the process must begin from within. We can regain functionality in a world perceived as hostile and brutal only by restoring our faith, trust, self-respect, love and compassion and by learning to follow a path of forgiveness and self-love, leading to inner peace and, ultimately, world peace. Meditation and self-development programmes can serve as a solution that can start from the home, school or community. We can open our home to be a home of light and offer children the possibility to learn basic meditation and basic morality. Dhammakaya meditation centres are found in more than 100 locations worldwide, offering basic meditation and youth programmes for self-development. Such programmes lead youth to peace of mind, compassion, sharing and universal love, enabling them to live together in harmony. When our world can discover peace of mind, women and girls will all be treated with dignity and love. 