%%%GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES|STANDARDIZATION|

Tenth United Nations Conference on the Standardization of Geographical Names New York, 31 July-9 August 2012 * E/CONF.101/1. ** The full report was prepared by the Iranian Committee for Standardization of Geographical Names, National Cartographic Centre, and is available in the language of submission only from http://unstats.un.org/unsd/geoinfo/UNGEGN/ungegnConf10.html. Item 5 of the provisional agenda* Reports on the work of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names, its divisions, working groups and task teams since the Ninth Conference Activities of the Asia South-West Division (other than Arabic) of the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names Summary** Given their historical background, geographical connections and language ties, the member States of the Asia South-West Division (other than Arabic) are profoundly linked to each other in cultural and social areas, where place names and geographical features play a significant role in connecting the nations of the region. Cooperation between the member States of the Division in academic and technical areas for standardization of geographical names and use of standardized names can play a significant role in the implementation and development of a regional spatial data infrastructure. Thus, the extension of regional cooperation in this area will be very important in terms of the economic development and progress of the region. Based on this view, the Islamic Republic of Iran, as chair of the Division, is making its best efforts to promote a culture for the production, recording and consistent publishing of correct geographical names in the region. To date, numerous measures have been adopted to make progress in the standardization of geographical names at the regional level. In addition to meetings of the Division, usually held as side events at United Nations conferences and sessions, the eighth and ninth regional meetings have also been held in the Islamic Republic of Iran. In regard to academic collaboration between the member States of the Division, a training course was organized for experts of the Afghan Geodesy and Cartography Head Office and a workshop, entitled "Establishment of a regional geographical names database", was held in Tehran by the National Cartographic Centre of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Representatives of member States of the Division met to follow up on regional activities at side events of the first meeting of the heads of surveying and mapping organizations of the Economic Cooperation Organization and the second international conference and exhibition on mapping and spatial information in Tehran. 