%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|REPORT PREPARATION|REPORTING PROCEDURES|WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS|

United Nations FCCC/SBI/2012/18 Distr.: General 27 September 2012 Original: English Subsidiary Body for Implementation Thirty-seventh session Doha, 26 November to 1 December 2012 Item 4(a) of the provisional agenda National communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention Progress report on the work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention: report on the hands-on training workshop for the Latin America and Caribbean region on mitigation assessment Note by the secretariat Summary The Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE) conducted a hands-on training workshop for the Latin America and Caribbean region on mitigation assessment in Saint Mary's, Antigua and Barbuda, from 16 to 20 July 2012. This report outlines the proceedings of the workshop and summarizes the presentations and the feedback on and recommendations regarding the workshop received from the participants, the updated CGE training materials and other issues relating to the preparation of national communications. Paragraphs Page Mandate The Conference of the Parties (COP), by decision 5/CP.15, reconstituted the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE) for the period 2010 - 2012 in order to improve the process of the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties). The terms of reference of the CGE are operationalized through its work programme for 2010 - 2012 developed at its first meeting, held in March 2010. The work programme was welcomed and taken note of by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) at its thirty-second session. In accordance with its work programme referred to in paragraph 2 above, the CGE, with the assistance of the secretariat, held a hands-on training workshop for the Latin America and Caribbean region on mitigation assessment, in Saint Mary's, Antigua and Barbuda, from 16 to 20 July 2012 with a view to enhancing the capacity of national experts from the region to prepare their national communications, particularly the mitigation assessment component. By decision 5/CP.15, the COP requested the secretariat to facilitate the work of the CGE by organizing meetings and workshops and compiling reports of its meetings and workshops for consideration by the SBI. Possible action by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation The SBI, having considered this report, may wish to note the recommendations of the workshop participants and provide further guidance to the CGE on the provision of technical assistance to non-Annex I Parties in preparing their national communications. Proceedings of the workshop Opening of the workshop The hands-on training workshop for the Latin America and Caribbean region on mitigation assessment was hosted by the Ministry of Agriculture, Lands, Housing and the Environment, Antigua and Barbuda, from 16 to 20 July 2012, in Saint Mary's. The meeting was addressed by Mr. Hilson Baptiste, Minister of Agriculture, Lands, Housing and the Environment of Antigua and Barbuda, and Mr. Robelto Issac, Permanent Secretary of the same ministry. In his keynote address, Mr. Baptiste welcomed the participants to Antigua and Barbuda and highlighted the voluntary commitments and projects Antigua and Barbuda has taken on to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Ms. Ruleta Camacho (Antigua and Barbuda), Chair of the CGE, gave the opening statement. She welcomed the participants and informed them about key mandates of the CGE, including the provision of technical assistance by the group to non-Annex I Parties on the process of, and preparation of, national communications and the process of updating its training materials on national GHG inventories, vulnerability and adaptation assessment, and mitigation assessment, which are being used at the various regional hands-on training workshops organized by the CGE with the assistance of the secretariat. She thanked the secretariat for facilitating remote participation through the use of a videoconferencing tool, WebEx, and hoped that the online participants would be able to benefit from the workshop despite the inadequate Internet facilities in some countries of the region. A representative of the secretariat outlined the objectives of the workshop and provided a brief overview of its organization. The objectives of the workshop were as follows: To build the capacity of the national experts of non-Annex I Parties in the Latin America and Caribbean region to undertake mitigation assessment, and to report it in their national communications, by introducing them to recent scientific knowledge and various tools and methodologies; To seek feedback on the draft updated CGE training materials on mitigation assessment in order to improve them further; To serve as a platform for the exchange of views among the participants and with the experts. A total of 24 national experts from 21 non-Annex I Parties and three members of the CGE attended the workshop. The workshop was held with the financial support of the European Union. An average of 30 participants took part in the workshop daily online through the use of WebEx. Organization of the work The hands-on training workshop, conducted over five days, comprised seven modules as follows: The first module was an introductory module, which provided a general overview of the scientific basis of climate change and the context for addressing climate change; The second module focused on mitigation in the context of the national communications of non-Annex I Parties and shared with the participants past experiences and lesson learned in conducting mitigation assessment. This module also included country presentations, in which representatives of seven countries from the region presented their experience in conducting mitigation assessment in the context of the preparation of their national communications; The third module presented the participants with the purpose and objectives of mitigation assessment and a step-by-step approach to conducting it. It also included a group exercise, in which the participants developed mitigation cost curves and mitigation potentials for various GHG mitigation policies in a fictitious country; The fourth module included lectures on mitigation options, issues and barriers by sector and involved a group exercise in which the participants performed screening of GHG mitigation options using multicriteria analysis; The fifth module introduced the participants to commonly used methods and modelling tools that can be applied when undertaking mitigation assessment. The participants again worked in groups to construct a simple mitigation scenario using the Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning System (LEAP); The sixth module consisted of presentations on reporting mitigation assessment in national communications as per the "Guidelines for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention" (hereinafter referred to as the UNFCCC guidelines for the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties); The last module presented the participants with an example of a documentation toolkit that interested countries may use for developing and maintaining the mitigation assessment process; Finally, there was an interactive discussion moderated by the Chair of the CGE in which the participants discussed issues relating to the national communication process. They also provided recommendations on possible ways to further improve the CGE training materials and on how future regional workshops could be conducted. The training, which included hands-on practical sessions, was conducted by resource persons and CGE members using the draft updated CGE training materials. Summary of presentations Mitigating climate change The first module provided a general overview of the scientific basis of climate change and the context for addressing climate change. It presented information on climate change, GHG emission sources and sinks, and the potential benefits of mitigation activities, including the interaction between mitigation, adaptation and development. Mitigation in the context of national communications This module covered an introduction to climate change and mitigation in the context of the Convention, particularly focusing on mitigation in the context of national communications, experiences and lessons learned in reporting mitigation, and recent developments related to mitigation. It provided the participants with the context for undertaking and reporting mitigation assessment in the national communications from non-Annex I Parties. In doing so, the presentation outlined the benefits of the process of, and preparation of, national communications and of the national communication report itself. It provided an overview of the main components of national communications from non-Annex I Parties, guidelines used for the preparation of national communications and some examples of information contained in the mitigation chapters of the national communications from some Parties in the region. The presentation also provided a summary of lessons learned and experiences reported in the national communications on designing and implementing mitigation assessments and communicating the results. Lastly, the presentation provided an overview of decisions adopted by the COP at its seventeenth session that are relevant to mitigation, such as those on the biennial update reports, international consultation and analysis, nationally appropriate mitigation actions (NAMAs) and the NAMA registry. Representatives of Argentina, Belize, Brazil, Chile, Jamaica, Peru and Uruguay presented their national perspectives on information on mitigation reported in their latest national communications or latest results of any work on the mitigation assessment, institutional arrangements put in place to generate the required information on mitigation to be reported in the latest national communications, challenges and barriers encountered, and how they were overcome, and lessons learned and the way forward. This was followed by a question and answer session during which other participants also presented their national experiences. Mitigation assessment: concepts, structure and steps This session provided an overview on the purpose of, and step-by-step guidance and key design considerations involved in conducting, a GHG mitigation assessment and on the issues involved in building upon these assessments to create more detailed national climate action plans. The main steps for conducting mitigation assessments include the following: Determining and prioritizing the objectives of the assessment and defining the key participants and stakeholders; Defining the scope of the assessment; Selecting the assessment methodology; Collecting and calibrating data and assumptions; Developing baseline scenarios; Identifying and screening mitigation options; Developing and assessing mitigation scenarios. The session also covered a brief overview of the linkage between mitigation assessment, GHG inventories, and vulnerability and adaptation assessment. The participants were provided with a list of resources for planning and undertaking mitigation assessments. Mitigation options, issues and barriers by sector This module provided the participants with an overview of GHG emission sources, trends and drivers by sector and region, technologies and practices that reduce GHG emissions, policies and measures that lead to the adoption and implementation of those technologies and practices, and common barriers and potential solutions. The participants engaged in an exercise identifying mitigation potentials by sector in their respective countries and potential barriers to realizing those potentials. Mitigation analysis: methods and tools This module introduced the participants to commonly used methods and modelling tools that can be applied when conducting mitigation assessments. It discussed the advantages, limitations and drawbacks of different mitigation assessment approaches. The participants were introduced to software and/or tools designed for mitigation assessment in the energy sector at the national level and that are widely applied in a variety of international settings and have been thoroughly tested and generally found to be credible. The session also included an overview on the general steps involved in conducting mitigation assessments in the non-energy sectors. Reporting mitigation in national communications This module provided the participants with an overview of reporting mitigation in national communications in accordance with the UNFCCC guidelines for the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties contained in decision 17/CP.8. The presentation outlined the principal objectives of the UNFCCC guidelines for the preparation of national communications from non-Annex I Parties and the reporting of mitigation-related information in national communications. In addition, the presentation also included a few examples of good practices on reporting, including an illustration of the different ways of presenting the results of the GHG inventory, mitigation options that could be considered and associated marginal abatement cost curves. The presentation also included information on biennial update reports, particularly the scope of those reports. Building national arrangements for the mitigation assessment The last module presented the participants with an example of a documentation toolkit that interested Parties may use for developing and maintaining the mitigation assessment process, which covers the following: institutional arrangements; reporting; quality control; data management; documentation; and improvement plans. The expected benefits of this toolkit are a reduction in the effort required by future teams to develop and undertake mitigation assessments and the promotion of consistency within and among reports over time. Hands-on exercises The participants also engaged in three sessions of an interactive hands-on exercise using a case study to conduct mitigation assessment, as outlined below: Firstly, conducting a simple static screening of mitigation options, which consisted of two basic parts: calculating, using a simple spreadsheet, some of the main quantitative indicators used in a mitigation screening, including the GHG emission reduction potential from each mitigation option and the costs; and examining those results carefully with a qualitative assessment of various screening criteria in order to develop an overall screening matrix; Secondly, building upon the data and results developed for screening and, using LEAP, creating a simple GHG mitigation scenario and reproducing various reports of the type that could be included when reporting on mitigation assessment in national communications; Finally, conducting a cost - benefit analysis using LEAP, in which the costs of the various policies and measures employed in the mitigation scenario are quantified and compared with the `do nothing' baseline scenario. Feedback and recommendations During this interactive discussion session the participants provided feedback on ways to enhance the provision of capacity-building support to non-Annex I Parties to improve the process of, and preparation of, their national communications. In addition, the participants were also requested to complete a short feedback form at the end of the workshop every day to find out what they viewed to be useful with regard to the day's training and the training materials used. Overall, the participants expressed that the hands-on training workshop met their expectations. The participants found the following to be useful aspects of the workshop: Introduction to the steps involved in undertaking mitigation assessments, including developing mitigation scenarios, identifying mitigation options and barriers taking into consideration the national circumstances, how these barriers can be overcome, the application of policy instruments to specific technologies and the application of mitigation assessments in national developments plans; The hands-on training sessions undertaking simple GHG mitigation assessments, including the use of LEAP, and accessing various online databases; Information on the financial mechanism of the Convention, and procedures on how Parties can access and apply for funding, specifically for the preparation of national communications and biennial update reports; The guidance and additional information provided for the preparation of national communications and biennial update reports, including the different reporting processes involved; The various methods of how Parties can present information and results in their national communications, and different templates for organizing, collecting and archiving data used during the national communication process and possible institutional arrangements during such a process; Country presentations, and exchanges of experiences among the participants and with the CGE members and the resource persons; The list of available software and/or tools designed for mitigation assessment. In addition to the daily feedback received from the participants, an online survey was conducted at the end of the workshop to gather general feedback from the participants, including those who took part remotely. Thirty participants responded to the online survey. The online survey results showed that the majority of the participants who took part in the survey found the content of the workshop to be helpful and relevant to their area of work, as shown by the figure below. Note: Module A = mitigating climate change; Module B = mitigation in the context of national communications; Module C = mitigation assessment: concepts, structure and steps; Module D = mitigation options, issues and barriers by sector; Module E = mitigation analysis: methods and tools; Module F = reporting mitigation in national communications; Module G = building national arrangements for the mitigation assessment. Recommendations The participants made the following recommendations to improve the training materials and the structure and content of future workshops: Focus more on the discussions and examples for selecting appropriate mitigation methods and different types of models used for mitigation assessment, including exploring the usefulness of how these models work in the absence of sufficient national data; Further improve the instruction manual used for the hands-on training exercises with a glossary of basic concepts, and improve the readability and transparency of formulas and conversion factors used in the material for the hands-on training exercises; Provide more cases studies or examples from the region addressing the synergies between mitigation and adaptation assessment; Include more examples of mitigation options and recommendations that are relevant to the region; Allocate more time to hands-on training exercises; Address the evolving needs of non-Annex I Parties, with an emphasis on moving from mitigation assessment to the implementation of identified mitigation options; Establish a network of national experts involved in the national communication process; Translate and disseminate the CGE training materials into other United Nations languages in order to increase their usefulness at the national level, especially when workshop participants need to share those training materials with national experts in the process of the preparation of national communications. Conclusion The participants were appreciative of the training course and thanked the CGE and the secretariat for organizing the workshop and the Government of Antigua and Barbuda and the people of Antigua and Barbuda for the warm welcome accorded to them and for hosting the workshop and providing excellent facilities. The participants also thanked those Parties and organizations that funded the workshop. Ms. Camacho closed the workshop by thanking the participants, the trainers, the other CGE members and the secretariat for a successful workshop. 