%%%HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY|ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE|HUMAN RIGHTS ADVANCEMENT|STATISTICAL DATA|SOCIO-ECONOMIC INDICATORS|LIECHTENSTEIN|SIGNATURES, ACCESSIONS, RATIFICATIONS|

United Nations HRI/CORE/LIE/2012 International Human Rights Instruments Distr.: General 22 October 2012 Original: English Common Core document forming part of the reports of States parties Liechtenstein* [7 February 2012] Paragraphs Page I. Introduction 1 - 3 3 II. General information about Liechtenstein 4 - 99 3 A. Geographical, economic, demographic, social and cultural characteristics 4 - 50 3 B. Constitutional, political and legal structure of the State 51 - 99 18 III. General framework for the protection and promotion of human rights 101 - 154 26 A. Acceptance of international human rights norms 101 - 102 26 B. Legal framework for the protection of human rights at the national level 103 - 117 33 C. Framework within which human rights are promoted at the national level 118 - 132 36 D. Reporting process at the national level 133 - 135 38 IV. Information on non-discrimination and equality, and effective remedies 136 - 154 38 I. Introduction 1. The protection and promotion of human rights are a focus area of the foreign policy of the Principality of Liechtenstein. On the one hand, this is demonstrated by the fact that Liechtenstein is a State Party to many international and regional instruments. On the other hand, this engagement is expressed in Liechtenstein's active participation in the relevant bodies of the United Nations, the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Also, by way of development cooperation, Liechtenstein strives to support organizations and initiatives in a targeted manner which endeavour to improve the implementation and promotion of human rights. 2. As a State Party to various international human rights treaties, the Principality of Liechtenstein undertakes to report regularly to the relevant monitoring bodies on its implementation of and compliance with these treaties. The present document contains core information on the Principality of Liechtenstein and on the general framework relevant to the protection and promotion of human rights in Liechtenstein. This core document shall be used for all reports submitted to the international treaty bodies. In each case, it will supplemented by the treaty-specific reports. 3. To compile the present core document, data from various administrative and judicial authorities as well as private organizations in the Principality of Liechtenstein were used. At the time the document was compiled, these figures were the most current available. Because of the different times at which the data were gathered, however, the currency of the information may vary considerably. II. General information about Liechtenstein A. Geographical, economic, demographic, social and cultural characteristics 1. Geography 4. The national territory of the Principality of Liechtenstein is situated between Switzerland and Austria, extending over an area of 160 km2. Liechtenstein consists of 11 municipalities, the largest of which has nearly 6,000 inhabitants. One quarter of the national territory is in the Rhine Valley plain, while the remaining three quarters are on the slopes rising from the Rhine Valley and in the inner Alpine zone. The capital and seat of Government is Vaduz. 2. Economics Economic area 5. Since the entry into force of the Customs Treaty in 1924, Liechtenstein has constituted a common economic area with Switzerland. The border between the two States is open. In 1980, Liechtenstein and Switzerland concluded a Currency Treaty, under which Liechtenstein - which has used the Swiss franc as its legal tender since 1921 - is integrated into Switzerland's currency area while maintaining its monetary sovereignty in principle. Additionally, Liechtenstein has been a member of the European Economic Area (EEA) since 1995, in which it forms a unified single market together with the European Union (EU) member States as well as Norway and Iceland. As a consequence of EU enlargement in 2007, the EEA also expanded to what the current 30 States. 6. In principle, the four freedoms of the EU apply throughout the EEA, guaranteeing the free movement of goods, persons, services and capital among the Contracting Parties. The EEA excludes agricultural policy, fisheries policy, the economic and currency union, common tax policy, foreign and security policy as well as police and judicial cooperation. National account 7. Liechtenstein is a modern industrial and services State with worldwide links. The foundations of its economic success over the past decades have been favourable business conditions thanks to liberal economic laws, a high degree of political stability, modern infrastructure and a high level of education. Table 1 Development of gross domestic product and gross national income Gross domestic product Gross national income Year M CHF Change over previous year in % Per employed person in 1000 CHF Employed persons are calculated as the annual average of full-time equivalents 8. Converted into the artificial currency "purchasing power standards (PPS)", per capital gross national income (GNI) was PPS 70,000 in 2007. Compared internationally, Liechtenstein has one of the highest GNIs per capita. Economic structure Figure 1 Share of sectors in gross value added, 2008 9. Liechtenstein exhibits a broadly diversified economic structure. Compared with other national economies, Liechtenstein has a strongly industrial economy. The highly productive, globally oriented industrial sector contributed 36% to gross added value in 2008. Relative to the size of the country, a substantial number of internationally significant industrial enterprises have been founded in Liechtenstein or are domiciled here. Some of these enterprises are world market leaders in their sectors. Liechtenstein industry is characterized by a high degree of specialization and innovative strength. 10. The second strong pillar of Liechtenstein's economy is its services sector. Liechtenstein is home to highly professional service enterprises, especially in the financial sector. The financial sector consists primarily of banks, insurances, fiduciary companies and investment companies. 11. Together, financial services and general services generated 58% of Liechtenstein's gross added value in 2008. Their broad diversification has been and continues to be the key to the steady, crisis-resistant growth of Liechtenstein's economy. Finally, the agricultural and households sector contributed 6% to gross added value in 2008. Employment structure Table 2 Number of full-time and part-time workers by sector (as of 31.12.2009) Employed persons Total Percentage Employed inhabitants Cross-border commuters Men Women Agriculture, forestry and fishery Industry Services Table 3 Share of cross-border commuters since 1930 Domicile of persons employed in Liechtenstein Liechtenstein Foreign country Share of cross-border commuters Unemployment 12. Compared internationally, Liechtenstein's unemployment rate is very low. The unemployment rate of 15-24 year olds and of foreigners is slightly higher than the national average. Table 4 Unemployment rate 2006-2010 (as of 31.12.2010) by gender, age and nationality (in percent) Age Liechtenstein citizens Foreigners Unemployment rate 2006 Unemployment rate 2007 Unemployment rate 2008 Unemployment rate 2009 Unemployment rate 2010 13. Every person employed in Liechtenstein is mandatorily insured against the risk of unemployment. Employers and employees must each pay 0.5% of the insured income to the Unemployment Insurance (Arbeitslosenversicherung (ALV)). No contributions are made on salary components exceeding CHF 126,000. The benefits of Unemployment Insurance include unemployment compensation, compensation for short-time work, compensation for bad weather, and compensation in the event of insolvency of the employer. 14. Every person who is fully or partially unemployed and has paid contributions to Unemployment Insurance for at least 12 months is entitled to unemployment compensation. The amount of the compensation is at most 80% of the insured income and is paid out for 130 to 500 days, depending on the contribution period and age. 15. In addition to financial support for unemployed persons, several measures to support job-seekers exist in Liechtenstein. The Liechtenstein Labour Market Service, which is affiliated with the Office of Economic Affairs, offers various services for unemployed persons, such as counselling and support in the job search as well as continuing training programmes. The Labour Market Service also strives to actively match jobs with job seekers. State finances Table 5 Development of national budget from 1995 to 2009 In million CHF Current expenditures Current revenue Cash flow Depreciation of assets of the Administration Result of current account 16. Since the Second World War, Liechtenstein's economy has developed positively almost without interruption. This has entailed that Liechtenstein has no national debt to date. The current account has in the past always closed with a revenue surplus, with the exception of 2008 and 2010. Thanks to the revenue surpluses, high reserves have often been constituted. The financial assets of the State were CHF 1,838.1 million at the end of 2010, compared with borrowed capital of CHF 307.4 million. In 2010, liabilities were thus covered with a ratio of 598%. 17. Not only does the State of Liechtenstein enjoy an exceptionally healthy financial situation, but also the Liechtenstein municipalities have no debt. In 2009, the municipalities generated a total surplus of CHF 54.3 million. The coverage of liabilities across all municipalities in 2009 was even 1049%. 18. Although Liechtenstein enjoys a comparatively very healthy financial situation, it should not be overlooked that State expenditures have steadily risen over the past decades. To counter this development, the Government has taken cost-cutting measures to ensure a balanced national budget over the long term. Price development Figure 2 Development of the national consumer price index 2000-2011 * Basis: May 2000=100 ** May 2011 Note: The figures from 2001-2010 are the annual average. 19. With the exception of 2007, annual average inflation over the past 11 years has always been below 2%. Liechtenstein therefore enjoys high price stability. Wage statistics 20. According to the 2008 Wage Statistics, the median gross monthly wage was CHF 6,315. The wage distribution was as follows: Figure 3 Frequency distribution of gross monthly wages in 2008 in CHF (in percent) Figure 4 Gross monthly wages in 2008 by gender and nationality (in CHF) 21. An important indicator of income distribution is the Gini coefficient. The coefficient for Liechtenstein is 24.7% (last surveyed in 2004). Compared with the surrounding countries such as Germany (25.7%), Austria (25.7%) and Switzerland (26.7%), the index is relatively low. 3. Demography Population 22. With a population density of approximately 224 inhabitants per km2, Liechtenstein is a rather densely populated country. The long term growth trend of the population (five-year average) is 0.7%. Growth is due to both a birth surplus (2009: 177 persons) and an immigration surplus (2009: 128 persons). The birth rate and thus the birth surplus have been in decline overall since 1970. Table 6 Population development from 2000-2009 of which Population change in % Share of foreigners in % Liechtensteiners Birth surplus and net migration (average of 5-year periods) Population structure 23. About one third (33.1%) of the Liechtenstein resident population is foreign. Of all the foreign citizens living in Liechtenstein, 49.3% are from the European Economic Area (EEA), especially Austria and Germany. 30.2% of the foreign population are Swiss citizens, and 20.5% are from third countries. Table 7 Foreigners by nationality Switzerland Austria Germany Italy Other Europe Outside Europe Stateless and unknown Table 8 Development of the population structure from 2004-2009 Gender (share of total population in %) Male Female Age (share of total population in %) Age 20 and under Age 20-64 Age 65+ Youth dependency ratio* Old-age dependency ratio** Life expectancy at birth in years Please note that, due to the small population number, the figures may be subject to certain distortions. * Youth dependency ratio = Age 20 and under in relation to age 20-64 ** Old-age dependency ratio = Age 65 and older in relation to age 20-64 Households 24. While in 1970, 33% of Liechtenstein's inhabitants still lived in private households with six or more persons, only 6% of the population still lived in households of this category in 2000. During the same period, the number of one-person and two-person households increased strongly, so that nearly 40% of the population now live in these household forms. In 2000, the average household had 2.4 persons. The increase of single-parent families is also conspicuous. Note: Figures in bold indicate the number of households; figures in italics indicate the number of persons. Table 9 Household sizes in Liechtenstein in 2000 Household size, persons Number of households Share in % Religion 25. The Liechtenstein Constitution guarantees freedom of religion and conscience. It also guarantees civil and political rights irrespective of religious affiliation. 26. Under the Constitution, the Roman Catholic Church is the "national church of Liechtenstein", but this is not the same as a "State church" or "established church". Every religious community in Liechtenstein has the possibility of registering as an association. Along with the Roman Catholic Church, the Evangelical (Protestant) Church and the Orthodox Association of Churches (since 2001) receive financial support. 27. New rules governing the relationship between the State and religious communities are currently being developed. Table 10 Religious affiliation of the total resident population (in percent) Roman Catholic Evangelical (Protestant) Islamic communities Orthodox Christian churches Others/no affiliation The Islamic communities and the Orthodox Christian churches were counted as Other/no affiliation until 1960. No affiliation declared Table 11 Religious affiliation of the foreign resident population (in percent) Other/no affiliation Language 28. Under the Liechtenstein Constitution, German is the State language and the official language of Liechtenstein. Generally, an Alemannic dialect of German is spoken colloquially. 29. Because of the high rate of immigration, however, German is not every inhabitant's most-used colloquial language, as the table below shows. Table 12 Main language of the resident population (2000) Main language Number German Italian Turkish Spanish Serbian, Croatian Portuguese Albanian Other languages 30. Nevertheless, this does not mean that inhabitants whose main language is different from German do not also speak German. It must be assumed, however, that at least some of them have deficits with regard to the German language. 4. Social and cultural characteristics Social system 31. Liechtenstein has a very high standard of living. There is no absolute poverty in Liechtenstein, since the social net is extraordinarily well developed. Social security in Liechtenstein is ensured by various institutions, such as Unemployment Insurance (Arbeitslosenversicherung (ALV)), Disability Insurance (Invalidenversicherung (IV)), Old Age and Survivors' Insurance (Alters- und Hinterlassenenversicherung (AHV)), the Family Compensation Fund (Familienausgleichskasse (FAK)) and compulsory health insurance. However, it may happen in certain cases that some people are unable to afford the cost of living, despite these social insurances. In order to afford the cost of living, financial social assistance can be claimed as a minimum level of security. In the case of a one-person household, this assistance may be up to CHF 1,110 per month, and additional costs (housing, basic medical care, and minimum insurance contributions to AHV-IV-FAK) are also paid depending on the case. 32. All the same, low-income population groups also exist in Liechtenstein. According to the last survey based on 2004 data, approximately 11% of households in Liechtenstein are considered low-income. Not counting social benefits provided by the State, the figure would be 19.2%. Especially affected are single-parent families and families with two or more children. A household is considered low-income if its annual income is less than 60% of the median annual income. This threshold was CHF 27,754 in 2004, which is relatively high compared with other countries. Despite this high threshold, Liechtenstein has a low rate of low-income households. Low-income households (2004) Low-income households, not taking account of State social benefits (theoretical) Low-income households, taking account of State social benefits (actual) - Age 20-49 - Age 50-63 - Age 64 and older - Married couples without children - Single parents - Married couples with 1 child - Married couples with 2 children - Married couples with 3 or more children - Households with old-age pension 33. State expenditures for social welfare in 2010 made up 26% of total State expenditures. This is the largest expenditure item of the State, which emphasizes that Liechtenstein's social system is well developed. Old-age provision 34. Old-age provision in Liechtenstein is comparatively very well developed and allows the population to enjoy a sufficient standard of living after retirement. The regular retirement age is currently 64 for both men and women; early retirement is possible from the age of 60. It is also possible to delay retirement for up to six years. 35. Liechtenstein uses a "three-pillar principle" for old-age provisions. The first pillar is Old Age and Survivors Insurance (AHV). Every person in Liechtenstein employed by an employer must contribute 3.8% of his or her gross wages to the AHV. The employer pays an additional 3.8%. Self-employed persons must insure themselves with the AHV. As soon as retirement age is reached, the person is entitled to a pension, the amount of which is determined by the allowable contribution years and the average relevant annual income. A full pension is only possible if contributions were made without interruption from age 20 to 64, otherwise partial pensions are paid. In the event of early retirement, the pension is reduced. If retirement is delayed beyond the age of 64, in contrast, the pension is increased accordingly. The maximum pension per month is currently CHF 2,320 and the minimum pension is CHF 1,160. 36. Occupational retirement provision, which was introduced on a compulsory basis in 1989, constitutes the second pillar. Starting at a specified annual salary, employers must establish a pension scheme for their employees, to which both employees and employers must contribute a mandatory amount. In this way, old-age capital is accumulated during employment, which may be paid out to the employee upon retirement either as a monthly pension or as a lump-sum payment. 37. In addition to AHV and occupational pension provision, private provision is also possible (3rd pillar). This is made up of private savings or old-age insurance policies. 38. In some cases, the pension together with assets may not suffice to guarantee a sufficient minimum income. In such cases, supplementary benefits may be obtained from the AHV, which at least ensure a subsistence minimum. Education 39. Liechtenstein's population has a high level of education, which has contributed to the strong economic upswing of the country since the Second World War and still represents an important location advantage. Compulsory schooling is nine years. Schooling is free at public schools. Kindergarten prior to school enrolment is also free. 40. After primary school, which lasts five years, pupils are assigned to one of three types of secondary school. There is an Oberschule, a Realschule and a Gymnasium: the Oberschule represents the lowest standard of performance and the Gymnasium the highest. The Oberschule and the Realschule serve to prepare students for an apprenticeship and last four years. The Gymnasium lasts a total of 7 years and aims to prepare students for higher education. Transferring between secondary school types is possible where performance is sufficient. Table 14 School statistics for the 2010/2011 school year Type of school Number of schools Number of classes Number of students Students per class Kindergartens Primary schools Oberschulen Realschulen 10th school year The voluntary 10th school year builds on the last year of compulsory schooling (Oberschule and Realschule). Students are given the opportunity to further develop their personalities, to prepare for their career selection in a targeted way, and to expand their competence in school subjects. Depending on their goals and needs, students may choose among different concentrations. Gymnasium Total secondary schools 41. After graduation from Gymnasium or by way of a professional baccalaureate, students have the option of entering higher education. The University of Liechtenstein offers courses of study in Architecture and Planning as well as Business Economics with concentrations in Business Administration and Information Systems. For these and other courses of study, universities in Switzerland and Austria are also available. Agreements grant equal access to Swiss and Austrian universities for students from Liechtenstein. 42. To make higher education possible also for students from less wealthy families, the State makes financial aid available. Anyone who has been a resident of Liechtenstein without interruption for at least three years or for a total of five years may apply for financial aid. The amount of the financial aid is determined by the income and assets of the parents. Part of the financial aid (approx. 50% of the amount) is granted as a stipend, and the other part is granted as an interest-free loan. Stipends do not have to be repaid after graduation, while loans have to be paid in instalments. Highest level of education completed in 2000 by nationality and gender (row percent) Origin No education Secondary level I Secondary level II Tertiary level Total % Total number Western/Northern Europe/North America Southern Europe Eastern/Southeast Europe Turkey/Middle East/North Africa Sub-Saharan Africa/Latin America/Asia/ Oceania Total (percent) Total (number) Note: Secondary level I includes graduation from Oberschulen and Realschulen; secondary level II includes graduation from Gymnasium and completion of a professional apprenticeship. 43. In total, the share of educational expenditures in the total State budget of Liechtenstein in 2010 was 19%. Health 44. Every person residing in Liechtenstein is subject to compulsory health insurance and thus enjoys access to medical care. Compulsory health insurance is paid through a per capita premium split half-half between employers and employees. Low-income insured persons pay a reduced premium. Young people up to the age of 16 do not pay a premium. Persons under the age of 20 do not pay a deductible. To keep premiums low for all insured persons, the State additionally pays an annually fixed amount toward the costs of compulsory health insurance. In 2010, the State contribution was CHF 54 million. Public health is ensured by the high density of physicians and by the Liechtenstein National Hospital. Agreements also exist with foreign hospitals and psychiatric facilities. Inhabitants per physician since 1960 45. The high standard of health is seen in several indicators. For one, life expectancy is relatively high, and both infant and maternal mortality are very low. Between 2000 and 2007, an average of two children age 0-9 died each year, which makes up 1% of all deaths. Infant mortality is about 4 per 1,000 live births. 46. Over the long term, there are between 600 and 1,200 cases of transmissible disease each year. In the case of HIV, the number of infected persons is surveyed by the Office of Public Health. However, many infected persons are tested abroad, so that they are not included in the statistics. In 2009, two new cases were registered, which most probably does not represent the actual number of infected persons. There are no epidemiological evaluations in this area. Table 16 Cause of death by gender (2008) Infections Malignant tumours Cardiovascular, blood Respiratory organs Digestive organs Old age Accidents, violence Suicide Others Unknown cause International Humanitarian Cooperation and Development 47. The resources employed by Liechtenstein for official development assistance (ODA) have risen significantly since 2000. From approximately CHF 14 million in the year 2000, they were increased to CHF 27.7 million by 2010. Measured in terms of gross national income (GNI), expenditures for official development assistance were 0.54% in 2008. 48. Most of these funds (about 65%) are used for bilateral development assistance. About 10% are allocated to multilateral development cooperation. Another 10% are used for emergency and reconstruction assistance and for international refugee and migration assistance. About one third of the resources (33%) went to Africa in 2010, while about one sixth of the budget (15%) was employed in Europe. 49. Within the framework of International Humanitarian Cooperation and Development (IHCD), Liechtenstein also engages in the protection and promotion of human rights in other countries in a targeted manner. Within bilateral development cooperation, for instance, education is one of the priority areas. The inclusion and promotion of women has been a cross-cutting topic for several years now. Also in multilateral development cooperation, the protection of human rights is a thematic priority area under the overarching theme of good governance. 50. All information on the functioning and strategic orientation of International Humanitarian Cooperation and Development as well as current figures may be accessed on the website (http://www.llv.li/ihze). B. Constitutional, political and legal structure of the State 1. System of State 51. The Principality of Liechtenstein is a constitutional hereditary monarchy on a democratic and parliamentary basis. The power of the State is embodied in the Reigning Prince and the People. The relatively strong position of the Reigning Prince is balanced by the far-reaching direct, democratic rights of the People. Every citizen who has reached the age of 18 is entitled to vote and stand for election. 52. According to the Constitution, Liechtenstein is a union of the two regions of Vaduz (Oberland or Upper Country) and Schellenberg (Unterland or Lower Country). The Oberland consists of six municipalities, including the capital Vaduz, and the Unterland consists of five municipalities. 2. Economic and political integration 53. Already early in its history, Liechtenstein was aware that international cooperation would be necessary to secure its future. The country has therefore long pursued an active foreign policy, the goal of which is stronger State sovereignty and close political and economic integration at the European and global level. Liechtenstein is now a member of 27 important international organizations and institutions. Of particular note are the Statute of the International Court of Justice in The Hague (ICJ, member since 1950), the Council of Europe (since 1978), the United Nations (since 1990), and the country's participation in the Conference for Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE, now OSCE, 1975). 54. Already in 1960, Liechtenstein was integrated into the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) through its Customs Treaty with Switzerland. In 1991, it joined EFTA as an independent member. Accession to the European Economic Area (EEA) in 1995 was another important European integration step. Also in 1995, Liechtenstein joined the World Trade Organization (WTO). 55. Today, Liechtenstein maintains diplomatic representations at the United Nations in New York; the European Union in Brussels; EFTA, the United Nations and WTO in Geneva; a Permanent Representation to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg; and a Permanent Mission to OSCE, IAEA, the United Nations and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) in Vienna. Bilateral embassies have been established in Berne, Berlin, Brussels, Washington and Vienna as well as to the Czech Republic and the Holy See. Since 2007, Liechtenstein has also maintained honorary consulates in the United States and Germany. In the United States, there are honorary consulates in Macon (Georgia), Los Angeles (California), Portland (Oregon) and Chicago (Illinois). In Germany, there are honorary consulates in Frankfurt and Munich. 3. Separation of powers 56. In the dualistic system of State in the Principality of Liechtenstein, the power of State is embodied in both the Reigning Prince and the People. Separation of powers is further secured by the vesting of separate rights in the executive (Government), legislative (Parliament) and judicial (courts) branches. 4. Reigning Prince (Head of State) 57. The Reigning Prince is the Head of State and represents the State in all its relations with foreign countries, without prejudice to the requisite participation of the responsible Government. On the recommendation of Parliament, the Reigning Prince appoints the members of the Government. The Reigning Prince is also responsible for appointment of judges; the election of judges is carried out by Parliament on the recommendation of a body for the selection of judges. When justified on substantial grounds, the Reigning Prince may dissolve Parliament and dismiss the Government. The Reigning Prince also has the right to issue emergency decrees as well as the right of pardon, of mitigating sentences, and of quashing criminal investigations. Every law requires the sanction of the Reigning Prince and countersignature by the Prime Minister to attain legal effect; when exercising their powers in this regard, both the Reigning Prince and the Prime Minister are bound by the provisions of the Constitution. 5. Parliament, electoral system and political parties 58. The Liechtenstein Parliament consists of 25 members. They are elected every four years in universal, equal, direct and secret elections according to the system of proportional representation. 59. The most important responsibilities of Parliament are participation in the legislative process, assent to international treaties, approval of the State's financial resources, election of judges on the proposal of the body for the selection of judges, and oversight of the State administration. Parliament elects the Government and proposes it to the Reigning Prince for appointment. Parliament may also initiate dismissal of the Government or one of its members if either loses its confidence. Parliament has a quorum when at least two thirds of the members of present. 60. Elections take place in two electoral districts; the Oberland and the Unterland each constitute an electoral district. All citizens aged 18 and older whose normal residence is in Liechtenstein have the right to vote. The Oberland has 15 seats in Parliament, and the Unterland has 10 seats. Only persons included on the list of a political party may be elected. For a party to be eligible for a seat in Parliament, it must achieve at least 8% of all valid votes cast nationwide. This is a relatively high threshold compared with other countries. 61. The turnout at the parliamentary elections in 2009 was 84.6%, slightly higher in the Unterland (86.9%) than in the Oberland (83.4%). Over time, a similar pattern can be observed as in almost all Western democracies, where turnout tends to decline. Until the mid-1980s, more than 90% of all eligible voters turned out for parliamentary elections. Since then, turnout has (with few exceptions) declined significantly. 62. Currently, there are three political parties in Liechtenstein. The Patriotic Union (Vaterländische Union (VU)) and the Progressive Citizens' Party (Fortschrittliche Bürgerpartei (FBP)) are the two large people's parties. Both emerged after the First World War. Ideologically, they are hardly distinguishable, and both have a Christian-conservative orientation. The Free List (Freie Liste (FL)) was created in the 1980s and is more strongly oriented toward social and environmental issues. Since 1993, the Free List has had at least one seat in Parliament; between 2005 and 2009, it had three. 63. The three parties are represented in Parliament in the current legislative term (2009-2013). With 12 seats, the Patriotic Union has a relative majority. The Progressive Citizens' Party has 11 seats, and the Free List has one seat. The remaining seat is currently held by a member without party affiliation. In the 2009 elections, a total of six women were elected to Parliament, which represents a share of 24%. 6. Government 64. The Government is a collegial body consisting of five members: the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, and three additional Ministers. Most commonly, the Patriotic Union and the Progressive Citizens' Party have formed a coalition Government. The precise constellation depends on the election results, since the Prime Minister and the majority of Government members come from the party with the most votes. Currently, the Prime Minister and two other Ministers are from the Patriotic Union, while the Deputy Prime Minister and another Minister are members of the Progressive Citizens' Party. In this legislative term, the Government consists of three men and two women, so that the share of women is 40%. 65. The Government members are appointed by the Reigning Prince on the proposal of Parliament. The Government is the supreme executive body, to which 40 Government offices and units as well as eight diplomatic representations abroad are subordinate. About 60 commissions and advisory councils support the work of the Administration. 66. The Government has the power to enact ordinances and is thus also a rule-making body. Ordinances may only be enacted on the basis of laws and international treaties, however. 7. Legislative process 67. Every enactment and amendment of constitutional and legislative provisions begins with an initiative. In Liechtenstein, the right of initiative is granted to the Reigning Prince (in the form of Government proposals), Parliament, and eligible voters. 68. Without the participation of Parliament, no law may enter into force in Liechtenstein or be declared valid. Similarly, a law requires the assent of the Reigning Prince to become valid. 69. In the vast majority of cases, the initiative for the enactment or amendment of constitutional provisions and laws originates with the Government. Generally, the competent ministry prepares a draft law. The draft is then circulated for consultations. For this purpose, the Government publicly circulates the law for comments. Target groups who have or might have a special interest in the proposal are especially invited to comment. However, not only those who have been specifically invited to comment may do so. In principle, any person or organization with an interest in the proposal may submit comments. The draft law is then revised, and the comments received are taken into account to the extent possible. The modified draft is then adopted by the Government and presented to Parliament for consideration. Parliament may accept, change, or reject the draft law. For this purpose, two readings and a final vote are held in Parliament. If Parliament adopts a law, the decision is subject to a facultative referendum for a period of 30 days. If 1,000 signatures of eligible voters are collected against the decision by Parliament, a popular vote must be held. This applies not only to laws, but also to financial decisions of Parliament. In the case of constitutional decisions, 1,500 signatures are required for a popular vote. 70. In addition to the Government, Liechtenstein citizens have the right of initiative. 1,000 eligible voters may submit a legislative initiative in the form of a precisely formulated draft or a general suggestion. Parliament must then consider the initiative in its next session. It may accept or reject a formulated initiative. If Parliament does not adopt a formulated initiative, a popular vote must be held. If Parliament accepts a simple suggestion, it implements the suggestion by enacting, repealing or amending a law. 71. A popular initiative may also concern a partial or total revision of the Constitution, if 1,500 signatures are gathered. Also in this case, Parliament may either accept or reject the initiative and hold a popular vote. 72. Of special note is the referendum on international treaties. Every decision of Parliament concerning assent to an international treaty is subject to a popular vote, if Parliament so decides or if 1,500 eligible voters or four municipalities demand a vote within 30 days. 73. Both instruments, referenda and initiatives, are used by the People. Between 2000 and 2010, there were 17 popular votes at the national level. Each year, this amounts to slightly less than two popular votes on average. Turnout for popular votes is roughly 70%. 8. Municipalities 74. Municipal autonomy plays an important role in Liechtenstein. Within their own sphere of competence, the municipal authorities autonomously carry out the business that arises and administer the municipal assets. Citizens have the option of calling a referendum against any decision. As at the national level, the People also have the option of initiative. 75. Eligible voters in each municipality elect a Municipal Council presided by a Mayor, who carries out his or her function full-time or part-time, depending on the size of the municipality. Elections for Municipal Council and Mayor take place simultaneously in all municipalities every four years. 76. Similarly to the national level, women are also underrepresented in politics at the municipal level. In the 2011-2015 term, the share of women in Municipal Councils is 27.4% nationwide. In the Unterland, the share of women in the Municipal Councils is slightly higher at 29.5% than in the Oberland at 25.8%. The office of Mayor is held by men in all municipalities. The turnout for Municipal Council elections in 2011 was 82.7%. 77. Votes at the municipal level may be held on a variety of issues. Specifically, they may concern changes to municipal regulations, financing of infrastructure projects, or the naturalization of foreigners. Naturalization of foreigners is the most frequent issue in votes at the municipal level. On average, turnout is significantly lower than at the national level, namely slightly higher than 50%. 78. The importance of municipalities is also manifested by the fact that every municipality has the constitutional right to secede from Liechtenstein. 9. Non-governmental organizations 79. Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) may be founded as associations in Liechtenstein and may also be registered as such. They do not require any special recognition by the State. Every association in Liechtenstein has the right to pursue and represent its interests. These include participation in the legislative process within the framework of consultations. Associations may also exert targeted influence on legislation by launching initiatives and referenda. It is also of note that many associations and accordingly also NGOs receive financial support by the State and the municipalities. 10. Administration of justice Jurisdiction 80. Ordinary jurisdiction is distinguished from jurisdiction under public law. Ordinary jurisdiction covers the administration of justice in civil and criminal matters. The Court of Justice, the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court constitute the three instances. Before a civil lawsuit can be brought, a mediation procedure must generally be undertaken in the municipality where the respondent resides. 81. Jurisdiction under public law is exercised by the Administrative Court and the Constitutional Court. The Administrative Court is the appellate body for decisions and decrees of the Government or commissions acting on its behalf. The Constitutional Court has jurisdiction on constitutional questions. Court of Justice 82. The Court of Justice is the first instance in civil and criminal matters. Cases before the Court of Justice may, depending on the matter, be heard by individual judges or by a panel of judges. The Criminal Court and the Juvenile Court hear cases as panels. In civil matters and in the case of infractions, individual judges decide the case. The Criminal Court decides all cases involving crimes as well as certain misdemeanours exhaustively enumerated by law. The Juvenile Court has jurisdiction over perpetrators between 14 and 18 years of age. 83. Currently, the Court of Justice is composed of 14 full-time Judges of the Court of Justice and three full-time judicial officers. In the courts serving as panels (Criminal Court and Juvenile Court), the President of the panel (a Judge of the Court of Justice) serves full-time, while the other judges on the panel are part-time. On the panel of the Criminal Court, another judge is a full-time Judge of the Court of Justice in addition to the President. 84. In 2009, the Court of Justice dealt with a total of 21,320 cases of all kinds. In total, 17,344 of these were concluded, while 3,976 were still pending at the end of 2009. This represents a ratio of 18.6% of cases that were carried over into the next year. Court of Appeal 85. The second instance of ordinary jurisdiction in Liechtenstein is the Court of Appeal, to which appeals against judgments or decisions of the Court of Justice may be addressed. Judgments at the Court of Appeal are issued by Senates or by the President of the Senate. A Senate is composed of one full-time President of the Senate and four part-time Appellate Judges. The President and an Appellate Judge must be lawyers by training. In total, there are three Senates and thus three full-time Presidents of the Senates. 86. In total, the Court of Appeal dealt with 1,026 cases in 2009. Of these, 778 were concluded and 248 remained pending, which represents a ratio of 24.2%. Supreme Court 87. Appeals against judgments or decisions of the Court of Appeal may be lodged with the third and last instance, the Supreme Court. As in the case of the Court of Appeal, justice is administered by Senates or by Presidents of the Senates. There are two Senates composed of one full-time President of the Senate and four part-time Supreme Court Judges each. The President and at least two of the Supreme Court Judges must be lawyers by training. 88. In 2009, 298 cases were considered by the Supreme Court, of which 224 were concluded and 74 (24.8%) remained pending. Administrative Court 89. The Administrative Court, as a court of public law, is responsible for appeals against decrees and decisions of the Government or commissions acting on its behalf, and it is also the last instance in appellate proceedings against administrative acts. It consist of five Judges and five Alternate Judges. The majority of Judges must be lawyers by training. The Judges serve part-time. 90. In 2009, 144 new appeals were lodged with the Administrative Court. Of these, 114 were concluded and 30 (20.8%) remained pending. Constitutional Court 91. The Constitutional Court is a court of public law that is autonomous and independent in relation to other constitutional bodies. Its responsibilities include the protection of constitutionally guaranteed rights, including protection of individual rights guaranteed by international agreements. Other responsibilities include review of the constitutionality of laws and international treaties as well as review of the conformity of ordinances with the Constitution, laws, and international treaties. Moreover, the Constitutional Court decides on conflicts of jurisdiction among courts and administrative bodies, and it is responsible for the consideration of election complaints and indictments of Ministers. 92. The Constitutional Court is composed of five Judges, all of whom serve part-time. The majority of Judges must be lawyers by training. In 2009, 326 cases were considered. 215 of these were concluded, so that 34% of the cases remained pending at the end of the year. Office of the Public Prosecutor 93. While the Office of the Public Prosecutor formally reports to the Government, the Government may, pursuant to the Law on the Office of the Public Prosecutor, only issue very limited instructions to the Office of the Public Prosecutor. 94. The responsibility of the Office of the Public Prosecutor is to investigate criminal offences and to represent public charges in court. Currently, Liechtenstein has one Prosecutor General and six other Prosecutors. In 2009, the Office of the Public Prosecutor dealt with 2,667 criminal cases, of which 23 involved imprisonment. Accordingly, each Prosecutor had to deal with an average of 381 cases. 11. Police, criminal statistics and execution of sentences National Police 95. The responsibilities of the National Police are in particular to ensure public safety and order and to solve criminal cases. To carry out the responsibilities of the National Police, 90 police officers carry out public authority. Another 36 auxiliary police officers support the work of the National Police, especially for security. Crime 96. As the criminal statistics show, the number of criminal offences has increased in Liechtenstein over the past years. 868 criminal offences were registered in 2001, increasing to 1,216 in 2009. Figure 8 Criminal statistics, 2009 Category of crime Number of offences Cases solved Suspects brought to justice Juveniles Offences to assets or property Secondary criminal law Economic offences Violent offences Narcotics offences Migration offences Sexual offences Offences relating to documents Politically/religiously motivated offences Offences dangerous to public safety * Low significance due to small number of cases With respect to violent offences, it should be noted that most are bodily injury or brawling (90 cases). Homicide is very rare in Liechtenstein; there were no cases in 2009. Juvenile violence is also an issue in Liechtenstein, since a total of 28 violent acts were committed by 46 minors in 2008, of which 39 were male. In 2009, there were four criminal offences of racial discrimination. National Prison 97. The National Prison in Vaduz is the only facility in the Principality of Liechtenstein for prisoners on remand, convicts, and foreign citizens detained under immigration law. The official capacity is 20 persons. Occupancy varies substantially. The maximum capacity has never been reached in recent years, since capacity must always be kept available for new arrivals. There are 16 individual cells and 2 double cells. In addition, there is a police detention cell as well as a security cell (with video surveillance), which however is only used for short-term detention e.g. of heavily intoxicated persons. The size of the cells is approximately 9 to 10.5 m2. 98. Generally, only sentences of up to two years are carried out in Vaduz. Persons sentenced to more than two years imprisonment serve their sentences in a facility in Austria pursuant to a treaty of 4 July 1982 between Liechtenstein and Austria on the placement of convicts. Table 17 Prison statistics, 2009-2010 National Prison in Vaduz Total inmates Total days of imprisonment Days per inmate Detentions on remand Prisons in Austria Days per convict Victims assistance 99. On 1 April 2008, the Victims Assistance Act entered into force in Liechtenstein. People immediately affected by a criminal offence in a physical, psychological or sexual respect have the right to victims assistance in Liechtenstein. Pursuant to the Victims Assistance Act, there is a Victims Assistance Office in Liechtenstein offering the following services: counselling and immediate assistance; longer-term assistance of the Victims Assistance Office; cost contributions for longer-term help provided by third parties; assertion of claims for damages; free legal aid for victims in proceedings under the Victims Assistance Act. 100. In 2010, the Victims Assistance Office provided counselling in 49 cases. 34 victims were female and 12 were male. In 2 cases, the victims were institutions, and in one case a law firm. Figure 9 Victims assistance cases by offence and victim (2010) III. General framework for the protection and promotion of human rights A. Acceptance of international human rights norms 101. As a member of the United Nations and the Council of Europe, Liechtenstein has ratified various international and European agreements on the protection of human rights. It is the ongoing practice of the Liechtenstein Government to ratify an agreement only once the legal and practical preconditions have been created at the domestic level. This ensures that the agreement can be applied domestically from the time of entry into force. 102. The following table includes the most important human rights instruments of which Liechtenstein is a State Party. Liechtenstein's reservations and declarations are also listed. In the case of reservations, a brief explanation is also given. 1. Main international human rights treaties and optional protocols Instrument Entry into force for Liechtenstein Reservations and declarations Explanation International Covenant of 16 December 1966 on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 10 March 1999 International Covenant of 16 December 1966 on Civil and Political Rights Declaration concerning article 3 "The Principality of Liechtenstein declares that it does not interpret the provisions of article 3 of the Covenant as constituting an impediment to the constitutional rules on the hereditary succession to the throne of the Reigning Prince." Declaration concerning article 41 "The Principality of Liechtenstein declares under article 41 of the Covenant to recognize the competence of the Human Rights Committee, to receive and consider communications to the effect that a State party claims that another State party is not fulfilling its obligations under the Covenant." Reservation concerning article 14(1) "The Principality of Liechtenstein reserves the right to apply the provisions of article 14, paragraph 1 of the Covenant, concerning the principle that hearings must be held and judgments pronounced in public, only within the limits deriving from the principles at present embodied in the Liechtenstein legislation on legal proceedings." The Liechtenstein legal order contains provisions according to which certain hearings and judgments are not public. Reservation concerning article 17(1) "The Principality of Liechtenstein makes the reservation that the right to respect for family life, as guaranteed by article 17, paragraph 1 of the Covenant, shall be exercised, with regard to aliens, in accordance with the principles at present embodied in the legislation on aliens." This reservation is necessary for application of the existing legislation on aliens. Because of the small size of Liechtenstein, the immigration of foreigners is limited, which also has consequences for family reunification. Reservation concerning article 26 "The Principality of Liechtenstein reserves the right to guarantee the rights contained in article 26 of the Covenant concerning the equality of all persons before the law and their entitlement without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law only in connection with other rights contained in the present Covenant." In Liechtenstein, equality before the law and equality before the courts are guaranteed. However, there is no explicit protection from discrimination. In certain cases, citizens and foreigners do not enjoy equal treatment in a comprehensive sense. Optional Protocol of 16 December 1966 to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Second Optional Protocol of 15 December 1989 to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty International Convention of 21 December 1965 on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 31 March 2000 Declaration "In accordance with article 14 of the International Convention of 21 December 1965 on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Principality of Liechtenstein recognizes the competence of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to receive and consider communications from individuals or groups of individuals within the jurisdiction of Liechtenstein claiming to be victims of a violation by Liechtenstein of any of the rights set forth in the Convention. The Principality of Liechtenstein recognizes that competence on the understanding that the said Committee shall not consider any communication without ascertaining that the same matter is not being considered or has not already been considered under another international procedure of investigation or settlement." Convention of 18 December 1979 on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 21 January 1996 Reservation concerning article 1 "In the light of the definition given in article 1 of the Convention, the Principality of Liechtenstein reserves the right to apply, with respect to all the obligations of the Convention, article 3 of the Liechtenstein Constitution." According to article 3 of the Constitution of Liechtenstein in conjunction with the Law on the Princely House, only male members of the Princely House may becoming Reigning Prince. The Law on the Princely House expressly provides that reservations to this effect must be made to international treaties. Optional Protocol of 6 October 1999 to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 24 January 2002 Convention of 10 December 1984 against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 2 December 1990 Declaration concerning article 21(1) "The Principality of Liechtenstein recognizes the competence of the Committee against Torture to receive and consider communications to the effect that a State Party claims that another State Party is not fulfilling its obligations under this Convention." Declaration concerning article 22(1) "The Principality of Liechtenstein recognizes the competence of the Committee against Torture to receive and consider communications from or on behalf of individuals subject to its jurisdiction who claim to be victims of a violation by a State Party of the provisions of the Convention." Optional Protocol of 18 December 2002 to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 3 December 2006 Convention of 20 November 1989 on the Rights of the Child Optional Protocol of 25 May 2000 to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict 4 March 2005 "The Principality of Liechtenstein declares that, with respect to the Principality of Liechtenstein, articles 1 and 2 as well as article 3, in particular paragraph 2, of the Optional Protocol of 25 May 2000 to the Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989 on the involvement of children in armed conflict have to be understood in light of the fact that the Principality of Liechtenstein has no national armed forces and that hence no legislation on a minimum age for the recruitment of persons into the armed forces and for taking part in hostilities exists. The Principality of Liechtenstein regards the ratification of the Optional Protocol as part of its continuing commitment to the protection of the rights of children and at the same time as an act of its solidarity with the objectives of the said Protocol." 2. Other United Nations human rights treaties Convention Convention of 9 December 1948 on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide 22 June 1994 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court of 17 July 1998 1 July 2002 United Nations Convention of 15 November 2000 against Transnational Organized Crime 21 March 2008 Protocol of 15 November 2000 to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air Protocol of 15 November 2000 to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children Convention of 21 July 1958 relating to the Status of Refugees 8 May 1957 Protocol of 31 January 1967 relating to the Status of Refugees 20 May 1968 Convention of 28 September 1954 relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 24 December 2009 Convention of 30 August 1961 on the Reduction of Statelessness United Nations Convention of 31 October 2003 against Corruption 7 August 2010 3. Conventions of the Hague Conference on Private International Law Convention of 24 October 1956 on the law applicable to maintenance obligations towards children 18 February 1973 Convention of 15 April 1958 concerning the recognition and enforcement of decisions relating to maintenance obligations towards children Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of Children and Co-operation in respect of Intercountry Adoption 1 May 2009 4. Geneva Conventions and other treaties relevant to international humanitarian law Convention of 12 August 1949 for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field 21 March 1951 Convention of 12 August 1949 for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea Convention of 12 August 1949 relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War Convention of 12 August 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts 10 February 1990 Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts Protocol additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem 24 February 2007 Convention of 18 September 1997 on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer or Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction 1 April 2000 5. Regional human rights treaties (selection) European Convention of 4 November 1950 for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, including Protocols 1-12 and 14. 8 September 1982 (refers only to entry into force of Convention) European Convention of 26 November 1987 for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 1 January 1992 European Framework Convention of 1 February 1995 for the Protection of National Minorities 1 March 1998 European Charter of 5 November 1995 for Regional or Minority Languages European Agreement of 5 March 1996 relating to persons participating in proceedings of the European Court of Human Rights B. Legal framework for the protection of human rights at the national level Fundamental rights and freedoms 103. Articles 27 bis to 44 of the Liechtenstein Constitution enshrine numerous fundamental rights and freedoms. In particular, the Constitution guarantees the following rights: Human dignity shall be respected and protected. No one may be subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The right to life. The death penalty is prohibited. The right of every Liechtenstein citizen to reside freely in any location within the territory of the State and to acquire all forms of property. The political rights of Liechtenstein citizens, i.e. the right to vote and be elected from the age of 18. The equality of all Liechtenstein citizens before the law. Equal rights of men and women. Personal liberty, the immunity of the home, and the inviolability of letters and documents. Nulla poena sine lege. The right to an ordinary judge and the prohibition of special courts; the right to defence. The inviolability of private property. Freedom of commerce and trade. Freedom of religion and conscience. The right to free expression of opinion; prohibition of censorship. The right of free association and assembly. The right to petition. The right of complaint. The right to sufficiency of legal reasoning. Municipal autonomy. 104. Moreover, the case law of the Constitutional Court has derived further fundamental rights from the fundamental rights enumerated above or recognized them as independent, non-codified fundamental rights. These are the prohibition of arbitrariness, the right to be heard, the prohibition of formal denial of justice, the prohibition of exaggerated formalism, the prohibition of delay of justice, the principle of presumed innocence (in dubio pro reo), the principle of good faith and the prohibition of abuse of justice, the principle of legality in tax law, and the right to subsistence. Some of these fundamental rights are only considered and reviewed as part of the prohibition of arbitrariness. 105. Some fundamental rights only apply to Liechtenstein citizens. These include especially the political rights and the right to freedom of residence. While the text of the Constitution provides equality before the law only to Liechtenstein citizens, the case law of the Constitutional Court has extended the principle of equality before the law to foreigners. 106. While fundamental rights and freedoms may be temporarily limited in emergency situations, they may not be suspended or abrogated. Under article 10 of the Constitution, the Reigning Prince may issue emergency decrees to ensure the security and welfare of the country. Such emergency decrees expire at the latest six months after they have been issued. 107. Certain fundamental rights have absolute validity under the Constitution and may not be limited under any circumstances. These include the right of each person to life, the prohibition of torture and inhuman treatment, the prohibition of slavery and forced labour, and the principle of nulla poena sine lege. Importantly, there is no possibility of unlimited restriction of fundamental rights even if they are not deemed absolute. As in all countries governed by the rule of law, three preconditions apply in Liechtenstein to the restriction of classic fundamental rights: There must be a public interest at stake; a legal basis must exist; and any interference with a fundamental right must be proportionate. Implementation of human rights treaties 108. Liechtenstein uses the incorporation system or monist system. A ratified agreement becomes part of domestic law at the date of entry into force of the agreement, without the need for separate legislation to be created. 109. The Liechtenstein legal order has no explicit rule specifying the rank of international treaties. Accordingly, international agreements may have the rank of the Constitution, legislation, or ordinances. The rank is in principle determined by the content of the provision in question. According to article 104, paragraph 2 of the Constitution, the Constitutional Court may review the constitutionality of international treaties. 110. The Constitutional Court has often ruled on the rank of constitutional treaties and has repeatedly found that international treaties approved by Parliament enjoy at least the rank of legislation. According to the Constitutional Court's case law, international treaties concerning substantive constitutional law may be ranked lower than the Constitution in formal terms, but rank above legislation in substantive terms. Protection and enforcement of fundamental rights and freedoms 111. In Liechtenstein, the Constitutional Court is responsible for the effective protection and enforcement of fundamental rights and freedoms. Natural and legal persons in Liechtenstein have various legal remedies at their disposal to assert their fundamental rights and freedoms. 112. Anyone who believes that a final decision or decree of a court or public authority has violated one of his or her rights guaranteed under the Constitution or rights guaranteed under an international convention for which an individual right of complaint has been recognized by the legislative power may appeal the decision or decree to the Constitutional Court. This also entails that various international conventions for the protection of human rights are considered substantive constitutional law. 113. Another means of enforcing constitutional laws is the Constitutional Court's review of the constitutionality of laws. This may occur on the application of the Government or municipality or on the application of a court. The Constitutional Court may also carry out a review on its own motion, if proceedings call for the application of a law the Constitutional Court believes to be unconstitutional. If a law or individual provisions thereof are incompatible with the Constitution, the Constitutional Court voids the law or the relevant provision. 114. Finally, Government ordinances may also be reviewed for compatibility with the Constitution, legislation, and international treaties. Such a review by the Constitutional Court may be demanded by a court, a municipal authority, or at least 100 eligible voters. The Constitutional Court may also review ordinances on its own motion. If the Constitutional Court finds that an ordinance violates the Constitution, a law, or an international treaty, it voids the ordinance in whole or in part. 115. Finally, the Constitutional Court also has jurisdiction to review the constitutionality of international treaties. The review may be carried out either on application by a court or an administrative authority or on the Constitutional Court's own motion. 116. Since Liechtenstein is a State Party to the European Convention of 4 November 1950 for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the possibility exists in some cases to appeal to the European Court of Human Rights if a violation of rights under the Convention is asserted. Before such an appeal is possible, however, all domestic remedies must be exhausted. The judgments of the European Court of Human Rights are binding. 117. Under conventions providing an individual right of complaint, affected persons may also submit a complaint to the competent treaty body. C. Framework within which human rights are promoted at the national level Institutions for the promotion of human rights 118. There are several institutions in Liechtenstein for the promotion of human rights. As one of the first bodies, an inter-office Equal Opportunity Commission was created in 2005. At the same time, the Government decided to expand the Office of Gender Equality into an Office of Equal Opportunity (Stabsstelle Chancengleichheit (SCG)). 119. The SCG's focus is on combating discrimination and promoting de facto and de jure equal opportunity in areas key to the protection of human rights, such as the equality of women and men, disabilities, migration and integration of foreigners, social disadvantage, sexual orientation, and gender identity. The SCG maintains publically available documentation and provides free advice to individuals, organizations and companies. Additionally, the SCG is engaged on behalf of sensitization measures, issues comments on draft laws, consultations and ordinances, serves as the secretariat of the Equal Opportunity Commission, and coordinates measures within the Administration to ensure equal opportunity. 120. Additionally, a Victims Assistance Office was created in 2008, offering the victims of criminal offences and their family members counselling as well as medical, psychological and financial assistance. 121. In 2010, an Ombudsman Office for Children and Young People was created. The Ombudsman Office is an independent, neutral, and universally accessible contact and complaints office on child and youth issues. Children, young people and adults may turn to the Ombudsman Office if they have questions or concerns. Complaints may also be brought before the Ombudsman Office. The Ombudsman Office receives these complaints and mediates in disputes and difficulties arising between individuals and Government offices, authorities and all public organizations involved in work with children and young people. All matters are treated with strict confidentiality. A further responsibility of the Ombudsman Office is to monitor implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. Where children's rights are violated, the Ombudsman Office may conduct investigations, submit complaints to the competent bodies, and make proposals for improvements. 122. An important institution for the protection and promotion of human rights is the Corrections Commission. The responsibility of the commission is to convince itself that the rules governing execution of sentences are being observed, especially regarding the treatment of convicts. The commission's composition is interdisciplinary (lawyers, physicians, social workers, and criminal law and corrections specialists). It is independent in the fulfilment of its responsibilities and is not bound by any instructions. Once a quarter, it must visit the National Prison unannounced. It has the option of carrying out additional visits. It may demand information about convicts and inspection of corrections documents. It is entitled to speak with detainees in the National Prison without other persons being present. The work of the Corrections Commission is not limited to convicted prisoners, but also includes prisoners on remand and other persons detained in the National Prison. The Corrections Commission also serves as the national preventive mechanism under the Convention against Torture, according to which not only prisons are inspected, but also all places where persons are or may be deprived of their liberty (e.g. also nursing homes). 123. In addition to the institutions mentioned here, there are numerous service agreements between the State of Liechtenstein and NGOs. By way of service agreements, NGOs are entrusted with implementation of measures relating to the protection and promotion of human rights in specific areas (e.g. operation of a Women's Home for the temporary housing of victims of domestic violence. 124. On 1 January 2007, the Law on the Equality of Persons with Disabilities entered into force. The law provides for an Office on the Equality of Persons with Disabilities. To implement the act, an office has been established with the Liechtenstein Association of Persons with Disabilities. National information policy relating to human rights instruments 125. All laws and practically all international treaties are considered by Parliament and must be published in the Liechtenstein Law Gazette (Liechtensteinisches Landesgesetzblatt (LGBl)). Law gazettes must be promulgated in all national newspapers. All international treaties applicable to Liechtenstein are made available to the public in German. The chronological and systematic compendium of law gazettes may be either be obtained from the Government Chancellery or accessed free of charge at www.gesetze.li. 126. The website of the Office for Foreign Affairs (www.aaa.llv.li) contains all national reports submitted by Liechtenstein as well as the recommendations of the human rights committees and treaty bodies. Media 127. Pursuant to the Information Act, the Liechtenstein public has the right to information concerning the activities of the authorities and the right to inspect files. These rights are intended to make official conduct transparent. All significant activities of Liechtenstein in the field of human rights are published in the form of press releases or articles in the two national newspapers appearing daily and on the national television channel. For instance, both the signing of new agreements as well as recommendations by treaty bodies relating to reports on various conventions are communicated via the Liechtenstein media. In this way, a high degree of public information concerning Liechtenstein's activities in the field of human rights can be ensured. Human rights education 128. To promote human rights effectively, it is of the utmost importance that the public be sensitized on human rights issues. Various measures targeting the general public or also specific target groups contribute to a broader discussion of human rights in general, but also specific topics such as respect, equality and equal opportunity, racism and violence prevention, as well as intercultural and respectful communication. 129. Human rights also play an important role in instruction at Liechtenstein schools. The curriculum requires human rights to be incorporated in various school subjects, with the basic objective of educating young people as open and tolerant individuals with respect to political, religious and ideological differences. On the one hand, young people are taught to stand up for their rights; on the other hand, they are taught to respect the rights of others. Special courses for teachers are also offered on these topics, including on how to deal with violence and racism at school. 130. With respect to State employees, it is important to raise awareness for human rights. This is especially true of judges, prosecutors, the police and prison employees. In the past, training programmes have thus been offered in various administrative offices of Liechtenstein. It is also of note that Liechtenstein's reporting under the UN human rights instruments always involves a large number of Government offices. Within the National Public Administration, this has led to a learning process and sensitization in the field of human rights. Role of civil society 131. Civil society plays an important role in general in Liechtenstein; the numerous associations are especially significant in this regard. Associations may be freely established in Liechtenstein, as long as their purpose is not unlawful. The State and the municipalities support the establishment of associations by various means, including financially. Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) may be freely established in Liechtenstein as associations. There are numerous associations engaged in human rights. In this regard, Amnesty International (Liechtenstein) is one of the few associations with a focus on human rights in general. Other associations focus more on specific human rights topics, such as the rights of women, homosexuals, and foreigners. Of special note are NGOs engaged in women's rights, since they are very well organized: 17 different NGOs from Liechtenstein are currently engaged within the Liechtenstein Women's Network. 132. Since 2009, the Office for Foreign Affairs has conducted an annual human rights dialogue with NGOs. About 20 to 30 NGOs involved in human rights are invited. The goal of the dialogue, which was established pursuant to a recommendation made to Liechtenstein by the Human Rights Committee as part of the Universal Periodic Review, is to offer NGOs a platform for exchanging ideas both among themselves and with the Office for Foreign Affairs and for discussing ways to participate in the protection of human rights. Another way for NGOs to exert influence is during the consultations on draft legislation. For every draft law relating to human rights, they have the possibility to submit comments and thus influence the shape of the legislation. If their concerns are not taken up during the legislative process, they are free to launch initiatives or referenda. D. Reporting process at the national level 133. The Office for Foreign Affairs is responsible for compiling all reports to be submitted in the field of human rights. The Office coordinates the entire process, from the drafting of the report to presentation and follow-up on recommendations. The Office works closely together with the relevant administrative offices in this regard. Periodic reports are finally adopted and submitted by the Government. 134. After presentation of the report before the respective monitoring body and receipt of the concluding recommendations, various measures are taken by Liechtenstein for the purposes of follow-up. The recommendations are first translated into German, and the content is made available to the public. The recommendations are also published in the form of a press release in the national newspapers. The concluding observations of the monitoring bodies are carefully analysed by the competent Government offices and, where necessary and possible, the required implementation measures are initiated. 135. Finally, the recommendations are also relevant to the NGO dialogue, where they are presented and discussed with the NGOs. IV. Information on non-discrimination and equality, and effective remedies 136. The principle of equality before the law is enshrined in article 31 of the Liechtenstein Constitution. This principle explicitly also includes the equality of men and women. According to article 31, paragraph 3, of the Constitution, the rights of foreigners are determined by international treaties, including their non-discrimination clauses, and by reciprocity. 137. Various social groups exist which may potentially be exposed to inequality and discrimination. In recent years, various measures have been taken in Liechtenstein to combat discrimination and unequal treatment of various social groups. In the following paragraphs, the most important affected groups and the relevant measures taken will be discussed. The principle of equal treatment under article 31 is a constitutional right which may be invoked as part of appeals. On a supplemental basis, the relevant special laws contain provisions on legal remedies available to affected persons. 138. In legal terms, men and woman in Liechtenstein are equal. On the one hand, equality before the law is enshrined in the Constitution; on the other hand, the 1999 Gender Equality Act aims to achieve equality of women and men at work. In particular, it contains a non-discrimination principle with respect to wage demands, harassment and sexual harassment, employment conditions, basic and continuing training, promotions, and dismissals. Since 2011, it has also served to ensure the equality of women and men with respect to access to and supply of goods and services. The Gender Equality Act also governs legal claims and remedies. Since 2001, Liechtenstein has also adopted several EU directives as part of its EEA membership which aim to achieve gender equality. 139. Additional legislation aims to improve the rights of women. This includes primarily the Victims Protection Act (since 2008), the criminal offence of stalking (since 2007), and the amendment of the State Employees Act (2008). The State Employees Act now expressly states that the equal opportunities of women and men in State employment must be ensured. Additionally, a better compatibility between family and work is to be achieved. 140. In addition to de jure equality, various measures exist for the purpose of guaranteeing de facto equality. The Office of Equal Opportunity annually submits a catalogue of measures to the Government to promote gender equality. Measures especially in the following areas are proposed and implemented: balanced representation of women and men in political bodies, education, employment, compatibility of family and work, social situation. With respect to promotion of the compatibility of family and work, day care spots and day structures at schools have been substantially expanded in recent years. 141. At the national level, various institutions are engaged on behalf of the promotion of women. These include the Gender Equality Commission, the Office of Equal Opportunity, the Working Group on the Promotion of Equality in the National Administration, various NGOs, and the Liechtenstein Women's Network. Moreover, cross-border networks exist in this area, and Liechtenstein participates in various such projects. Persons with disabilities 142. With the entry into force of the Law on the Equality of Persons with Disabilities at the beginning of 2007, a balanced instrument was created in Liechtenstein to safeguard the rights of persons with disabilities and at the same time to ensure the principle of proportionality. The de jure and de facto equality of persons with and without disabilities is one of the key concerns of Liechtenstein's social policy. The goal is to ensure equal rights with regard to participation in the life of society and to facilitate the autonomous pursuit of life goals. 143. One of the institutions for this purpose is Disability Insurance (Invalidenversicherung (IV)), which is primarily concerned with the financial security of persons with disabilities, but also the Liechtenstein Association of Persons with Disabilities, which publically represents the interests of persons with disabilities and runs an Office for the Equality of Persons with Disabilities on behalf of the Government. 144. The Government is currently reviewing the preconditions for accession to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Sexual orientation 145. Liechtenstein has made great progress over the last 20 years in the prevention of discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation. Until 1989, homosexual acts were forbidden and punishable. This prohibition was then repealed, as were other articles in the Criminal Code with a discriminatory effect on homosexual persons. 146. On 1 September 2011, a new Registered Partnership Act entered into force, which gives homosexual couples the option of registering their partnership. As a consequence, registered partners are deemed equivalent to married couples with respect to inheritance law, social insurance law, occupational pension provision, immigration and naturalization law, tax law and the other areas of public law. Marriage, the adoption of children, and the use of reproductive procedures remain excluded. Foreign population 147. The legal status of the foreign population in Liechtenstein is governed by the Vaduz Convention for Swiss citizens and the EEA Agreement and Law on the Free Movement of Persons Act (Personenfreizügigkeitsgesetz (PFZG)) for EEA citizens. For persons outside the EEA and Switzerland, the Foreigners Act (Ausländergesetz (AuG)) applies. The AuG governs entry and exit, family reunification, and termination of stay. 148. The integration spelled out in the AuG is based on the principle of "promoting and demanding," which calls upon foreigners to demonstrate their willingness to integrate and calls upon the native population to show openness toward immigrants. The core of this policy is the introduction of individual integration agreements between the State of Liechtenstein and individual foreigners. In these agreements, the foreigner pledges to achieve a certain level of competence in the German language within a predefined time. If the foreigner is unable to demonstrate the required language skills within the required time, the permit to stay in Liechtenstein may be revoked. The State provides financial support for attendance of these language classes as well as additional integration measures contained in the integration concept "Strength Through Diversity" and the associated 2010 plan of measures. 149. The principle of "promoting and demanding" also applies to acquisition of Liechtenstein citizenship. Naturalization is possible by way of a simplified or ordinary procedure. Under the simplified procedure with a legal entitlement to naturalization, three residency periods apply: five years for stateless persons, 10 years for persons married to Liechtenstein citizens (years of marriage count double), and 30 years of residency otherwise (years before the age of 20 count double). Under the ordinary procedure by way of municipal vote, the minimum residency is 10 years. Naturalization is dependent on evidence of skills in German and knowledge of Liechtenstein. 150. Family reunification is recognized as an important element for the integration of foreigners in Liechtenstein. Swiss citizens and citizens of EEA States with a permit to stay in Liechtenstein may immediately bring their families to Liechtenstein as soon as they have sufficient income and housing. This also applies to students with dependent children. Citizens of other countries who have a work permit may immediately bring their families to Liechtenstein, but this must be applied for within three years of receiving the permit. Persons who have received a work permit by way of family reunification may bring family members to Liechtenstein after residency of four years, provided they have a stable and permanent employment. Short-term residents and students do not have a right to family reunification. According to the AuG, family members moving to Liechtenstein must already acquire minimal German skills before receiving the right to stay, so that their integration is facilitated after arrival. Asylum seekers and refugees 151. The legal status of asylum seekers and refugees in Liechtenstein is governed by the Refugee Act, which entered into force in 1998. Persons seeking asylum in Liechtenstein are first housed in the central reception centre in Vaduz. The centre, which houses 40-60 asylum seekers, is run by the Liechtenstein Refugee Assistance association. Once an application is submitted, the grounds for the asylum application and the identity of the asylum seeker and their travel itinerary are determined by the Passport and Immigration Office. The interviews for this purpose are conducted in a language in which the asylum seeker has native-language competence. Moreover, each interview on the grounds for asylum must be attended by a representative of an assistance organization, which monitors compliance with the applicant's rights. 152. For the duration of the asylum procedure, the State makes the necessary housing available and provides the asylum seekers with vouchers for food and personal hygiene products. The social needs of the persons and the principle of family unity are also taken into account. Asylum seekers are legally required to earn their living to the extent possible. For this purpose, they are expressly permitted to work. School-age children of asylum seekers are enrolled in school, and vocational training is also provided where needed. 154. The Refugee Act is currently undergoing a total revision. 