%%%POLYMETALLIC SULPHIDES|SEABED MINING|MARINE RESOURCES|UNITED KINGDOM|RESOURCES EXPLORATION|

Eighteenth session Kingston, Jamaica 16-27 July 2012 Decision of the Council relating to a request for approval of a plan of work for exploration for polymetallic nodules submitted by UK Seabed Resources Ltd. The Council of the International Seabed Authority, Acting on the recommendation of the Legal and Technical Commission, Noting that, on 23 May 2012, a request for approval of a plan of work for exploration for polymetallic nodules was submitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with the Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area by UK Seabed Resources Ltd., Recalling that, in accordance with paragraph 6 (a) of section 1 of the annex to the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982, the processing of an application for approval of a plan of work for exploration shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Convention, including annex III thereto, and the Agreement, Recalling also that, pursuant to article 153, paragraph 3, of the Convention and paragraph 6 (b) of section 1 of the annex to the Agreement, the plan of work for exploration shall be in the form of a contract concluded between the Authority and the applicant, Taking note of the advisory opinion of the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea of 1 February 2011, 1. Takes note of the report and recommendations of the Legal and Technical Commission on the request for approval of a plan of work for exploration for polymetallic nodules submitted by UK Seabed Resources Ltd. transmitted to the Council, in particular paragraphs 30 to 34; 2. Decides, on the basis of the data and information submitted by UK Seabed Resources Ltd., and taking into account the recommendation of the Legal and Technical Commission, to designate part A of the application area as identified in the annex to the report and recommendations of the Legal and Technical Commission as the area reserved for the Authority; 3. Also decides, taking into account the recommendation of the Legal and Technical Commission, to allocate part B of the application area as identified in the annex to the report and recommendations of the Legal and Technical Commission to UK Seabed Resources Ltd. as the exploration area; 4. Approves the plan of work for exploration for polymetallic nodules submitted by UK Seabed Resources Ltd.; 5. Requests the Secretary-General of the Authority to issue the plan of work for exploration for polymetallic nodules in the form of a contract between the Authority and UK Seabed Resources Ltd. in accordance with the Regulations. 181st meeting 26 July 2012 