%%%NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONES|

First session Vienna, 30 April-11 May 2012 Nuclear-weapon-free zones Working paper submitted by China 1. The establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, in accordance with article VII of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the guidelines adopted by the United Nations Disarmament Commission in 1999, is of great significance in promoting nuclear disarmament, preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and enhancing regional and global peace and security. It also marks an important step towards the attainment of a world free of nuclear weapons. 2 The international community should actively support the countries concerned in their endeavour to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of consultations among themselves and voluntary agreements concluded in the light of the actual situation in their region. 3. Efforts should be made to give effective implementation to the resolution on the Middle East adopted by the 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The 2010 Review Conference decided to convene an international conference in 2012 on the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, which will constitute an important step in implementing the above-mentioned resolution. The participation of all States of the Middle East region is crucial to the success of this conference. 4. The agreement reached by the States parties to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone and the nuclear-weapon States on the outstanding issues of the Protocol to the Treaty will be conducive to the early signature and entry into force of the Protocol, a step of great significance to the promotion of peace and security in South-East Asia. 5. All nuclear-weapon States should give unconditional undertakings not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States and nuclear-weapon-free zones, and should conclude an international legal instrument to that end. 6. All nuclear-weapon States should respect the legal status of nuclear-weapon-free zones and sign and ratify the protocols to the relevant treaties on nuclear-weapon-free zones. They should adopt concerted measures to implement the security assurances stipulated in all nuclear-weapon-free-zone treaties and their associated protocols. 