%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|ARMED INCIDENTS|SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC|

Identical letters dated 16 April 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit herewith a detailed list of 50 violations in contravention of the guidelines on the cessation of violence in all its forms, which were committed by armed groups in Syria on 12 and 13 April 2012 (see annex). It would be highly appreciated if the present letter and its annex could be circulated, on an urgent basis, as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Bashar Ja'afari Ambassador Permanent Representative [Original: Arabic] Thursday, 12 April 2012 1. At 0830 hours, more than 45 armed persons attempted to enter Syrian territory by crossing surreptitiously across the border with Turkey in the area of Khirbat alJawz. They were intercepted and forced to flee. 2. At 1400 hours, as he was driving a Kia 3600 truck belonging to Shayma' Transportation Company, an armed terrorist group intercepted Muhammad Mawsili bin Muhammad Sa'id at the Basida junction in Ma'arrah and stole the cargo and a sum of money. 3. Muhammad Yasir bin Ahmad al-Ibrahim, an officer in the Syrian Arab Army, alleged that, at 1500 hours, Ali bin Hassan al-Ali and Muhsin bin Muhammad alRahyah, residents of Karam al-Lawz quarter, burned down his house, which is located in Karam al-Zaytun quarter. 4. At 1600 hours, Yusuf bin Salih al-Hajj Abdullah and Samir bin Muhammad Ali Jabrah alleged to the director of the Idlib area that an armed terrorist group stole their vehicles: a Suzuki bearing number plate 479636 and a Suzuki bearing number plate 530054 (Idlib). 5. At 1700 hours, a group of persons attempted to enter surreptitiously into Syrian territory from Turkey some 1.5 km west of the Salamah Gate. They were intercepted and forced to flee. 6. At 1900 hours, four armed persons in a tourist vehicle travelling along the Salamiyah-Sabburah road, Hama governorate, fired on and killed Hassan Haraz alSheikh (born 1964), headmaster of Siba' village school, Salamiyah district), as he was driving his Kia automobile. The attackers then fled. 7. At 2030 hours, two armed persons on a motorcycle fired on four persons inside the offices of Radwan Estate Agency, Salahaddin quarter, Aleppo, killing Taha Muhammad Radwan (born 1957), Mustafa Muhammad Qablawi (born 1956) and Muhammad Jamil Madin (born 1977). The fourth person was injured by a bullet. The attackers fled. 8. At 2030 hours, in Hamidiyyah quarter, Dayr al-Zawr, unidentified armed persons fired on and killed Chief Warrant Officer Jum'a Alyu, the driver of the director of the General Intelligence branch office. 9. At 2150 hours, shots were fired intermittently at law enforcement forces in Rif Dimashq; a conscript was wounded. 10. At 2230 hours, four armed persons fired on Sergeant Khalid Dahir al-Asi of the Fifth Division, Inkhil, Dar'a, who took shelter in a home. The attackers followed him into the home, shot and killed him and then fled. 11. At 2330 hours, six armed persons fired on and killed Brigadier General Walid Juni, commander of the 90th Brigade, in front of his home in Jaramanah, Rif Dimashq governorate. 12. At 2350 hours, an armed group fired on law enforcement forces in Qarabis quarter, Homs, killing Sergeant Ahmad Shukri al-Ibrahim and wounding another person. 13. At 2355 hours, a checkpoint in Barzah operated by law enforcement forces came under intense fire from an armed group. 14. The bodies of two unidentified persons were discovered in an ancient cistern north of the village of Tal'adah, Harim district. 15. An armed terrorist groups hurled two explosive devices at the house of Asim Awad al-Jahmani, a candidate in the parliamentary elections from Nawa, Dar'a governorate. One of the devices exploded without causing any injuries, while the other was disarmed. 16. The Directorate of Police Housing, Harista, Rif Dimashq, came under intense fire from an armed group. 17. The fuel depot at Harista came under intense fire from an armed group. 18. An armed group fired on the security checkpoint at Jubar and attacked the command post of the southern region in Zablatani. 19. In the city of Tall, unidentified armed persons in a Hyundai Avanti bearing forged number plate 889949 (Damascus) fired on a tanker truck belonging to the Armaments Directorate. The attack did not result in any casualties. Those same persons also seized a government vehicle belonging to the Rukn al-Din Post and Telephone Office. Friday, 13 April 2012 20. At 0240 hours, an armed group attacked the arsenal of the 34th Brigade Signal Corps in Dar'a, injuring a Staff Sergeant. 21. At 0300 hours, ten terrorists attempted to cross from Iraqi territory into Syrian territory in the district of Itz. They were intercepted and returned in the direction from which they had come. 22. At 0310 hours, an armed group opened fire on law enforcement forces in the quarter of Qarabis, in Homs, injuring a Staff Sergeant. 23. At 0315 hours, an armed group opened fire on law enforcement forces in Dayr Ba'alba, in Homs, injuring one individual. 24. At 0315 hours, an armed group opened fire on law enforcement forces in the Bayada quarter of Homs, injuring one individual. 25. At 0345 hours, armed men in a civilian car opened intense fire on the guard at the southern gate of the Infantry Academy in Aleppo, resulting in the martyrdom of the conscript Sa'd Mamduh Al-Sattuf. 26. At 0800 hours, an armed group comprising between six and eight members stopped civilian cars on the Damascus-Aleppo highway, intimidating and stealing from citizens. 27. At 0845 hours, ten armed men threw seven sticks of dynamite in the Tabiyat and the Saydawi Garden quarters of Ladhiqiya, injuring one law enforcement officer. 28. At 1000 hours, an armed terrorist group of some 20 individuals entered the 7 April Agricultural Centre in the village of Buwayl, district of Muhasan. They threatened the two guards and stole two Russian rifles and six 200-round magazines before fleeing the scene. 29. At 1000 hours, unknown individuals planted a 10-kilogramme explosive device in the car of Asim Awad al-Jahmani in the town of Nawa, Dar'a. The device was connected to the car battery and was defused by members of the military bomb squad without material or human damage. 30. At 1030 hours, seven armed men blocked the Ladhiqiya-Aleppo road and stole a refrigerated van. 31. At 1045 hours, an explosive device was detonated between the Sahn and Jubb roundabouts in the quarter of Qusur, Hama, while law enforcement patrols were passing. There were no injuries. 32. An explosive device was detonated at 1130 hours, targeting law enforcement forces in the region of Abu Kamal. Two people were injured. 33. At 1200 hours, an explosive device planted by a terrorist group exploded in the market of the city of Abu Kamal, injuring two people. 34. At 1300 hours, an armed terrorist group travelling in a van seized a government-owned Mitsubishi double-cabin pick-up van, registration number 894766, belonging to the Directorate-General of Development and Environmental Preservation at the Jazira station, Badiyat al-'Ishara, district of Mayadin. 35. At 1300 hours, some 70 individuals demonstrated in the locality of Sukkari -- Tall al-Zarazir, Aleppo governorate, carrying sticks, knives and daggers, were warned by patrols that they should disperse. None of them complied, and two opened fire with pump-action rifles and threw explosive devices towards the patrols and passers-by. Three people were injured and taken to the Aleppo Military Hospital. The demonstrators were dispersed by the patrols and fled into the side-streets. Two of them were apprehended. 36. At 1300 hours, some individuals gathered in front of the Fatima al-Zahra mosque on Al Shahbani Street, in the Al-Bab quarter of Aleppo. They blocked the street with rocks and triangle signs and pelted patrols with stones and Molotov cocktails. Two people fired shots, one with a revolver and one with a Russian rifle, from within the market near the quarter. Nobody was harmed. 37. At 1300 hours, armed groups fired indiscriminately on the people of Salqin in Idlib governorate and attacked public and private property. 38. After worshippers had left the Hussain mosque on the road to the dam in Dar'a, people gathered at the entrance to the camp and threw stones and two Molotov cocktails at security and law enforcement forces, injuring five men from the State security forces in Dar'a, who were taken to the National Hospital for treatment. 39. At 1400 hours, an armed terrorist group murdered Major Musa Tamir Yusuf in the Safsafa quarter of Hama. 40. At 1700 hours, some 60 armed men attacked law enforcement forces at Khan Shaykhun in Idlib. 41. At 2030 hours, an armed terrorist group fired on and threw sticks of dynamite at joint patrols at the Mudallja roundabout in Dayr al-Zawr, injuring two, who were taken to the military hospital in the city. 42. At 2030 hours, unknown armed persons in the town of Sayyida Zainab in Rif Dimashq shot and killed Shaykh Muhammad Nasser al-Alawi, a Pakistani national who was studying in the hawza in that town. 43. At 2100 hours, as they were travelling between the towns of Musayfirah and Sahwat in a public vehicle driven by Warrant Officer Jihad Zainaddin, Rabi' Fayyad Ghabra and Nathim Azzam, air force intelligence officials from Dar'a, and Tariq Fawwaz Sariwi, a policeman from the Dar'a political security branch, were ambushed by an armed terrorist group. Both Warrant Officer Jihad and Nathim Azzam were killed, while Tariq, the policeman, was shot in the back and taken to hospital. Rabi' Fayyad Ghabra was abducted. 44. At 2200 hours, an armed terrorist group murdered Chief Warrant Officer Jama'a al-Aliwi in his home in Dayr al-Zawr. 45. An armed terrorist group fired two rocket-propelled grenades at a car belonging to law enforcement forces that was carrying an injured person, but did not hit it. 46. Armed terrorist groups threw sticks of dynamite at law enforcement patrols in Hama governorate, without doing any damage. 47. Armed men fired on and killed Major Musa Yusuf when he was returning by car to his home in Masafi, Hama governorate. 48. A terrorist group fired on but did not harm law enforcement force personnel in Kafr Shams, Dar'a governorate. 49. In Abu Kamal, an explosive device was detonated as a law enforcement patrol was passing, injuring a citizen who happened to be in the area. 50. Nine persons who had been injured by weapons fire at various places in Homs and the surrounding countryside were taken to the military hospital. Armed men were seen on bicycles and pick-up vehicles in the village of Jusiyah, and large numbers of armed men were seen laying mines and harrying security checkpoints in the Rustun area. 