%%%MILITARY ACTIVITY|BOUNDARIES|SOUTH SUDAN|SUDAN|SOUTHERN KORDOFAN (SUDAN : STATE)|

Letter dated 28 April 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council 1. Further to our previous letters addressed to the esteemed Security Council regarding violations of and attacks against Sudanese territory committed by South Sudan, I should like to inform you that People's Movement forces connected to South Sudan are currently present in three areas inside the territory of the Republic of the Sudan, north of the border established on 1 January 1956. Those forces are present in the following areas: I. Southern Darfur (a) Samahah, Southern Darfur, which is located 30 km north of the border established on 1 January 1956. (b) Mayram, Southern Darfur, which is located 14 km north of the border established on 1 January 1956. (c) Kafiya Kingi, Seri Melaga and Kafan Daba, Southern Darfur, which are located some 5-20 km north of the border established on 1 January 1956. II. Southern Kordofan (d) People's Movement forces connected to South Sudan are present in Buhayrat Abyad, which is located some 5-6 km north of the border established on 1 January 1956. III. Blue Nile (e) In Blue Nile state, those forces are present in Yabus, Uru and Fung, which are located some 4-5 km north of the border established on 1 January 1956. 2. In light of the information presented above, we call on the Security Council to condemn that aggression and exercise caution when speaking of aerial bombardment as long as invading forces are present in Sudanese territory and are conducting military operations against the Sudan. In that connection, we would like to make it clear that the Sudan is fully entitled to defend its territorial unity and integrity, pursuant to Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations, which guarantees the right of self-defence. The Government of the Sudan also has the right to defend the unity of its territory by all means, including through the use of the air force, particularly since the aggression occurred inside the territory of the Republic of the Sudan. 3. In conclusion, we would like to underscore that the policy of the Government of the Sudan is not to interfere in the affairs of other States or to violate their territorial integrity. 4. I should be grateful if this complaint could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Daffa-Alla Elhag Ali Osman Permanent Representative 