%%%PEACEBUILDING|POLITICAL CONDITIONS|GUINEA-BISSAU|MALI|SUDAN|SOUTH SUDAN|SOMALIA|COOPERATION BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS|

Letter dated 13 June 2012 from the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council At a consultative meeting of members of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, held in New York on 13 June 2012, the members of the two Councils adopted a joint communiqué (see annex). I would be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Baso Sangqu Ambassador Permanent Representative of the Republic of South Africa Communiqué of the consultative meeting between members of the Security Council of the United Nations and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union 1. The members of the Security Council of the United Nations and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union held their 6th consultative meeting at United Nations Headquarters on Wednesday, 13 June 2012. 2. Reaffirming the primary responsibility of the Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security and the mandate of the Peace and Security Council with regard to the promotion of peace and security in Africa, also reaffirming the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations on the role of regional arrangements in the settlement of disputes among and within their Member States, and recalling the communiqués of their previous consultative meetings held between 2007 and 2011, the two Councils reviewed matters of common interest, in particular the ways and means of strengthening the partnership between them, consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, with regard to the maintenance of peace and security in Africa. 3. The members of the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council assessed their cooperation with regard to conflict prevention and resolution, and peacekeeping and peacebuilding, including the maintenance of constitutional order and the promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of law in Africa. 4. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council recognized the positive role that women have played in the peaceful resolution of conflict and underscored the need to strengthen women's participation in peace and mediation and political processes. In that regard, they reaffirmed the vital role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations, peacebuilding, peacekeeping, humanitarian response and post-conflict reconstruction. The members of the two Councils expressed concern at the situation of women and children in conflict situations and post-conflict contexts; they stressed the need to effectively address the problem of sexual violence in armed conflict and post-conflict situations; to investigate crimes committed against women and children; and to ensure that their perpetrators are brought to justice. They also stressed the need for the United Nations and the African Union to work to ensure that women and gender perspectives are fully integrated into peace and security efforts undertaken by the two organizations, including by building the necessary capacity. Strengthening of methods of work and cooperation 5. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council welcomed the adoption of resolution 2033 (2012) and stressed the importance of further cooperation and of developing effective relationships, consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, to address common collective security challenges in Africa. 6. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council took note of the communiqué of the Peace and Security Council dated 9 January 2012 and the reports of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on their respective strategic visions of the partnership between the African Union and the United Nations and the practical modalities proposed in those reports for enhancing the partnership between the two institutions. They stressed that common and coordinated efforts undertaken by the two Councils in matters of peace and security should be based on their respective authorities, competencies and capacities. 7. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council expressed satisfaction with the recent progress made in the cooperation between the two Councils and expressed their determination to improve the effectiveness of consultative meetings in the future. They agreed to elaborate further ways of strengthening relations between the two Councils, including through more effective annual consultative meetings and the holding of timely consultations and collaborative field missions of the two Councils, as appropriate, to formulate cohesive positions and strategies on a case-by-case basis in dealing with conflict situations in Africa. 8. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council welcomed the regular interaction between the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission, through the United Nations-African Union joint task force on peace and security, encouraged the task force to continue to focus on strategic and country-specific issues on the African continent that are of interest to both organizations, and requested the task force to consider ways to enhance cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union on conflict-prevention in Africa. 9. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council also welcomed close collaboration of the United Nations Secretariat, most notably in (a) the joint African Union-United Nations technical assessment mission in respect of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); (b) the joint assessment mission to the Sahel region; and (c) the development of the framework for African Union and United Nations facilitation of the Darfur peace process. 10. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council encouraged the improvement of regular joint interaction, consultation and coordination, as appropriate, on matters of mutual interest. They expressed support for further interaction between the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission to exchange information and, as appropriate, coordinate in the preparation of recommendations, including through joint assessments, in order to assist the two Councils in formulating cohesive positions and strategies. 11. The members of the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council reiterated the need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing of the African Union peace and security capability. They recalled the report of the African Union-United Nations panel (A/63/666-S/2008/813) as an important contribution towards the overall efforts to enhance the capacity of the African Union in undertaking peacekeeping operations. They also reiterated that regional organizations have the responsibility to secure human, financial, logistical and other resources for their organizations, including through contributions by their members and support from partners. They intend to continue to exchange views on the issue in future joint consultative meetings. Peace consolidation in West Africa 12. The members of the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council condemned the recent instances of unconstitutional change in West Africa and reiterated their commitment to strengthening democracy, peace and stability on the continent. They expressed concern at the serious threat to international peace and stability in different regions of the world, in particular West Africa and the Sahel region, posed by transnational organized crime, including illicit weapons and drug trafficking, piracy and armed robbery at sea. They also expressed serious concern about the insecurity and rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Sahel region, which is further complicated by the presence of armed groups and terrorist groups and their activities, and by the proliferation of weapons from within and outside the region that threaten the peace, security and stability of regional States. Guinea-Bissau 13. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council expressed their strong condemnation of the coup d'état perpetrated on 12 April 2012. 14. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council underlined the urgent need to continue to strengthen measures to restore and respect constitutional order, including a democratic electoral process, and that members of the "military command" relinquish their position of authority. They expressed their concern with continuing reports of human rights violations and abuses, including arbitrary detentions, ill-treatment during detention, repression of peaceful demonstrations and the restrictions on freedom of movement. 15. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council reaffirmed the importance of concerted international action, including by the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European Union, as well as the mediation efforts led by ECOWAS, with a view to developing a comprehensive integrated strategy with concrete measures aimed at implementing security sector, political and economic reforms, combating drug trafficking and fighting impunity. The members of the two Councils resolved to keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau under continuous review, and each expressed their readiness to consider additional measures. In that context, they noted the withdrawal of the Angolan military mission from Guinea-Bissau. 16. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council stressed that the recurrence of illegal interference of the military in politics in Guinea-Bissau and the impact of illicit drug trafficking and organized crime contribute to the persistence of instability and a culture of impunity and hamper efforts to consolidate the rule of law, implement security sector reform and promote the development and entrenchment of a democratic culture. They reaffirmed the need for effective restoration of constitutional order. Mali 17. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council strongly condemned the forcible seizure of power from the democratically elected Government of Mali by some members of the Malian armed forces. 18. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council acknowledged the signing on 6 April 2012 by the perpetrators of the coup d'état in Mali and ECOWAS mediators of a framework agreement for the implementation of the solemn undertaking of 1 April 2012, providing for a series of steps for the restoration of constitutional order in Mali. They urged all Malian stakeholders to implement the agreement. 19. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council urged Malians to desist from unlawful conduct and acts of violence and to support all political and legitimate efforts to restore constitutional and democratic governance. 20. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council reaffirmed the need to uphold and respect the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Mali and reject categorically any declarations to the contrary, demanded in that regard the full cessation of hostilities in the north of Mali by rebel groups and acknowledged the efforts of ECOWAS to explore options to restore peace and security in Mali in the context of upholding its territorial integrity. 21. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council expressed deep concern at the increased terrorist threat in the north of Mali due to the presence among the rebels of members of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, condemned all violence, including against humanitarian workers, called for the immediate cessation of all violence and renewed their call to all parties in Mali to seek a peaceful solution through appropriate political dialogue. 22. The members of the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council reaffirmed their support to the mediations efforts made by the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS for the restoration of constitutional rule in Mali and for initiating concrete steps to protect its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. 23. The members of the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council took note of the communiqué of the meeting of the Peace and Security Council held on 12 June 2012, and will examine proposals for future appropriate steps to assist ECOWAS in its efforts in Mali. Sudan/South Sudan 24. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council welcomed the adoption of Security Council resolution 2046 (2012), in which the Council expressed support for the Peace and Security Council communiqué of 24 April 2012. They welcomed the resumption of negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and the Government of South Sudan under the auspices of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, and reaffirmed that the Government of the Sudan and Government of South Sudan must comply with all of their obligations under the resolution and the African Union road map to ensure peace and stability and to create conditions necessary for two viable and prosperous States. 25. The members of the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council expressed their concern at the prevailing situation between the Sudan and South Sudan. They reaffirmed their strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial integrity of the Sudan and South Sudan and reiterated that the territorial boundaries of States shall not be altered by force and that any territorial disputes shall be settled exclusively by peaceful means. 26. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council expressed their grave concern over the conflict in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States in the Sudan and the resulting dire humanitarian situation. They reaffirmed that the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North must extend full cooperation to the African Union High-level Implementation Panel and the Chair of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to reach a negotiated settlement on the basis of the 28 June 2011 framework agreement on political partnership between the National Congress Party and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North and political and security arrangements in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan States. They urged the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North to accept the tripartite proposal by the African Union, the United Nations and the League of Arab States, for immediate humanitarian access to the affected population in the two areas. 27. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council expressed concern over the continued violence and insecurity in Darfur. They welcomed the framework for African Union and United Nations facilitation of the Darfur peace process. They emphasized the importance of the implementation of the Doha document for peace in Darfur and in that regard also welcomed the inauguration of the Darfur Regional Authority as an important step in the implementation of the Doha document for peace and also emphasized the need to ensure that the Authority has sufficient resources and capabilities to fulfil its responsibilities. They urged all parties, in particular other armed movements who had not signed the Doha document for peace in Darfur, to indicate a willingness to negotiate without preconditions or further delays on the basis of the Doha document for peace in Darfur and fully participate in the joint African Union/United Nations mediation. Somalia 28. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council noted that the political process in Somalia was at a critical phase, with only two months to go until the end of the transitional period on 20 August 2012. They noted that there would be no further extension of the transitional period. They welcomed the progress made so far in the implementation of the road map to end the transition and reaffirmed their commitment to supporting the process. They expressed concern that some deadlines for the completion of tasks had already been missed. 29. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council urged the transitional federal institutions and all other signatories of the road map to redouble their efforts to complete on time the remaining tasks, including the creation of a representative constituent assembly, with the participation of women and civil society; the adoption of a provisional constitution underpinned by respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms; the establishment of a new parliament; and indirect elections of a speaker and president. They welcomed the Addis Ababa agreement of 23 May, which had renewed the momentum of the process, and reiterated the importance of meeting the deadlines agreed in the agreement. 30. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council stressed the primary responsibility of the Somali parties to reach agreement on broad-based, inclusive and representative post-transitional arrangements, in line with the Djibouti peace process, Kampala agreement, road map, Garowe principles and Addis Ababa agreement. They urged the transitional federal institutions and the road map signatories to abide by their commitments, and also stressed the importance of a transparent and legitimate political process, including public consultations on the Constitution. They welcomed the conclusions and commitments of Somali stakeholders and the international community at the London Conference held on 23 February and the Istanbul Conference held from 31 May to 1 June. In addressing the challenges of Somalia, they called for a continued coherent and cooperative international approach. 31. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council strongly supported the joint letter of 1 May 2012 by the African Union Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the United Nations, and reiterated their readiness to support measures against internal and external actors or groups that sought to undermine or block the peace process in Somalia, including after the August transition deadline has passed, while recognizing the importance of freedom of speech and of assembly. 32. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council commended the progress made by AMISOM and the Somali national security forces in consolidating security and stability in Mogadishu, and recognized the significant sacrifices made by those forces. They welcomed the adoption of Security Council resolution 2036 (2012), in which the Council facilitated the expansion of the control of the Transitional Federal Government over large parts of Somalia. They also welcomed the cooperation of the African Union and the United Nations on the technical assessment mission to design the new concept of operations of AMISOM. They called upon new troop-contributing countries to fully integrate their forces into AMISOM command and control structures, in line with the above-mentioned resolution. They stressed the need to expedite the staffing of the force headquarters and called upon all the countries concerned to extend full cooperation in that respect. 33. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council welcomed the work of the Transitional Federal Government and local governance structures to promote stability and reconciliation in the newly liberated regions in Somalia, and encouraged further efforts in that regard. 34. The members of the Security Council and Peace and Security Council expressed grave concern over the threat that piracy and armed robbery at sea against vessels pose to the situation in Somalia and other States in the region, and to international navigation, the safety of commercial maritime routes and the safety of seafarers and other persons. They underlined the importance of a comprehensive response to repress piracy and its underlying causes, including the need to investigate and prosecute those who finance, plan, organize or profit from pirate attacks, and took note of the report of the Secretary-General of 25 October 2011 on the protection of Somali natural resources and waters, and on alleged illegal fishing and illegal dumping, including of toxic substances, in line with paragraph 7 of resolution 1976 (2011). They emphasized that peace and stability within Somalia, the strengthening of State institutions, economic and social development and respect for human rights and the rule of law are necessary to create the conditions for the durable eradication of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia. 35. The next consultative meeting will be held at the headquarters of the African Union no later than July 2013. 