%%%HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|SOUTHERN KORDOFAN (SUDAN : STATE)|BLUE NILE (SUDAN : STATE)|SUDAN|

Letter dated 3 July 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Further to my previous correspondence dated 27 June 2012 on the Government of the Sudan's acceptance of the tripartite initiative of the African Union, the United Nations and the League of Arab States regarding the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the needy population in South Kordofan and Blue Nile States, I have the pleasure to transmit to you the press release issued by the African Union welcoming the acceptance by the Government of the Sudan of the tripartite initiative (see annex). I would be grateful if the present letter and its annex were circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Daffa-Alla Elhag Ali Osman Permanent Representative Press release The African Union welcomes the Sudan Government acceptance of the African Union/United Nations/League of Arab States joint proposal on humanitarian assistance Addis Ababa, 29 June 2012 The Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union, Jean Ping, welcomes the acceptance by the Government of the Sudan of the tripartite proposal of the African Union, the United Nations and the League of Arab States for access to provide and deliver humanitarian assistance to the war-affected civilians in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States. The Chairperson of the Commission wishes to underscore, as evidenced by the African Union road map of 24 April 2012, the Commission's unwavering support for the tripartite proposal since it is imperative that the affected population has access to humanitarian assistance, while a lasting political solution is being sought. In line with the tripartite proposal, the Chairperson of the Commission urges all those responsible to ensure that it is effectively and fully implemented without further delay, to facilitate the humanitarian operation in the two affected States. Furthermore, the Chairperson of the Commission would like to underline the readiness of the African Union to contribute personnel to the joint teams that would be responsible for undertaking a rapid humanitarian assessment mission in all affected areas. The Commission is also ready to contribute monitors. The teams and monitors will work very closely with the Sudanese parties to ensure neutrality, impartiality, accountability and transparency in the delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Chairperson of the Commission acknowledges the fact that the Sudanese parties remain the primary guarantors of the safety and security of all humanitarian staff and observers deployed in these affected areas. The Chairperson of the Commission reiterates the African Union's continued commitment to assisting the Sudanese parties, through the African Union High-level Implementation Panel on Sudan, in finding a lasting solution to their challenges. In this respect, and in line with the African Union road map, the Chairperson of the Commission reiterates the African Union's conviction that a political settlement is the only long-term solution to the crisis in the two States. 