%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC|

Letter dated 13 July 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to attach a letter dated 13 July 2012 from the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria, Kofi A. Annan, on the reports of intense violence and significant casualties in the town of Trem-seh, near Hama, including the use of heavy weapons in violation of the obligation of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic under Security Council resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) (see annex). I condemn this outrageous escalation of violence in the strongest possible terms, and fully concur with the views expressed by the Joint Special Envoy. I reiterate my call on members of the Security Council to insist on the implementation of the Council's resolutions and to exercise their common responsibilities by taking necessary collective action under the Charter of the United Nations. I should be grateful if you could bring this letter and its annex to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) BAN Ki-moon I am writing in the light of the tragic reports coming out of the village of Trem-seh, near Hama, of intense fighting and significant casualties. The use of artillery, tanks and helicopters, which has been confirmed by the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, is a violation of the Syrian Government's obligations and commitments to cease the use of heavy weapons in population centres under the six-point plan and Security Council resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). When I briefed the Security Council on 11 July, I stated that despite repeated promises to comply with its obligation to cease the use of heavy weapons, the Government has increased its operations -- with shelling, mechanized infantry and the use of helicopter gunships, including in population centres. Tragically, we now have another grim reminder that the Council's resolutions continue to be flouted. On Wednesday I recommended that the Council should insist on implementation of its decisions, and send a message to all that there will be consequences for non-compliance. This is imperative and could not be more urgent in light of unfolding events. (Signed) Kofi A. Annan Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria 