%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|ARMED INCIDENTS|SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC|

Identical letters dated 9 August 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council Upon instructions from my Government, and following my letters dated 16 to 20 and 23 to 25 April, 7, 11, 14 to 16, 18, 21, 24, 29 and 31 May, 1, 4, 6, 7, 11, 19, 20, 25, 27 and 28 June, 2, 3, 9, 11, 13, 16, 17 and 24 July, and 1 and 2 August 2012, I have the honour to attach herewith a detailed list of violations of cessation of violence that were committed by armed groups in Syria from Sunday evening, 22 July 2012, until Monday evening, 23 July 2012 (see annex). It would be highly appreciated if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Bashar Ja'afari Ambassador Permanent Representative Annex to the identical letters dated 9 August 2012 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council [Original: Arabic] From 2000 hours on Sunday, 22 July 2012 to 2000 hours on Monday, 23 July 2012 Time Location No. From To Composition of terrorist group Operations carried out by terrorist group Outcome Damascus and the surrounding rural areas Armed terrorist group Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Tall Manin. Lieutenant Muhammad Isa was killed. Colonel Ali Saqr was shot in Nahr Aishah. The Colonel was killed. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Damascus. Colonel Fayad Kado was killed. Police headquarters in Damascus were attacked. Staff Sergeant Khalil al-Salum and Chief Warrant Officer Yassir Fashtuk came under fire in the Zablatani district. Staff Sergeant Khalil al-Salum was killed and Chief Warrant Officer Yassir Fashtuk was abducted. Law enforcement personnel were attacked in Rif Dimashq. Colonel Ayman Awdah and Staff Sergeant Ali Zubaidi were killed. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Harasta. Three men, including a major, were injured. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Darayya. One man was injured. Armed terrorist groups A law enforcement checkpoint in the Judaydat Artuz area was attacked. Lieutenant Muhammad Jurji, Warrant Officer Mahran As`ad, Staff Sergeant Rami Mahmud, Staff Sergeant Muhammad Ismail, Conscript Muhammad al-Abdu, Conscript Sadiq al-Rawi, Private Ahmad al-Hussain and Private Ali al-Shaykh Salim were killed; four men, including a colonel and a captain, were injured. Two vehicles belonging to the law enforcement forces were stolen. A law enforcement checkpoint in Rif Dimashq came under fire. Sergeant Muhammad Ismail and Conscript Muhammad Abdu were killed. A border guard rations vehicle was ambushed in the Sahl district. Conscripts Ali Yusuf, Hilal Milham, Jum`ah al-Shaykhu Wa'il Hanu, Corporal Hussam Ali, Private Kamal Ghazi and Conscripts Abdulsalam Haraki, Abdulqadir al-Abd, Ammar Matar and Abdulrahman Abu Hawa were killed; four men were injured. Four rifles and three automatic machine guns were stolen. Dar`a and the surrounding rural areas A law enforcement checkpoint at the Atman turn-off near the south Khirbat Ghazalah bridge came under fire from various types of weapon. Captain Muhammad Safatli, Corporal Ali al-Zayyat, Sergeant Ahmad al-Ubaid, Staff Sergeant Haidar Fadil, Staff Sergeant Isam Rajab, Sergeant Abdullah al-Mish`al, Conscript Muhammad Qasim, Corporal Fadi Nastah, Conscript Hassan al-Aklah, Conscript Khidr al-Ajl, Corporal Taha Ahmad, Conscript Salih al-Salim, Conscript Omar al-Dahi, Conscript Ala' al-Ali, Corporal Muayyad Nawfal, Conscripts Hassan Unis and Abdulrahman Kalbun and Sergeant Muhannad Muhammad Abdulnassir Sibahi Shahin were killed; eight other men were injured. An explosive device was detonated, targeting a law enforcement patrol in Tafas. Two law enforcement personnel came under fire as they entered a shop in the town of Sayda with a view to making purchases. Conscripts Ahmad Baghdadi and Ahmad Baitar were killed and their vehicle was stolen. Seven armed men In the Darayya district, the home of a civilian, Abdulrahman al-Bujayrimi was broken into and the keys for a small bus belonging to the United Nations were taken under threat of armed force. The bus was forcibly seized. Personnel guarding a military barracks in Sath Zahnan came under fire. Law enforcement personnel came under fire near the Bilal mosque in Dar`a city centre. Conscript Muhammad Ali was killed. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Sanamayn. Three men, including a captain, were injured. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Busra al-Sham. A civilian, Hussain Abu Khadur, came under fire in Dar`a. The civilian was injured. A bus taking police personnel on leave came under fire in Dar`a. One policeman was killed and another, Bilal Haymud, was abducted and killed; his body, bearing marks of torture, was found on the Sadd road. In addition, policeman Hussain al-Jubayl was abducted. Law enforcement personnel came under fire near the Hussain mosque in Dar`a city centre. Conscript Zahir Awad was killed. Conscript Khalid al-Zuwayn was abducted in the Shaykh Miskin district. A civilian, Mundhir Safuk, came under fire in Shaykh Miskin. The civilian was killed. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Dar`a. Two men were injured. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Harak. Lieutenant Aws Ali was killed. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in the electricity company road in Dar`a. Chief Warrant Officer Baha al-Zu`bi was shot and his body dumped between the city of Dar`a and Tafas. The Chief Warrant Officer was killed. Law enforcement personnel came under fire near the Nu`aymah bridge. Qunaytirah Law enforcement personnel were attacked in Jubbata al-Khashab. Twelve men were killed, of whom Captain Fatir Mustafa has been identified; 11 other men were injured. A passenger vehicle belonging to the United Nations and a bus and tanker belonging to the law enforcement forces were stolen. Homs and the surrounding rural areas Law enforcement personnel in Talbisah came under fire from machine gun and sniper fire, rocket-propelled grenades and mortars. Two men were killed and six others injured. Law enforcement personnel came under fire from gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades in Qarabis, Cairo Street, Karm Shamsham, Bab Tadmur, Bab al-Siba`, Wadi al-Sayih, Khalidiyah, Sultaniyah and Rastan. Law enforcement personnel were attacked in Qusayr. Five men were injured. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Sittin Street. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in the Nazihin district. Border guards came under fire in Tall Kalakh. Personnel guarding the oil pipeline near the Sha`irat airport came under fire. Law enforcement personnel came under sporadic fire in Karm Shamsham, Cairo Street, Bab Tadmur, Wadi al-Sayih, Khalidiyah and Tall Kalakh. Law enforcement personnel came under fire from gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades in Qarabis, Qusur, Jurat al-Shayyah, Talbisah and Rastan. One man was killed and five injured. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Baytarah. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in the village of Naqirah. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in Bab al-Siba`. Border guards were attacked at Qasr in Jusiyah. Three men were injured. Law enforcement personnel at Umm Shamsham, the Manarah gas station and Za`faraniyah came under attack from various types of weapon. Lieutenant Manhal Zayud and Conscripts Abdullah Jasim, Ahmad Nazal, Khalil al-Hamad, Ahmad Zakur, Hamud al-Harran and Muhannad Shahadah were killed; 13 men were injured and 35 abducted. One vehicle belonging to the law enforcement forces was destroyed and two of their armoured vehicles were stolen. Hama and the surrounding rural areas Some 20-30 armed terrorists The village of Abb al-Khaznah in the subdistrict of Hamra was attacked and the inhabitants threatened with death unless they left the village. A tractor was stolen from a civilian, Khalid al-Bakri, near the Mazarib bridge. The subdistrict of Suran was attacked. The administrator of Suran subdistrict, Lieutenant Colonel Muhammad Hamud, was abducted along with six other men. A civilian, Ahmad Milham, was abducted as he was working on his farm to the south of the village of Tuwayni in the Ghab district. The civilian was abducted and his vehicle stolen. Eight armed terrorists Two vehicles, licence plate Nos. 333291 and 353716, were stolen in the Masafi district. A law enforcement patrol came under fire between the town of Ziyarah and Shaqqat al-Alman. An explosive device was detonated near Harat al-Samak. Another explosive device at the same place was defused by military engineers. Seven armed terrorists A tanker, licence plate No. 941928, belonging to the Suran water collective, was stolen near the village of Kubbariyah in the Suran subdistrict. Shots were fired and a hand grenade thrown at law enforcement personnel in Asi square. Aleppo and the surrounding rural areas The Ansari and Sukkari police buildings came under attack from sniper and machine gun fire. One man was killed. Law enforcement personnel at the Safirah district directorate and criminal security building came under fire. Law enforcement personnel in the Hamdaniyah precinct were attacked. Personnel guarding the northern region officers' club came under fire. Law enforcement personnel came under attack from machine guns, sniper fire and rocket-propelled grenades in the Salah al-Din and Sakhur neighbourhoods. Roadblocks were set up, passing vehicles were searched and public and private property was despoiled. One man was killed and four others injured. Four police vehicles were destroyed. An explosive device was detonated, targeting a law enforcement patrol on the Himayah highway. Two men were injured; the vehicle was damaged. Law enforcement personnel in Aleppo came under fire. Conscripts Abdulaziz Faraj, Hassan al-Abdullah and Lu'ayy al-Ayaf were killed. An explosive device was detonated in President's square. Three civilians were injured. Idlib and the surrounding rural areas Law enforcement personnel came under fire on the Jisr al-Shughur-Ariha road. Law enforcement personnel came under fire in the village of Rami in Jabal al-Zawiyah. Dayr al-Zawr Law enforcement personnel were attacked in Dayr al-Zawr. Ladhiqiyah Law enforcement and border guard personnel came under fire in Rabi`ah. Chief Warrant Officer Nazih Sulayman and Conscript Ali al-Hussain were killed and 20 men were injured. Law enforcement and police personnel came under fire in the village of Haffah. Violations along Syrian borders with neighbouring States (border guard forces) Lebanese border Law enforcement personnel in Idlin, Halat and Uyun al-Sha`rah in Tall Kalakh came under fire from gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades from the Lebanese villages of Nurah and Dababiyah. The fire was intended to provide cover for the attempted infiltration of Syrian territory by armed men from Lebanese territory. Iraqi border Border guard posts positioned along the Iraqi border and a part of the Turkish border in Hasakah governorate were attacked. Sergeant Hassan Abbas and Conscript Faisal al-Ali were killed and 10 others injured. Jordanian border There was an attempted infiltration of Syrian territory from Jordanian territory and border guards in Dar`a came under fire. Killed Injured Abducted Firing of weapons and attacks against Explosive devices Attempted cross-border infiltration and smuggling of weapons Unidentified bodies discovered Civilians Law enforcement officers Exploded Defused Exploded in assembly Lebanon Turkey Iraq Jordan 