%%%SPECIAL MISSIONS|TIMOR-LESTE|COSTS|EAST TIMOR QUESTION|

United Nations A/53/7/Add.13 General Assembly Distr.: General 20 May 1999 Original: English Fifty-third session Agenda item 113 Programme budget for the biennium 1998–1999 Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Addendum Fourteenth report: Question of East Timor 1. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions has received the report of the Secretary-General on the question of East Timor (A/C.5/53/61). As indicated in paragraph 4 of the report, the Security Council, in its resolution 1236 (1999) of 7 May 1999, welcomed the intention of the Secretary-General to establish as soon as practicable a United Nations presence in East Timor, with a view to assisting in the implementation of the Agreements between the Governments of Indonesia and Portugal, signed on 5 May 1999. 2. The Advisory Committee notes from paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Secretary-General’s report that two supplementary agreements were also concluded on 5 May 1999 between the United Nations and the Governments of Indonesia and Portugal on the modalities for the popular consultation of the East Timorese through a direct ballot and on security arrangements. Accordingly, the two parties requested the United Nations to deploy, immediately upon signature, United Nations personnel adequate for the execution of the various phases of the consultation process. In this connection, the Committee notes that the Secretary-General has begun to deploy personnel to East Timor in the areas of political affairs, electoral assistance, administration and logistics, with the exception of the civilian police component. 3. The Advisory Committee notes that, in paragraph 8 of its resolution 1236 (1999), the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to keep it closely informed of the situation in East Timor, to report to it as soon as possible, and in any event by 24 May 1999, on the implementation of the Agreements, specifying the detailed modalities of the consultation process, to make detailed recommendations to the Council for decision on the mandate, size, structure and budget of the United Nations mission, including civilian police officers envisaged to act as advisers to the Indonesian police in the discharge of their duties in East Timor. The Committee further notes that, in paragraph 9 of the same resolution, the Security Council expressed its intention to take a prompt decision on the establishment of a United Nations mission on the basis of the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General by 24 May 1999. 4. With regard to paragraph 8 of Security Council resolution 1236 (1999), the Advisory Committee recalls that the General Assembly, in its resolution 45/248 of 21 December 1990, reaffirmed that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters and expressed concern at the tendency of its substantive Committees and other intergovernmental bodies to involve themselves in administrative and budgetary matters. The Advisory Committee recalls that, in the same resolution, the General Assembly invited the Secretary-General to provide all intergovernmental bodies with the required information regarding procedures for administrative and budgetary matters. 5. Subsequent to the submission of the Secretary-General’s report, the Advisory Committee was informed that, following such action as the Security Council may take on the matter, the Secretary-General would submit a revised budget for the full cost of the entire mission, including civilian police. Therefore, the Committee did not consider the budget contained in the report (A/C.5/53/61) and, instead, recommends the procedure set out in paragraph 8 below. 6. In this connection, the Advisory Committee stresses that, whether in peacekeeping or the regular budget, it is important to show and to authorize spending for the full cost of the mandated activities of an operation or mission, regardless of the source of funding. 7. The Advisory Committee was further informed that, pending submission of a revised budget by the Secretary-General, an amount of $35 million would need to be committed from all sources of funds. 8. Under the circumstances, the Advisory Committee recommends approval of commitment authority of $35 million for the initial requirements of United Nations activities related to East Timor, pending further action by the Security Council and the submission of a revised budget by the Secretary-General. This recommendation of the Committee is without prejudice to the ultimate mode of financing to be decided upon by the General Assembly for the expenses of the United Nations in East Timor. 