%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|ISRAEL|PALESTINE QUESTION|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|

Identical letters dated 27 January 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council In letter after letter, and speech after speech, I have made clear to the Security Council that the rockets flying out of the Gaza Strip everyday are cause for very serious concern. One million civilians in southern Israel live under the constant threat of violence. Rockets fired from Gaza into Israeli cities, schools and homes could ignite an escalation of conflict in our already volatile region. The danger of these attacks is plain for all to see. Yet, some members of the Security Council continue to turn a blind eye. Just this past Tuesday -- while the Security Council was convening for its monthly Middle East debate -- terrorists in Gaza fired two rockets into the area of Eshkol. In the past two weeks alone, 13 rockets and mortars have exploded in Israeli communities, including in Be'erot, Kibbutz Zikim and Netiv Ha'asara. In this week's debate, the Security Council found it appropriate to discuss Israeli settlements for hours on end, but a meaningful discussion of the threat posed by rocket fire from Gaza remained noticeably absent. It is high time that the Security Council said no to terrorism, no to rockets and no to the deliberate targeting of Israeli civilians -- clearly, unequivocally and with one voice. Israel expects the Security Council, and all responsible members of the international community, to condemn the relentless rocket fire from Gaza without any further delay. We also expect President Abbas, and other leaders of the Palestinian Authority, to finally fulfil their fundamental obligation to clearly denounce these acts of terrorism. Israel holds the Hamas terrorist organization fully responsible for all attacks emanating from Gaza, where it remains in de facto control. Israel has exercised and will continue to exercise its right to self-defence, as appropriate, and will take all necessary measures to protect its citizens. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter distributed as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Ron Prosor Ambassador Permanent Representative 