%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|SERBIA|ALBANIA|CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION|FORMER YUGOSLAVIA SITUATION|

Letter dated 6 February 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Albania to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to forward a letter from H.E. Mr. Edmond Haxhinasto, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Albania, addressed to you, in your capacity as President of the Security Council for the month of February 2012 (see annex). Your kind assistance in circulating the present letter and the annex thereto to the members of the Security Council, and its publication as a document of the Council, would be highly appreciated. (Signed) Ferit Hoxha Ambassador Permanent Representative For more than a year, the Security Council, during its meetings on the report of the Secretary-General, has been hearing statements containing several appalling allegations presented as sheer facts by representatives of the Republic of Serbia, based on a report of the human rights rapporteur of the Council of Europe, Mr. Dick Marty, released on December 2010. This report tries to establish links between former Kosovo Liberation Army members to organized crime and accuses them of having harvested organs of prisoners, including of persons of Serb origin, allegedly in the territory of Albania. The Albanian Government entirely rejects such allegations as untrue and unfounded. They echo unconfirmed media reports and similar allegations by specific and interested parties, which the Albanian Government considers as part of a wider propaganda against Kosovo that is anything but new. More worryingly, they constitute an unfortunate effort in drawing unacceptable parallels between what has been proved and documented as crimes against humanity committed by the Serbian regime of Milosevic and their victims. It must be recalled that in 2004, the same allegations were investigated when the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia visited the alleged sites in Albania and concluded that there was no evidence to prove any of the allegations. Yet, given the nature of the claims that you have been hearing for so long, contrary to what has been alleged by Serbia or other promoters of this issue, Albania has taken the issue very seriously and has repeatedly expressed its continued determination and willingness to fully cooperate for an impartial and thorough investigation of such allegations, and to close this chapter once and for all. This investigation has been entrusted to the Special Investigative Task Force of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). Mindful of the need for a thorough investigation as the best approach to separating fact from fiction and, trustful of the legitimacy, technical capacity, professionalism and impartiality of EULEX to successfully handle such a delicate exercise, Albania has officially invited EULEX to carry out any investigative activity as may be needed in the territory of Albania. Mr. John Clint Williamson, the head prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task Force, has visited Albania several times and has always been assured of the readiness of the Albanian Government to cooperate with the Special Investigative Task Force. Furthermore, in the same spirit and with the same commitment, during Mr. Williamson's last visit, in January 2012, the Albanian Government agreed to make the necessary legal arrangements, including by enacting legislation if needed in order to institutionalize the cooperation between the Government and EULEX and create a clear legal framework that will help EULEX fulfil its mandate. We sincerely hope and expect that other countries related to this investigation will offer the same level of readiness in cooperating with EULEX on this matter. Albania firmly believes that the pursuance of justice in post-war countries is a prerequisite for peace and security and, by the same token, of paramount importance for a healthy reconciliation process among nations. But justice cannot be done under pressure, nor should it be influenced by any propaganda. Therefore, while waiting for the ongoing investigation to shed light, our task as Member States of the United Nations, including the distinguished members of the Security Council, is to provide full support to the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force and refrain from using these allegations for political benefits, short-term gains or any domestic agenda. As two strong components of the South-East European geopolitical landscape, Albanian and Serbian people need to look forward and join efforts in a common vision of building a long-lasting reconciliation process, peace and security in the Balkans. (Signed) Edmond Haxhinasto 