%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|BOUNDARIES|SUDAN|SOUTH SUDAN|MILITARY ACTIVITY|ABYEI (SUDAN)|

Statement by the President of the Security Council At the 6749th meeting of the Security Council, held on Thursday, 12 April 2012, in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council: "The Security Council expresses its deep and growing alarm by the escalating conflict between Sudan and South Sudan, as manifested most recently by the seizure and occupation of the town of Heglig and its oil fields in Sudan by the SPLA. The recent violence threatens to return both countries to full scale war and the period of tragic loss of life and suffering, destroyed infrastructure, and economic devastation, which they have worked so hard and long to overcome. The Security Council demands a complete, immediate, and unconditional: end to all fighting; withdrawal of the SPLA from Heglig; end to SAF aerial bombardments; end to repeated incidents of cross-border violence between Sudan and South Sudan; and an end to support by both sides to proxies in the other country. "The Security Council affirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of both Sudan and South Sudan. It recalls the importance of the principles of good neighbourliness, non-interference and regional cooperation. "The Security Council demands that both sides redeploy their forces 10 kilometres outside the North/South 1/1/1956 borderline in accordance with their Agreements of June 29 and July 30, 2011. It urges Sudan and South Sudan to take immediate steps to establish a Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and activate the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, and reiterates its readiness to continue to support the parties in implementing this Agreement with the support of UNISFA, in accordance with resolution 2024 (2011). The Security Council calls on Sudan and South Sudan to respect the letter and spirit of the Memorandum of Understanding on Non-Aggression and Cooperation of February 10, 2012. "The Security Council reiterates its demand that Sudan and South Sudan urgently redeploy their security forces immediately from the Abyei Area in accordance with their Agreement of June 20, 2011 and resolution 1990 (2011). "The Security Council calls upon the Governments of Sudan and South Sudan urgently and peacefully to resolve the fundamental issues of security and border management, the situations in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile, and Abyei and all outstanding CPA issues that are fuelling the mistrust between the two countries. It further calls on the leaders of Sudan and South Sudan to meet immediately in a Summit as previously planned in order to advance the issues that stand in the way of achieving lasting peace. "The Security Council underscores its support for the continuing efforts of the AU High-level Implementation Panel to assist Sudan and South Sudan to reach agreement on all outstanding issues, and encourages continuing partnership with the UN in this regard. "The Security Council views the current situation as a serious threat to international peace and security. It will continue to follow the situation closely, and will take further steps as necessary. The Security Council looks forward to receiving a briefing from the AUHIP and Special Envoy Menkerios in the coming days." 