%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|SOMALIA|SOMALIA SITUATION|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|SPECIAL MISSIONS|COUNTER-TERRORISM|PIRACY|

President: Mr. Bellingham (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) Members: Azerbaijan Mr. Mehdiyev China Mr. Wang Min Colombia Mr. Osorio France Mr. Briens Germany Mr. Wittig Guatemala Mr. Rosenthal India Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri Morocco Mr. Loulichki Pakistan Mr. Tarar Portugal Mr. Moraes Cabral Russian Federation Mr. Churkin South Africa Mr. Mashabane Togo Mr. Menan United States of America Mr. DeLaurentis Agenda The situation in Somalia Special report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2012/74) The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m. Expression of thanks to the outgoing President The President: As this is the first meeting of the Council for the month of March 2012, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Kodjo Menan, Permanent Representative of Togo, for his service as President of the Security Council for the month of February 2012. I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Menan and his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the Council's business last month. Adoption of the agenda The agenda was adopted. The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of Australia, Brazil, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Luxembourg, Norway, Somalia, Sweden, Turkey and Uganda to participate in this meeting. Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, to participate in this meeting. On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Mahiga, who is joining today's meeting via video teleconference from Mogadishu. In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting. The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. I should like to draw the attention of the members of the Council to document S/2012/74, which contains the special report of the Secretary-General on Somalia. I welcome the presence at this meeting of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I invite him to take the floor. The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to update the Security Council on the situation in Somalia. I thank His Excellency Mr. Henry Bellingham, United Kingdom Parliamentary Under Secretary of State, for chairing this meeting during his country's presidency of the Council. I commend the leadership and efforts of the United Kingdom for sustaining international support for Somalia following the London conference. This is a critical moment for Somalia. Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6494), three major developments have provided momentous impetus to the Somalia peace process: first, the second Somali National Garowe Consultative Constitutional Conference held last month; secondly, the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) on an expanded and well-resourced African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); and thirdly, the London conference held just 11 days ago. These developments, coming in quick succession within less than a month, present a rare opportunity to the Somali people and the international community to rapidly advance the peace process, albeit with guarded optimism, and to bring Somalia fully back to the international arena. The Garowe Principles provide clear steps to end the transition by August of this year and launch a new political dispensation. I particularly welcome the inclusion of a requirement that women hold a minimum of 30 per cent of the seats in the Independent Electoral Commission, the Constituent Assembly and the new Federal Parliament. The decision of the Security Council to endorse the expansion of the African Union Mission in Somalia follows major gains by AMISOM, the forces of the Transitional Federal Government and their partners in the military effort against Al-Shabaab. This new support will be crucial in enabling the Transitional Federal Government to extend its authority across a wider area of southern and central Somalia, and to significantly degrade the insurgency's military capability across the country. The military gains need to be consolidated through continued progress by Somalia's political leaders in the implementation of the road map for ending the transition, which is the basis for lasting peace and stability in Somalia. The London conference reiterated the commitment of the international community to strongly support the establishment of the new institutions that would lead to ending the transition, to provide support to AMISOM that would allow it to sustain the political process, and to provide sustained international support for recovery and development. London also strengthened the collective resolve to protect human rights and increase humanitarian assistance. The London conference occurred during a respite in Somalia's humanitarian crisis. Sustained high levels of humanitarian assistance and an exceptional harvest have improved the situation. However, this progress is extremely fragile and will likely deteriorate in the coming months as we move into the lean season before the next and most important harvest period in August. Somalia is not out of danger. In London, I held a wide range of meetings, including with President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, key stakeholders and regional leaders. My interlocutors thanked the United Nations, urged continued assistance and welcomed the Council's decision to support AMISOM. I received assurances that the guard force, as authorized by the Security Council, would be deployed. But of course I look forward to the day when Somalia forces themselves ensure security and that force will no longer be needed. I also discussed the challenge of Somali piracy with Mr. Koji Sekimizu, Secretary-General of the International Maritime Organization. We agreed not only on the need for security, deterrence and prosecutions, but also, and just as importantly, for education and jobs. Following the announcement I made during my visit to Mogadishu in December, I am pleased to report that my Special Representative has relocated to the capital. The initial deployment is focusing on the core business of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), which encompasses the provision of good offices to the Transitional Federal Institutions and major Somali political and security actors in Mogadishu, including the Joint Security Committee; support for the road map process; coordination with AMISOM; the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the United Nations country team and the international community in Mogadishu; the provision of timely and accurate information and analysis on political issues; and outreach to key constituencies on fundamental mission priorities and mandated tasks. Additional staff will deploy as accommodation and other logistical facilities become available. Our intention is to move more staff from Nairobi to Somalia in the coming weeks. Maintaining this momentum is critical. I thank Turkey for agreeing to host the second Istanbul conference, which I look forward to attending and which I encourage others to attend at the highest level. If it is to keep the Somalis committed and accountable, this Council must show its continued engagement and support in the political, security and recovery processes. I ask the Security Council to encourage all participants in the London conference and the entire international community to support the implementation of the London communiqué. For UNPOS in particular, this will require immediate human and financial resources to put in place the processes and structures for ending the transition period in a satisfactory manner within a tight time frame. My Special Representative will elaborate on these and other developments, as well as on plans for the remaining transitional period. As I emphasized at the London conference, in particular to Somali leaders, a new window of opportunity for peace and stability has opened. But it is a narrow window. All stakeholders must act with urgency and unity of purpose. We cannot afford to miss this opportunity. The President: I thank the Secretary-General for his statement. I now give the floor to Mr. Mahiga. Mr. Mahiga: I thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity to update the Council on the situation in Somalia. I welcome the presence of Mr. Bellingham, who is presiding over today's meeting, as well as the presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon. During the first Somali National Consultative Constitutional Conference, Principles were adopted on the reform of Parliament, elections, a Constituent Assembly, the Independent Electoral Commission, the new Parliament, and the sequencing of the timelines for ending the transition in August 2012. The second Garowe Conference deliberated on operationalizing the Garowe Principles. Safeguards and oversight procedures with checks and balances in selecting memberships have been introduced. The deliberations at the second Garowe Conference also considered key constitutional provisions related to federalism, the system of Government and other important constitutional issues such as land policy, citizenship and Sharia law, which have to be included in the draft Constitution. The challenges before us are in implementing the Garowe process within a very tight time frame. The drafting of the constitution has to be completed by the end of this month. The selection process to the 1,000-member Constituent Assembly from over eight community-based constituencies, including women, must be completed in eight weeks for the provisional adoption of the constitution by the end of April. This is an enormous exercise in political outreach and logistical organization. The failure to consolidate control over the recovered areas could create a vacuum and allow warlords to use the instability to their advantage. Local populations must know that the departure of AlShabaab shall be followed with peace dividends. To that end, in January, the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) issued a national policy for reconciliation and stabilization in newly liberated areas of south-central Somalia. We aim to pursue a multipronged approach, which will reach out to the existing local actors and convince them that the only meaningful way forward is to work with the TFG; and to identify and implement, jointly with the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the United Nations country team, quick-impact projects that bring about immediate dividends for the local population. Another ongoing challenge is the political stalemate within the Transitional Federal Parliament. The continuing efforts of the United Nations and the African Union to resolve the crisis have yet to bear fruit. The breakaway group of parliamentarians has rejected the Garowe process and has passed a motion bringing forward the presidential elections from July to 30 April this year. The President, the Council of Ministers and the national security committee declared that process illegal. I am concerned that that parliamentary vote and stalemate could disrupt the painstaking gains that Somali stakeholders and their partners have achieved. Parliament has paralysed the peace process. I actively continue to engage both the TFG leadership and the two factions in Parliament to find a way out of the impasse and restore the unity and functionality of the Parliament. It is critical that we preserve the institution of Parliament, as it has a central role to play in the peace process and other matters of governance, but we should not allow the group to hold hostage the process to end the transition. Spoilers continue to benefit from this protracted conflict, which has prevailed in Somalia during the past decade. The international community must identify the internal and external spoilers, both State and non-State actors, and take decisive action to end their obstructionist activities. Likewise, if those spoilers manifest their influence inside TFG institutions, including Parliament, the Somali political leadership, in close collaboration with the region, individual Member States and the rest of the international community, should stand ready to put in place the appropriate mechanisms to protect the implementation of the road map. That will require collective effort by the international community. The London conference brought about unprecedented attention to the Somalia political crisis in its 21-year history. It reaffirmed the centrality of Somali ownership of the peace process and the need for coordinated and scaled up international support. The London conference received a great boost from the decision of the Council to increase AMISOM's strength from 12,000 to a maximum of 17,731. The message to the world was that of commitment to peace, security and stability for Somalia by reducing the threat of Al-Shabaab, which has now declared itself to be an integral part of AlQaida. To the Somalis, the London conference brought about encouragement. The resolution brought about hope, as it also recognized the need to expand the development of the capacity and effectiveness of the Somali security forces. I am pleased to report that the African Union Commission has already moved in earnest to advance the implementation of resolution 2036 (2012). A meeting of the Joint Coordination Committee, chaired by the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security and with a membership that includes the AMISOM troop-contributing countries and the Force Commander, is scheduled to give advice on the implementation of AMISOM's concept of operations. The United Nations is actively supporting the African Union and AMISOM in that endeavour. Meanwhile, on the eve of the fifth anniversary of its presence in Mogadishu tomorrow, AMISOM has captured the Al-Shabaab stronghold and terrorist base of Maslah, on the outskirt of Mogadishu. As well, on the ground, TFG forces, with Ethiopian troops, last week captured the strategic town of Baidoa, in central Somalia. In the south, TFG forces, with Kenyan armed forces, are carrying out a steady ground offensive, supported by Kenyan air and sea assets. The significance of the London conference lies in the comprehensiveness of its agenda and communiqué. All the salient aspects of the Somali crisis were considered, including humanitarian issues, piracy and terrorism, stability and recovery, as well as the way forward in international cooperation to support the Somali peace process. The acute famine conditions reported from June to December last year are no longer present. Humanitarian organizations have been able to increase people's access to food, contain health and disease outbreaks and assist the hundreds of thousands of children suffering from acute and severe malnutrition. New approaches to humanitarian assistance, such as the development of more cash-based schemes, have saved many thousands of lives. Despite extremely challenging conditions, humanitarian organizations have continued to provide assistance throughout Somalia. However, unacceptably high rates of child mortality, disease and malnutrition persist. More than 320,000 children in Somalia are still acutely malnourished. Many of the areas that were pulled out of famine remain on the cusp of falling back into it. In a village of 5,000 in those areas, a person dies every day; that victim is usually a child. Consequently, some 2.34 million people in Somalia are still categorized as being in humanitarian emergency conditions, and will require immediate life-saving assistance throughout the year. Let us remember that humanitarian assistance in Somalia continues to be provided in the context of conflict. Somalia's conflict has disproportionately affected the civilian population through displacement, difficulties in accessing assistance and the direct impact of fighting. My relocation from Nairobi has enabled me to engage more easily with the leaders of the Transitional Federal Institutions and other key Somali interlocutors. It is important for the international community to deploy to Mogadishu without delay, especially as we aim to speed up the implementation of the road map. I hope that my presence in the country will encourage other international organizations and diplomatic premises to follow suit. We do not have the luxury of time. We are faced with a situation that demands urgent action. The TFG remains the international community's main Somali interlocutor. Building its capacity will be critical to transforming the country into a functioning State. Somalia today has the greatest opportunity to end the two decades-long conflict and bring lasting peace and stability to the whole country. But capitalizing on that momentum and ending the transition on time will require more efforts and support from all international actors in the coming months. We must ensure that all of us are pulling together in that regard. I am developing a plan that will include support for the establishment of a functioning constituent assembly composed of 1,000 people and a new bicameral parliament, as well as for outreach to Somali civil society and the diaspora for the implementation of the second Garowe Conference. I also plan to ensure that the Mogadishu Stabilization and Recovery Plan and "low-hanging fruit" activities are implemented, both in Mogadishu and in newly recovered areas. For all that to happen, we need strong political and financial support from the Council. The President: I thank Ambassador Mahiga for his excellent briefing. Following consultations among members of the Security Council, I have been authorized to make the following statement on behalf of the Council: "The Security Council welcomes the international London conference on Somalia held on 23 February 2012 and fully supports its conference communiqué. The conference demonstrated the international community's political will and determination to support the Somali people as they build peace and stability in Somalia. "The Security Council supports the progress made at the London conference on Somalia, which affirmed international support, progress on the political process, security, increasing stability, economic development and action to address terrorism, piracy and hostage-taking. The Council emphasizes the need to build on agreement in London and continue to pursue a comprehensive strategy for the establishment of peace and stability in Somalia through the collaborative effort of all stakeholders. The Security Council also welcomes the meeting, which preceded the London conference, on the ongoing and protracted humanitarian situation in Somalia. "The Security Council further welcomes the consensus in London that the mandate of the Transitional Federal Institutions will end in August 2012 and that there will be no further extension of the transitional period. The Council welcomes commitments to work for a more representative Government in Somalia, in line with the Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala Accord, the end-of-transition road map and the Garowe Principles. The Security Council reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia. "The Security Council reiterates its full support for the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Augustine P. Mahiga, and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) in facilitating progress towards peace and stability in Somalia, as well as that of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the African Union. The Council welcomes the relocation of UNPOS to Mogadishu and encourages the United Nations to achieve a more permanent, full relocation to Somalia when security conditions allow. "The Security Council pays tribute to the contribution of AMISOM and the Somali national security forces to achieving a more peaceful and stable Somalia, and expresses its appreciation for the commitment of troops by troop-contributing countries to AMISOM and the significant sacrifices made by both AMISOM and Somali forces. In this regard, the Security Council recalls resolution 2036 (2012) authorizing an expansion of AMISOM, increasing the scale and scope of the United Nations logistical support package to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of AMISOM's financing, and imposing an international ban on Somali charcoal. The Council welcomes the valuable financial support provided by the African Union's partners to AMISOM, including through bilateral support programmes from the United States of America and from the African Peace Facility of the European Union. The Security Council stresses the need for continued support to AMISOM and calls for further support from existing and new partners to provide equipment, funding for troop stipends to AMISOM and uncaveated funding, including through the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM. "The Security Council recalls its resolutions 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006) and 1894 (2009) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, welcomes the progress made by AMISOM in reducing civilian casualties during its operations and urges AMISOM to continue to undertake enhanced efforts in this regard. "The Security Council emphasizes the importance of effective governance in Somalia and the delivery of basic services to the Somali people throughout Somalia. The Security Council underlines the need for further efforts to fight corruption and promote transparency in Somalia, and welcomes initiatives to increase transparency and accountability in the collection and efficient use of Somali public revenues. "The Security Council underlines that the development of the Somali security forces and institutions is vital to ensure Somalia's long-term security and stability and calls upon the international community in coordination with the United Nations and AMISOM to provide increased support to the Somali security and justice sectors. The Council fully supports the training of Somalia's security forces through the bilateral support programmes of Member States and the European Union training mission for Somalia. "The Security Council supports efforts to expand existing stabilization plans in Somalia to new sectors, welcomes increased international support to areas of stability, including through a new stability fund, and encourages further efforts to address Somalia's long-term reconstruction and economic development. "The Security Council recognizes that while the famine may have ended in Somalia, there are significant ongoing humanitarian needs. The Council underlines the high number of internally displaced persons in Somalia who urgently need support, and persons in need of emergency relief. The Council emphasizes the need for the international community to provide well coordinated, timely and sustained humanitarian assistance to the Somali people, and to help build their resistance to future shocks, and stresses the importance of upholding and respecting the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. The Security Council demands that all parties ensure full and unhindered access for the timely delivery of humanitarian aid to persons in need of assistance across Somalia, consistent with relevant humanitarian and human rights law. "The Security Council welcomes the fact that effective countermeasures have led to a substantial reduction in the number of successful piracy-related attacks, although it notes with concern the increased incidence of attempted attacks. The Security Council remains gravely concerned about the ongoing threat posed by piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia, including the issue of hostage-taking and the increasing use of violence against hostages, and the extended range of the piracy threat into the western Indian Ocean and adjacent sea areas. The Security Council recognizes that the ongoing instability in Somalia contributes to the problem of piracy and armed robbery at sea, and stresses the need for a comprehensive response to repress piracy and armed robbery at sea and tackle its underlying causes. The Council welcomes the commitments made at the London conference on new efforts to repress piracy, including efforts by bilateral donors and regional organizations to strengthen the capacity of Somalia and relevant States in the region to prosecute those responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia and to imprison convicted pirates. "The Security Council remains gravely concerned about the threat posed to Somalia and the international community by terrorist attacks by Somali armed opposition groups, in particular Al-Shabaab, and welcomes the commitment made at the London conference for renewed international action to address this threat, while ensuring full respect for the rule of law, human rights and international humanitarian law. The Council also stresses the importance of addressing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. "The Security Council welcomes the intention of the Government of Turkey to hold a conference on Somalia in Istanbul. "The members of the Security Council will keep the situation in Somalia under close review." This statement will be issued as a document of the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/4. I shall now give the floor to the members of the Security Council. Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. We welcome you, Minister Bellingham, and we are particularly pleased to have you preside over this important debate. Your presence here is the best testimony to the commitment of your country to the resolution of the Somali conflict. I would like to assure you of my delegation's support during your presidency. We also want to congratulate the delegation of Togo for the manner in which it steered the work of the Council during the month of February. We thank the Secretary-General for his participation and welcome his comments. We also wish to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for his informative briefing and for his tireless work. Today's debate is a reaffirmation by the international community in general, and the United Nations in particular, that the people of Africa and Somalia are not alone in their quest to resolve the scourge of conflict that has ravaged the continent and their country for many years now. Since the beginning of the year, the international community has coalesced its work around the national and regional levels to resolve the Somali conflict. In January of this year, the Security Council, under the presidency of South Africa, convened a debate with the leaders of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African Union on their revised strategy concept for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). South Africa fully supports the strategic engagement and collaboration between the Security Council and the African Union on peace and security. The meeting of the Security Council in January (see S/PV.6702) with members of IGAD and the African Union was a practical demonstration of the strategic engagement called for in resolution 2033 (2012). From 5 to 6 February, the international contact group on Somalia met, and on 23 February the international London conference on Somalia was held. It is our hope that the London conference has given renewed impetus to what the Somali people and the Transitional Federal Government, supported by the African Union, the United Nations and IGAD, are striving to achieve. South Africa welcomes that meeting, which underscored the interrelated nature of the political, security, humanitarian challenges, as well as the piracy issue, which are directly related to the instability on land. The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012), on the eve of the London conference, in which the Council significantly enhanced the United Nations support package for AMISOM, was an important achievement. We particularly welcomed the authorization to increase the troop level to 17,731, as requested by the African Union. The resolution was adopted at a critical time, and we hope that it will go a long way towards ensuring the consolidation of the military gains that AMISOM has made thus far. The African Union welcomed resolution 2036 (2012) as an important milestone and further testimony to the commitment of the United Nations to help AMISOM and the Somali leadership to consolidate the important progress made towards the completion of the transition process in Somalia. We also commend the important contribution of, and sacrifices by, troop-contributing countries, which serve under difficult conditions in AMISOM. As we welcome those important developments, we also reiterate our long-held view that the military strategy for Somalia must be in support of a broader strategic and political objective. Investment in the military operation should not be viewed as an end, but as a means for the creation of a conducive environment for a political engagement in dialogue to take place. In that regard, the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) must continue the important task of outreach and reconciliation within Somalia. That should include persuading military elements who are willing to lay down their arms to join the peace process and be reintegrated into the community, including through the development of a defector programme. The adoption of the Kampala Accord, in June 2011, and the road map, in September 2011, as well as the outcomes of the first and second Garowe Conferences, are all strong indicators of the determination of the Somali people to reach peace among themselves. The Principles agreed upon during the second Garowe Conference on federalism, the system of Government and ending the transition will significantly contribute to finalizing the draft constitution by 20 April 2012. We welcome that important development, as the end of the transition is fast approaching. We wish to encourage the Transitional Federal Institutions to utilize the existing window of opportunity to achieve measurable results in all the priority areas identified in the road map. We are mindful of the fact that the road map will require financial and technical support for its full implementation. We therefore call on the international community to continue its support to the Transitional Federal Institutions in that regard. The extension of the TFG's authority throughout the territory of Somalia should lead to the improvement in the lives of ordinary citizens. We therefore support the expansion and full implementation of the Mogadishu Stabilization and Recovery Plan for enhancing the safety and security and economic opportunities and basic services to the population in Mogadishu and the newly liberated areas. We also welcome the new recovery fund, which will further enhance local stability. Somalia's long-term security and stability will require a credible and effective justice system. We encourage the international community to continue its support for building the capacity of the Somali judicial system in line with the agreed Somali legal foundation. The United Nations and the international community's support for the provision of those services and for institution-building must also support the national and the local ownership of those processes. We therefore welcome the coming Istanbul conference. While piracy along the coast of Somalia remains a critical challenge, we call on the international community not to forget that the solution to that problem will have to come from land, not sea. The comprehensive resolution of the Somali conflict must address all the root causes of piracy and the other challenges, including the exploitation of marine resources and the dumping of toxic wastes. Equally, Somalia's myriad challenges, including its humanitarian situation and the terrorism plaguing it, will remain with us for as long as the instability on land is not addressed. In that regard, we welcome the continued focus of the international community on Somalia, as well as efforts geared towards addressing Somalia's challenges in a comprehensive and holistic manner. For our part, in relation the humanitarian situation, we will continue, together with our partners in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region, to provide whatever assistance we can to the people of Somalia. We have just provided assistance for the air-lifting of the humanitarian aid contribution from the SADC member States to the people of Somalia. We stand ready to play our part in supporting all efforts that can help bring about lasting peace, security and stability to Somalia. As we mark the fifth anniversary of the AMISOM presence in Somalia tomorrow, we remember and honour those who have sacrificed their lives for peace and stability in that East African country. A lot of progress has been made in the past five years, and Somalia will never be the same again. Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his presence here and for the analysis that he has given us with regard to the situation in Somalia and the most recent developments and agreements reached at the London conference. I would like to welcome you, Under Secretary Bellingham, as President of the Council and to congratulate your country on your assumption of the presidency this month. I assure you of Colombia's full cooperation. I would also like to recognize the magnificent work done by the representative of Togo and his team last month as they presided over the Council. I would like to welcome the United Nations Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga. We wish him, every success in his mission, which we very much need to be successful. The London conference was yet another valuable demonstration of the ongoing commitment of the international community to bring about stability and development in Somalia, as it reaffirmed the ownership and responsibility of the Somali people over decisions that relate to the future of their country. While we feel some optimism thanks to the progress in the implementation of certain tasks set down in the road map, we understand that the current political, military and humanitarian situation in Somalia, although encouraging, is not without risks. The situation is still fragile. We therefore need to consolidate the progress made in various areas in order to provide the basis for re-establishing peace and stability in order to ensure sustainable economic and social development. Although the Transitional Federal Government has the primary responsibility for restoring security, political stability and the rule of law, it is crucial that the international community provide its support to strengthen the institutions of the State. With regard to security, the situation has improved. The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) exercises greater control over the areas of Mogadishu and is beginning to extend that control beyond Mogadishu. The work of AMISOM is, therefore, fundamental for the stabilization of Somalia. Colombia supports the incorporation of the Kenyan forces into the command and control of the AMISOM forces. We note the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012), extending the mandate of AMISOM and authorizing an increase in the number of troops deployed to a total of 17,731. The increased capacity of AMISOM to meet its mandate will largely depend on its being provided with adequate resources, particularly enablers and force multipliers. It is therefore indispensible to continue to provide equipment, technical assistance and funding to the Mission through the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM. It is also important to provide more technical, financial and training capacities to the forces of the Transitional Federal Government so that it can carry out its activities on land and in its coastal waters and to play a more important role in current operations. The monitoring and identification of arms embargo violations must be stepped up, and targeted sanctions applied when necessary, in order to reduce the potential devastating effects of that dynamic in the Somali context. We are particularly concerned by the recent violations of the arms embargo reported by the Monitoring Group, including arms maritime arms smuggling to Al-Shabaab in the north of the country, and the operations of armed maritime security companies working in Somali ports and territorial waters. Political and military forces must be harmonized and synchronized in order to stabilize the situation. The military achievements attained to date would be more sustainable if the Transitional Federal Government were to strengthen its political management and legitimacy and work to hold on to the recently liberated areas by meeting the aspirations of the Somali people through a transparent and inclusive process. We stress the importance of the outcome of the second Somali National Consultative Constitutional Conference, held in Garowe, as a decisive step towards finalizing the transition period by August 2012 and the establishment of constitutional order. Although we appreciate the advances that have been made towards establishing a Somali-owned Government, it will be important to ensure the territorial unity of Somalia in that process. We are convinced that a stable and lasting solution to the problem of piracy will be very important to resolving the Somali crisis and strengthening the rule of law in the country. Therefore, all viable options will require a comprehensive approach aimed at developing national institutional capacities for addressing economic, security, legal and penitentiary matters simultaneously. In particular, the development of such activities as fishing and port industries could arise as viable economic alternatives for the population and reduce dependency on organized crime linked to piracy. We should therefore address the legal issue of maritime borders as soon as possible so that they can be brought in line with international law, enabling the definition of an exclusive maritime zone and maritime borders to be established with Kenya, Djibouti and Yemen. Finally, I would like to encourage the Somali authorities and all other relevant actors to continue to engage constructively and to meet their obligations in the implementation of the road map, so that the deadlines established therein for the transition by August 2012 can be met. With regard to ending the transition period, and given the fragility of the situation, the United Nations should provide a comprehensive, international response that makes the stabilization of the Somali State a central and long-term objective. Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First, I would like to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the Council and to ensure it of our full support. I also thank Togo for its presidency in February. I thank the Secretary-General and Special Representative Augustine Mahiga for their presentations and personal commitment to the stabilization of the situation in Somalia. I align myself with the statement to be made on behalf of the European Union. Political and security developments in Somalia in recent months have rekindled hope. The international community and the Somali stakeholders must, however, ensure that these gains are lasting. On the security level, the stage is now set for the Somali Government to regain control of the whole country. The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) gives the African Union unprecedented resources to strengthen its Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), enabling it not only to better secure the capital but also to combat AlShabaab actively in the territories of southern Somalia that the terrorist group still controls. To support these efforts, it is now important for troop-contributing countries to swiftly mobilize the authorized troop contingents so they can become operational and consolidate such recent progress as the taking of Baidoa by the forces of the Transitional Federal Government and Ethiopia. Moreover, the African Union will need to swiftly establish appropriate command structures to enable effective coordination among troop-contributing countries. In that respect, we note with interest the implementation of the strategic concept and of AMISOM's revised concept of operations. Strengthening Transitional Federal Government forces must also be a priority for AMISOM. In particular, that will require the speedy establishment of a chain of command to strengthen the capacity of action of the Somali national forces that will ultimately need to ensure the stability of Somalia. AMISOM currently relies on critical financial support from the European Union, which pays the totality of AMISOM troop salaries. The members of the European Union are currently considering the extent to which that financial support can be stepped up, given that the Union is already engaged at various levels in the region and the funds initially earmarked for AMISOM will not be enough to cover the costs incurred by increasing the troop ceiling mandated in resolution 2036 (2012). It is therefore vital, as stated in the resolution, that new contributors pledge to join the European Union in providing financial support. In the political realm, the steps that were expected have been taken. The two successive Conferences held in Garowe enabled us to clarify the institutional architecture of the future Somali State. All of the Somali stakeholders made significant progress on key points of the road map. These efforts will have to be pursued in order to meet the timelines set out, including the adoption in May of a draft constitution. We trust that President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed of the Transitional Federal Government and all Somali stakeholders will adhere to that timeline. The Council has said on many occasions that there can be no new extension of the transition period. High priority must now be accorded to the challenge of establishing local and regional administrations in regions recovered from Al-Shabaab. Such administrations will be critical to preventing the fragmentation of the country and the emergence of new warlords, as well as to offering basic services to the civilian population. They will have to support the Government, the Garowe Principles and the road map. In that context, we welcome the establishment, at the London conference of 23 February, of a stability fund for recovered zones that will complement the political stabilization of the recovered regions by contributing to their economic revival. The support of the United Nations is key to helping Somali institutions implement the road map. The relocation of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) to Mogadishu is vital in that respect. The bulk of United Nations personnel, however, remain in Nairobi, and we encourage a more general relocation to Mogadishu as soon as security conditions permit. I conclude by addressing the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia. This global challenge is being tackled on an unprecedented scale by the European Union through Operation Atalanta. Numerous pirates are arrested by Atalanta vessels every year. It is vital therefore for the States of the region, above all Somalia, to assume their responsibilities and establish the necessary arrangements to allow the legal and penitentiary processing of these pirates. It is utterly unacceptable that pirates arrested at great cost should be released without trial. As the final communiqué of the London conference stresses, specialized Somali courts would satisfy these needs. Furthermore, I stress the absolute need for Somalia to adopt anti-piracy legislation, in accordance with the road map. Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We once again thank the Togolese delegation for a job well done over the past month. Allow me also to welcome the presence here today of Under Secretary of State Bellingham to preside over this important meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his presence and analysis, as well as Special Representative Mahiga for his very helpful briefing. I commend him and his team for their work and efforts. For a period of several months we have been seeing encouraging signs and important positive developments in Somalia. Nevertheless, the overall situation remains fragile and of concern. But the international community's role and determination in continuing to support the Somali people is clear. Politically, that support was demonstrated by the London conference in bringing together key partners at this critical juncture for the country, with the aim of reaching a comprehensive strategy for the establishment of peace and stability. It has also been demonstrated by the continuous engagement of the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as well as by Turkey's intention to hold another high-level meeting in Istanbul in the coming months, thereby building on the momentum. The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) and the significant strengthening of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) that it authorized; the support being given to develop the Somali security forces, especially by the European Union; the hard work and sacrifice of AMISOM, regional partners and the Somali security forces; as well as the commitment of troops by established and new contributing countries, all highlight the support at the security and military levels. In that regard, allow me to acknowledge the efforts made by all parties involved in military action in Somalia to minimize the negative impact of military intervention on Somali civilians -- we continue to encourage them to continue to do so -- and to promote the safety and welfare of civilians fleeing conflict and meet the food needs in the country. On the humanitarian front, despite the end of the state of famine, partners continue to be heavily engaged in improving and addressing the ongoing, protracted needs of Somalia. However, assistance will only be fruitful if it reaches those in need in a timely way. To that end, we urge all parties to ensure full and unhindered access for humanitarian aid across the country. Partners are also addressing the underlying causes of instability. In that regard, the relocation of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia to Mogadishu, the support aimed at building stability at the local level and the consistent stepping-up of action to tackle the threats posed by piracy and terrorism are of great importance. Portugal is engaged in multiple efforts, mainly through the outstanding contribution of the European Union. In that context, we of course share the position of the European Union, to be expressed later by Ambassador Mayr-Harting. The engagement and additional efforts that we all have committed ourselves to are nevertheless dependent upon the will and commitment of the Somali people, in particular the Somali political leadership. Portugal welcomes the consensus on ending the transitional period in August 2012, in line with the road map for ending the transition, and takes note of the agreement on the Garowe Principles and the commitment by Somali leaders to ensure the delivery of basic services to the population, promote good governance and safeguard peace and security in Somalia. We take this opportunity to once again urge the Transitional Federal Institutions and all road map and Garowe signatories to redouble their efforts. As Portugal has stated before, it is also vital to ensure inclusiveness and representativeness throughout the current process. We recall the constructive role that women can play towards that end, as well as in ensuring full respect for human rights. Turning those decisions into reality is another step, yet a significant one, that Somalis need to take themselves towards a stable and viable State. We call upon them also to continue to work closely with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, whose efforts I wish again to underline and commend. In concluding, allow me to recall the need to ensure the sustainability of the progress achieved so far in Somalia. To that end, and despite the current environment of global financial constraint, we encourage others, in particular new donors, to contribute to that collective endeavour, by ensuring the sustainability of AMISOM financing. Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. President, to the Security Council Chamber. We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/74) and to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga for his assessment of the situation in Somalia. Above all, we would like to congratulate our British colleagues on successfully holding the London conference on Somalia. We hope that it will make a significant contribution to the process of resolving the situation in Somalia, which has entered a critical phase. Achieving the goal of stabilization and laying the foundation for statehood in Somalia requires coordinated, dynamic efforts on the part of the international community, political will and the full commitment of the Somali Transitional Federal Government. Of paramount importance right now are the timely suppression of Al-Shabaab and the prompt completion of the main transition objectives within the deadline set. We welcome the recent successes of Kenyan, Somali and Ethiopian troops in southern and central Somalia. However, extremists continue to control a major part of the South of the country and, judging by the latest reports, they are actively regrouping and making alliances, both with local likeminded groups -- such as in Puntland -- and with Al-Qaida abroad. Terrorist acts continue in Mogadishu, where the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is an important stabilizing force. The recent adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) creates new possibilities for strengthening AMISOM military capabilities, making possible a broader and more intensive campaign against Al-Shabaab. It is vital to begin implementing the resolution's provisions as soon as possible. Any attempts to engage Al-Shabaab in dialogue are unacceptable. It is a group on the United Nations sanctions list for Somalia. Its goals -- particularly since allying with Al-Qaida -- are patently clear and do not include renouncing terrorism or further attempts to destabilize the situation in Somalia. Somalia is awash with weapons, a circumstance that inevitably provokes violence. Given that reality, it is more important than ever to strengthen the arms embargo overall and to cut off weapons channels for the extremists, including those coming from Libya and other volatile regions in Africa and the Middle East. We must bear in mind that force can only be a complement to a broad political process, which the Somalis themselves have the full responsibility to drive forward. In that light, they must work for unity within the Transitional Federal Institutions, put an end to personal score-settling and mobilize their energies to carry out the provisions of the road map, namely, advancing the political process and securing State authority over the recovered territories. We must reject any attempts to undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia. Although the effects of the famine have somewhat abated, the humanitarian crisis in Somalia continues and the number of refuges is unfortunately growing as military action against Al-Shabaab continues, affecting even the capital Mogadishu itself. The Russian Federation provides humanitarian assistance to Somali refugees in neighbouring countries, especially Kenya, and makes significant contributions to United Nations programmes. We support measures adopted under Mr. Mahiga's leadership to coordinate and expand the United Nations presence in Somalia as required by the security situation. The outlook for the fight against piracy off the coast of Somalia is still dim. Piracy is flourishing and continues to destabilize the region, taking a large economic and moral toll on the international community. We welcome the determination in evidence at the London conference to counteract that scourge as part of a comprehensive anti-piracy strategy, including creating an effective system aimed at bringing pirates to trial. Given the clear complications of carrying out justice in Somalia, we are in favour of creating a relevant structure with an international component. Russia continues to participate in international operations to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia. We will continue to pursue a policy of comprehensive support to Somalia and active participation in the efforts of the international community to facilitate a solution to the Somali situation. Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me start by congratulating the delegation of the United Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. I would also like to put on record our appreciation for the delegation of Togo, and in particular Ambassador Kodjo Menan, for their stewardship of the Council during the month of February. The political, security and humanitarian situations in Somalia and their consequences, particularly the problem of piracy and hostage-taking, are of serious concern to the international community. Today's open debate is therefore a timely endeavour to comprehensively address the situation in Somalia. We appreciate the efforts of the delegation of the United Kingdom in organizing the meeting and thank you personally, Sir, for presiding over today's deliberations. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for their comprehensive and valuable briefings. A few days back more than 50 countries, including my own, participated in the London conference on Somalia. The conference served a useful purpose in reiterating the support of the international community for the comprehensive stabilization of the situation in Somalia, while taking stock of the progress made so far in the political, security and humanitarian fields. The conference also reminded us of the difficult challenges that lie ahead. The past year has been a mixed bag for Somalia. There have been significant gains made by the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and Kenyan and Ethiopian forces in securing Mogadishu and other areas in southern and central Somalia. The extended transition period saw the adoption of a comprehensive road map by the Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs), in accordance with the June 2011 Kampala Accord. The effective engagement of the international community also helped to tide over the worst phase of the humanitarian crisis. Still, millions have continued to suffer from the crisis and the implementation of the road map has left much to be desired. In spite of the pressure it is under, Al-Shabaab with its recent affiliation to Al-Qaida remains a serious threat to peace and stability in Somalia and in the larger region. There is, however, an opportunity today in Somalia that has not been available for years. The TFIs could consolidate the gains made by AMISOM and the forces of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia by urgently addressing the issues of governance and basic services in areas recovered from Al-Shabaab. That would also result in the emergence of organized economic activities and employment generation. For that to materialize, the international community must persevere and continue its effort for the people of Somalia. AMISOM, as the mainstay of security-related operations in Somalia, deserves our continued support. In that connection, we welcome the Council's adoption of resolution 2036 (2012), which provides for force enablers and multipliers for AMISOM and also expands the United Nations support package. The resolution will make available more sustainable and predictable resources for the troop-contributing countries and assist in the full implementation of the new strategic concept of AMISOM, including its limited maritime component. This would help AMISOM to sanitize the Somali coastline and deprive Al-Shabaab of revenues earned from port facilities and the export of charcoal. We hope that the Council will agree to include naval assets for the reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment when it considers the extension of the AMISOM mandate later this year. India made an uncaveated contribution of $2 million in 2011 to the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM. We stand ready to provide further support to AMISOM. In parallel with AMISOM operations, Somali stakeholders have to build on the gains made in the field of security through progress on the political track. The TFIs should rid themselves of internal divisions and focus their energies on implementing the Kampala Accord and the road map. The drafting and adoption of a new constitution and its endorsement by a constituent assembly in a timely manner, as per the Garowe Principles, should remain a priority task. That process should be as broad-based as possible, taking into consideration the traditional social structure and security situation on the ground. Piracy off the coast of Somalia remains a serious problem for maritime security and trade. A large portion of the world's trade, including India's, estimated at about $120 billion annually, passes through the Gulf of Aden. Piracy off the coast of Somalia is adversely affecting that trade at a cost of several billion dollars, due to the rerouting of vessels into safer routes and increased costs of insurance and security. As we speak, a number of seafarers, including 33 Indians, remain hostage to pirates. Their humanitarian condition remains a source of serious concern to the Government and people of India. What is more worrisome is that attacks by pirates have been increasing in spite of counter-piracy operations. Given the growing scope and expanding coverage of piracy off the coast of Somalia, the international community has to think about the adoption of a comprehensive counter-piracy strategy. Such a strategy should involve the effective sanitization of the Somali coastline, the priority enactment of national laws to criminalize piracy as defined in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and United Nations-led anti-piracy forces to conduct naval operations and coordinate anti-piracy operations by various naval forces. India, on its part, continues to undertake antipiracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden and has deployed its ships in the eastern and north-eastern Arabian Sea. So far, the TFIs have paid little attention to this problem. We expect the TFIs to expeditiously implement the benchmarks on piracy contained in the road map on transitional tasks. We stand ready to help in capacity-building of the TFIs and the States of the region for effective measures to combat piracy. In conclusion, to ensure lasting peace and security in Somalia, economic development has to form an integral part of our efforts. The international community should expand its development assistance to Somalia so that the Somali people directly benefit from the peace dividend. India, on its part, will continue to extend help to Somalia in capacity-building through human resource development. We have recently increased the number of scholarships for Somali students and experts. We have also contributed to the information technology sector in Somalia. We will continue to partner with the Somali authorities as they work towards turning a new page. Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let me start by congratulating the United Kingdom on its assumption of the Council presidency for the month of March. The holding of this important debate less than two weeks after the holding of the London conference, as well as your personal presence among us, Sir, attest to the importance that the United Kingdom attaches to improving the situation in that Arab-African country. I would also like to congratulate Togo on its productive, successful presidency, which did honour to the African continent. My country pays tribute to the participation and involvement of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the issue of Somalia, which reflects his commitment to peace and stability throughout our continent. His Special Representative, Mr. Augustine Mahiga, merits our full recognition for the excellent work that he has carried out in a very brief time frame. The resurgence of interest in Somalia and its people, which have experienced more than 20 years of the ravages of civil war, aggravated by a most tragic humanitarian situation, is a strong signal of the commitment of the international community to promoting peace and stability in the country. The increasing hope of the international community for peace and stability in Somalia has been demonstrated by the Council's adoption on 22 February of resolution 2036 (2012), increasing the troop levels, funding and mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and by the recent holding of the London conference, which will be followed up by the conference planned for June in Istanbul. We welcome the holding and results of the London conference, which was an important turning point in the efforts of the international community to breathe new life into the peace and stabilization process in Somalia. We support the new approach adopted at the London conference in support of a comprehensive and consistent treatment of all of Somalia's problems, whether in the political, security or humanitarian fronts or related to the fight against terrorism and piracy, on the basis of concerted international action. A political process that is fully owned by Somalis and that involves all Somali parties who renounce violence in favour of dialogue is the only guarantee for the establishment of a sustainable political and constitutional order that will ensure the development of Somali society. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the adoption of the Garowe Principles following the second Constitutional Conference, held in February. The consensus on the important aspects related to the federal structure of the State, its system of Government and the implementation of the first Garowe Conference Principles with regard to the adoption of the constitution by the national Constituent Assembly represent a decisive step in the process of finalizing the constitution. The six months remaining before the end of transition are crucial for laying the basis of a Somali State that is able to ensure effective governance for Somali society. It is therefore essential that the priority tasks decided in the road map for ending the Somali transition be implemented within the deadlines set forth. In that respect, we support the call of Special Representative Mahiga for unity and for the good functioning of the Somali Parliament. With the announcement that Al-Shabaab has now joined the Al-Qaida movement, the terrorist threats targeting Somalia and the international community are even more pressing and call for substantial, rigorous and coordinated international action. Such action against Al-Shabaab should also target its sources of funding, in particular that stemming from the trade in charcoal. In that respect, particular mention should be made of the efforts and sacrifices made by Somali forces and those of the countries contributing troops to AMISOM to consolidate the security gains and to liberate more territory currently controlled by AlShabaab. But despite those advances, the challenges to Government authority and to its effective control over its national territory still have to be overcome. However, the achievements in the military and security areas cannot be sustained without effective local governance and administration in the territories taken from Al-Shabaab, which is essential for success in the current political process and for obtaining the support of the local population for its implementation. In that connection, we welcome the announcement made at the London conference with regard to new local stability funds and a joint financial management board to ensure an efficient use of resources in favour of the development of Somali society. Although we welcome the fact that Somalia is no longer in a state of famine, the situation nevertheless remains fragile. We hope that the improvement in the security situation will make it possible to establish better conditions for humanitarian operations, in particular since the Al-Shabaab movement continues to prohibit certain humanitarian organizations from operating in areas under its control, which considerably affects the ability to provide aid to populations in need. The international community should also show greater solidarity with the Somali people in terms of providing humanitarian assistance. Finally, piracy off the coast of Somalia is still a source of major concern for the international community owing to its human cost and the fresh outbreaks of violence against hostages, with their destabilizing consequences for Somali society. In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco welcomes the international community's renewed interest in solving the crisis in Somalia and welcomes the steps taken towards stabilizing that African country. We take comfort every time that Africa is on its way to resolving a conflict that is shaking our continent. We hope that the Somali authorities will redouble their efforts to contribute to returning Somalia to normality in region that is so strategic for the stability of our continent. Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would like to commend the United Kingdom on assuming the responsibilities of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March, as well as to congratulate Togo for its very successful presidency in February. I would also like to thank the United Kingdom for convening this open debate on the situation in Somalia, and to welcome the presence at this important meeting of His Excellency Under Secretary of State Henry Bellingham. We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement, and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga for his briefing. I would like to reiterate our strong support for the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia in its efforts to overcome difficulties, achieve reconciliation and build a secure, stable, united, democratic and prosperous nation. We note the holding last month in Garowe of the United Nations-facilitated second Somali National Consultative Constitutional Conference, which agreed on a set of Principles for finalizing the draft constitution and ending the transitional process by August 2012. As Somalia moves towards the end of the transition, additional steps should be taken to protect the security and political gains of the past few years, as well as to ensure that all efforts ultimately contribute to the delivery of the road map. We believe that continued international assistance to the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia to implement the end of the transition is necessary to bring unity, peace and stability to Somalia. Azerbaijan supports the work of the United Nations in that country. We commend the efforts of the African Union, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the troop-contributing countries for their valuable support for the people and the Government of Somalia. We also commend the contribution of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in favour of achieving peace and national reconciliation in Somalia and mobilizing assistance to meet the urgent needs of the people affected by the humanitarian crisis in the country. Like other members of the Council, Azerbaijan welcomed the international London conference held on 23 February 2012, which demonstrated the international community's political will and determination to support Somalia and its people. It is important to use the momentum generated by the conference and build on the agreement achieved in London to continue pursuing a comprehensive strategy for the establishment of peace and stability in Somalia. We must continue to approach the complex situation in the country with care and sensitivity, on the basis of a comprehensive strategy aimed at addressing the political, humanitarian, economic and security problems in the country through the collaborative efforts. Somalis should take over responsibility for providing their own security and developing their own justice system in order to deal with threats to their security. It is essential that political, security and institutional reforms conform to the pace of military gains. The Transitional Federal Government should be consistently supported so that it can become fully operational in the areas under its control. The measures taken by the Government to develop outreach activities in the recently recovered areas should be further encouraged. Azerbaijan welcomes the commitment made at the London conference for renewed international action to address the threat posed by terrorist attacks from Somali armed opposition groups. It is encouraging that a combination of measures, including the efforts of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, actions by naval forces and the imprisonment of many suspected or convicted pirates, has contributed to the decline in the number of successful piracy-related attacks. However, further effective countermeasures and strengthened international cooperation remain crucial against the backdrop of the ongoing threat posed by piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia and the increased incidents of attempted attacks. In that regard, we note the commitments made at the London conference on new efforts to repress piracy. The long-awaited durable peace in Somalia requires the economic recovery of the country, which is suffering from the grave consequences of the two-decade war and instability. It is important to expand the existing stabilization plans in Somalia to new sectors, to increase international support to areas of stability, including through a new stability fund, and to encourage further efforts to address Somalia's long-term reconstruction and economic development. Azerbaijan welcomes the initiative of the Government of Turkey to host a conference in Istanbul in April, focused on the economic development of Somalia. The humanitarian situation in Somalia is a matter of serious concern. We stress the importance of lasting support to Somalia in that regard, as well as the need to redouble efforts to find long-term solutions for internally displaced persons. In conclusion, I would like to stress that, whatever the measures being taken and assistance being provided to support Somalia, respect for and a strong commitment to its sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity are crucial and must constitute an absolute priority and indispensable prerequisite for building a secure, stable and prosperous Somalia. Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I would like welcome you, Mr. Minister. We extend our congratulations to the United Kingdom on assuming the Council's presidency and thank the delegation of Togo for its leadership of the Council last month. We thank the Secretary-General for his statement this morning and Special Representative Mahiga for his briefing. Somalia stands at a critical moment. The international community has an important but limited window of opportunity. The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali forces have driven Al-Shabaab out of Mogadishu and other areas. The mandate of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) comes to an end in August. Somalia now has a blue print for a State after 20 years without a functional Government. At the same time, Somalia is emerging from the worst humanitarian crisis in the world. The TFG and the international community have already taken important steps. The unanimous adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) on 22 February, immediately followed by the London conference on Somalia, shows that the international community is united in its commitment to Somalia's future. I would like to thank the United Kingdom for hosting that important conference, and commend members of the Council for giving unanimous support to AMISOM's expansion. The AMISOM troop levels are now increasing and its funding needs have been established. The second Garowe Constitutional Conference showed the way towards more inclusive governance with clear benchmarks, and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia has now been established in Mogadishu. We have accomplished much, but this is no time to lose momentum. A number of critical tasks lie ahead before the road map's August deadline. We have six months, and we need to use them wisely. First, the most important achievement of the London conference was to galvanize high-level and public international support to continue to keep pressure on Somali leaders to complete the road map by August. The conference participants, including the United States, concluded that the August deadline was firm. There must be no extension of the Transitional Federal Government's mandate beyond 20 August. The signatories to the road map must fulfil their commitments and complete the difficult work ahead to bring stability to Somalia for the first time in many of its people's lives. The critical next steps are to complete the drafting of the new constitution and to establish the Constituent Assembly. Fundamental to that effort will be developing a public information and outreach process to win popular consent for the ongoing process. The United States will support the sanctioning of political spoilers and other individuals who threaten the peace, stability and security of Somalia. Secondly, for the political process to continue, we must redouble our efforts to disrupt terrorism. Despite the military successes of AMISOM, Al-Shabaab remains dangerous. It continues to destroy the lives of innocent Somalis. We welcome the Council's decision, as requested by the TFG, to further degrade Al-Shabaab by imposing an international ban on the import and export of charcoal from Somalia. That decision targets a primary revenue stream for Al-Shabaab. However, sanctions work only when they are implemented. We urge all Member States to take immediate steps to comply with the obligation contained in resolution 2036 (2012) to ban the trade of Somali charcoal, particularly by those most active in such trade. We must also stop the movement of terrorists to and from Somalia, further disrupt the flow of their finances, and develop the capacity to conduct criminal investigations and prosecutions, as well as to operate secure detention facilities. The Security Council should continue advancing international cooperation to produce concrete results in those areas. We also ask all Member States to build the capacity of the Somali security sector to pave the way for Somalis to take charge of their own security. We urge new donors to assist the Somali national security forces by providing training, equipment, salaries, infrastructure and logistical support. The United States has obligated more than $106 million to support that effort, and we ask others to do their part. Thirdly, to maximize the pressure on Al-Shabaab, we must implement fully and swiftly the expansion mandated in resolution 2036 (2012). The sacrifices made by AMISOM and the Somali national security forces testify to their dedication to bringing peace and stability in Somalia. We call on additional troop contributors to respond quickly to enable AMISOM to be fully staffed. We also urge Member States to increase the voluntary support for AMISOM troop-contributing countries, particularly in the form of equipment and funding for the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM. The United States has a long and strong tradition of support for that. Now, the support of AMISOM must become a truly international effort. Maritime assets will be critical to AMISOM's mission, and we hope that providing sustainable and reliable funding for the maritime component will be addressed in the coming months. As we continue to reinforce AMISOM's capacity to root out Al-Shabaab and establish conditions for effective and legitimate governance, we must also ensure that timely and visible benefits accrue to ordinary Somalis in recently liberated areas and improve security, as well as access to food, water, health care and livelihoods. Stabilization programming in those areas must be expanded swiftly to cement military gains and to lay a foundation for long-term reconstruction and economic development. Fourthly, as we continue to press for political progress and diminish the threat of terrorism, we must sustain our humanitarian response to Somalia. All parties to the conflict must allow unrestricted humanitarian access. The United States is deeply concerned about displaced people pouring into Mogadishu. There is a widespread housing shortage, a lack of clean water and sanitation and a serious threat of disease. We remain particular concerned about the plight of Somali women and children, many of whom are vulnerable to increased levels of sexual and gender-based violence. We urge the international community to continue to provide life-saving assistance to those populations and others in need in Somalia and its neighbours. Secretary of State Clinton announced at the London conference that the United States would increase our humanitarian assistance to the Horn of Africa by $64 million, bringing our total emergency assistance to the region since 2011 up to more than $934 million. That amount includes more than $211 million for life-saving programmes in Somalia. We urge all Member States to strongly support the $1.5-billion United Nations consolidated appeal for Somalia, which is currently funded at only $165 million, or 11 per cent. Let me reiterate our strong support for AMISOM and our continued commitment to working with the international community in seeking solutions to the challenges faced by the people of Somalia, who have suffered for too long. In the six-month period, we have a unique opportunity, and we must do everything that we can to seize it. Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to thank the United Kingdom for taking the initiative to convene this open debate on the situation in Somalia. I also wish to welcome Mr. Bellingham, Under Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, for chairing today's meeting. I wish to thank the Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and his Special Representative for Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for their briefings. At present, the peace process in Somalia has shown positive momentum. The implementation of the road map to end the transition has made progress. The second Somali National Consultative Constitutional Conference was successfully convened. Relevant military actions are constantly making progress. The humanitarian situation in Somalia has significantly improved. China welcomes those developments. In the meantime, we note that the peace process in Somalia remains an uphill battle. Some key tasks for the transitional period have yet to be completed. The tendency of some factions towards extremism and terrorism has grown. The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains fragile and calls for greater efforts on the part of the relevant parties in Somalia and the international community as a whole. The achievement of national reconciliation is the ultimate means to the restoration of peace and stability in Somalia. We hope that the relevant parties in Somalia can seize the current favourable conditions, further strengthen unity and reconciliation, and actively promote and implement the Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala Accord and the Garowe Principles. We hope that they can comprehensively implement the road map and end the transitional period on time. We hope that the Transitional Federal Institutions of Somalia can further build their capacities and undertake, as soon as possible, effective governance over the entire country. We hope that the relevant factions in Somalia can forsake violence and terrorism and join the peace process. Recently, the international community has been increasing its attention to and investment in the issue of Somalia. International regional organizations, such as the United Nations, the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) have stepped up their mediation efforts. The Security Council adopted resolution 2036 (2012), which raised the authorized troop level of and the support for the African Union Mission in Somalia. Troop-contributing countries such as Uganda, Burundi and Kenya have made important contributions to and sacrifices for the maintenance of stability in Somalia. Recently, the London conference on Somalia was successfully convened. We welcome its success. China calls on the international community to continue its efforts in the following areas in order to promote the Somali peace process. It must, first, strengthen the political process and support the mediation efforts of the United Nations, AU and IGAD, and encourage relevant parties in Somalia to substantially implement the road map; secondly, reinforce logistical support to improve the governance of the Transitional Federal Government and implement resolution 2036 (2012) in a timely and comprehensive manner; and thirdly, enhance humanitarian relief and continue to help Somalia improve its humanitarian situation. We hope that the international community can further enhance coordination and honour its commitments in order to make due contributions to the realization of lasting peace in Somalia. Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important meeting on the future of Somalia and welcome you personally back to New York. We congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the Council's presidency and assure its of Germany's support, while thanking our friends from Togo for their stewardship of the Council's work in February. A great many thanks go to the Secretary-General for his presence and his clear analysis today, as well as to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga for his briefing and his untiring commitment under very difficult circumstances. My country aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the European Union. Today, I would like to focus on three points: the political situation, the security at sea off the coast of Somalia, and security on land. First, with regard to the political situation, the London conference was indeed a milestone on the way to a better Somalia. We commend the British Government for that initiative and the efforts it put into that undertaking. It was particularly useful that all major actors from within and outside of Somalia participated and agreed to come to common solutions. We therefore look forward to the upcoming Istanbul conference, which will certainly continue this positive trend. The sustained engagement and support of the international community should encourage the Somali leaders to move forward and to achieve tangible progress in the implementation of the road map. In this context, we recognize the important meetings in Puntland and commend the outcomes of the first and second Somali National Consultative Constitutional Conference, held in Garowe. While those are certainly steps forward, many questions still remain unresolved. Those pertain to the election of a new parliament and the approval of a new constitution. Further, finding administrative and security arrangements for newly liberated areas in the south and centre of Somalia remains a priority. Somalia has no time to loose. Therefore, we see with regret and frustration, to be quite frank, the deadlock in the Transitional Federal Parliament and the ongoing infighting in the Transitional Federal Institutions. The Council has confirmed many times that it is ready to act against spoilers that slow down the country on its way forward. The time has come for the Council to discuss what type of effective action it can take against the spoilers of the Somali peace process. There are no more excuses for derailing the process, especially since the London conference and this Council have confirmed once again that the transition will end in August. Let me now turn briefly to my second point -- the military and security aspects of the situation in Somalia, including the issue of piracy. Piracy continues to pose a threat to civil navigation in the waters off Somalia and to the delivery of much-needed humanitarian aid to the people of Somalia. Due to a coordinated and resolute international response, the number of successful attacks has considerably decreased. Lawlessness and the absence of reliable State structures in vast parts of Somalia not only provide a breeding ground for piracy, but also pose obstacles to the prosecution of apprehended suspects. Prosecution remains an element of our response to piracy that should be further strengthened. We commend the efforts of States in the region in this respect and encourage others to join them. Germany has provided substantial support to those efforts, both directly and through the Trust Fund of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We need to disrupt the pirates' business model by increasing our efforts against the beneficiaries of piracy and improving our understanding of the financial flows generated by piracy. Let me turn to my third point -- the security situation on land. Germany commends the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which operates under very difficult circumstances and has made enormous sacrifices. It has been the determination and commitment of those African Union (AU) forces that have improved the security situation on the ground in recent months, thereby also creating better conditions for providing humanitarian aid. With resolution 2036 (2012), which was adopted on the eve of the London conference, the Security Council extended considerably the mandate of AMISOM and the scope of United Nations support for the Mission. In making that decision, the members of the Security Council expressed their willingness to seize the opportunity on the ground. It is now crucial that the new strategic concept for AMISOM be implemented in a timely and comprehensive manner and that all components of AMISOM jointly work towards fulfilling its objectives. We look forward to the swift rehatting and arrival of new troops in line with the agreed schedule. The Council will closely monitor progress in this regard, based on regular reports in accordance with resolution 2036 (2012). That resolution recognizes the support provided to AMISOM by bilateral partners and regional organizations. I would like to stress once more the substantial contributions made by the European Union currently and in the past, and reiterate the call of resolution 2036 (2012) for new donors to support AMISOM. Finally, resolution 2036 (2012) also calls for the speedy establishment of Somali security forces. It is the Somalis themselves who will eventually need to take care of their country and provide for the safety and security of the population. Therefore, the establishment of professional and reliable Somali security forces is key. The international community needs to support Somalia in this respect. My country actively engages in the European Union training mission for the Somali security forces and encourages others to join these efforts. For Germany, the ultimate goal of all efforts remains a peaceful and functioning Somali State with responsible State authorities that effectively serve the people of Somalia. Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we congratulate the United Kingdom on its assumption of the presidency of the Council and thank it for having organized this meeting. We also reiterate our gratitude to the delegation of Togo for its outstanding management of the presidency in February. We would like to thank Mr. Henry Bellingham, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State of the United Kingdom, for presiding over this meeting and to congratulate him for the successful conference held in London a few days ago. We also extend a warm welcome to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga, an ex-colleague and esteemed friend, who joins us through cyberspace. The London conference undoubtedly raised Somalia's profile in the international community, and generated good prospects for meeting the schedule established for the transition period. We believe that Somalia is facing a challenge akin to that of a marathon runner, since the drafting of the constitution must end by 20 April and its adoption completed on 22 May. Following that, on 15 June we expect the new Somali Federal Parliament to be formed and, as if that were not enough, the general elections are planned to be held on 20 August. Therefore, we understand that the next six months will be critical to the political trajectory of Somalia, and a rigid discipline on the part of the authorities and civil society of the country, as well as the strong support of the international community, will be required if this highly ambitious timetable is to be met. Both the London conference and the recently adopted resolution 2036 (2012) -- which strengthens the operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) -- demonstrate the commitment of the international community to supporting the national process in Somalia. This is adequately reflected in the documents that came out of the first and second Somali National Consultative Constitutional Conferences held in Garowe. The Security Council must remain vigilant to the compliance with these deadlines, since postponing the end of transition would represent a step backwards. We hope that the new Government of Somalia that will assume power after 20 August will be more representative and inclusive of the Somali people. We appreciate that 30 per cent of the representatives in the new Somali Federal Parliament will be women. We are concerned about the tactics of one group of parliamentarians in not recognizing the Principles and road map that emerged from the second Garowe Conference, as noted by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga in his briefing. We appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Mahiga and by the United Nations Political Office for Somalia to help these tasks be completed. Allow me now to highlight some points about the security strategy. We are encouraged by events on the ground and by the areas recently recovered. We are grateful to all partners for their sustained support to Somalia, in particular those whose personnel have made the supreme sacrifice in helping to stabilize the country. We reiterate that financial support to AMISOM must be predictable. At the same time, we believe that the capacity-building of Somalia's security forces is essential, and that these continue to work side by side with AMISOM. We are encouraged by the fact that Mogadishu is experiencing an environment of stability that is increasing day by day. The presence of Mr. Mahiga and his team there attest to that fact. We fully support expanding and implementing the stabilization plans to the recovered sectors. The establishment of local administrations capable of providing basic services to their local population will be essential. Finally, we know that Somalia is endowed with an adequate base of natural resources, including one of the longest shorelines in Africa. The sustainable management of these resources must benefit the local population. We know that piracy and armed robbery on the coasts of Somalia are largely a consequence of the lack of economic opportunities for its population. That is why we are pleased that the economic development of Somalia is a key item on the agenda of the forthcoming Istanbul conference. Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We warmly felicitate the delegation of the United Kingdom on its assumption of the Security Council's presidency for this month. We welcome you, Sir, as the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom. We also thank Togo for its sterling stewardship of the Council in February. We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his special report on Somalia (S/2012/74). We also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga for his briefing today. At the present critical juncture in Somalia's quest for peace and stability, hope outweighs the usual skepticism associated with the country. The London conference on Somalia reflected this optimism. We commend the United Kingdom for organizing the conference. The London communiqué reflects the international community's desire to support Somalia, as well as the aspirations of the Somali people to a better life and future. Pakistan would join the consensus within the Security Council in support of the London communiqué. The end of the transition period in August should mark the end of conflict spanning more than two decades. A domestic consensus among all political stakeholders is essential to oversee this critical period. We welcome the commitment of the Somali leadership, first at Garowe in December 2011 and later in London last month, to work for a representative post-transition Government in Somalia, in line with the Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala Accord and the transition road map. Such a commitment is essential to create a positive political environment to handle successfully the imminent transformation in Somalia. We hope that the leadership of Somalia will shoulder its responsibility and seize the opportunity provided by the strong engagement of the international community for achieving peace and stability in the country. Political progress in Somalia will remain fragile without corresponding gains in the security area. In that regard, the role of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is crucial. Resolution 2036 (2012), adopted last month, increased the scale and scope of AMISOM. It also expanded the United Nations logistical support package to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of the Mission's financing. With that, AMISOM corresponds with the benchmarks identified in the United Nations-African Union strategic concept paper. That development constitutes a stellar model of cooperation in the field of peace and security between different organs of the United Nations and the African Union. The upgraded AMISOM, with all the requisite enablers and force multipliers, will meet the objectives set forth by the United Nations and the African Union and assume an improved profile to implement its challenging mandate. AMISOM troop-contributing countries deserve praise for their commitment and resilience. We value the financial contributions made to AMISOM by the African Union's partners, bilateral donors and contributors to the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM. Long-term security and stability in Somalia cannot be ensured without a viable security setup. The development and enhancement of Somali security forces was also an element of the strategic concept paper. International assistance, including through wider engagement by the United Nations peacekeeping architecture, will be vital for that purpose. Pakistan supports the addition of a maritime component to AMISOM for the prevention of piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia. That would complement the efforts of the international naval forces in the Gulf of Aden and adjacent waters. The area of Somali pirate activities is mostly along the Somali coastal areas, the Gulf of Aden and adjacent waters. That is the area where the anti-piracy operations should focus strictly. Over the years, Pakistan has played an active role in the international naval coalition against piracy by deploying its naval assets. We have participated in the operations of two naval task forces -- Combined Task Force 150, for countering piracy in the Gulf of Aden, and Combined Task Force 151 (CTF-151), for countering piracy off the coast of Somalia. Pakistan, which had commanded the task force in the past, has again been in command of CTF-151 since November 2011. As part of the international naval coalition, we can say from experience that coercive measures alone are not enough to eradicate the menace of piracy. For its complete eradication, a comprehensive strategy aimed at addressing the root causes is required. As has been stated before, the root causes of piracy exist on land, and include a complex intermix of economic breakdown caused by political and security strife as well as environmental degradation of coastal areas caused by illegal fishing and the dumping of toxic wastes. All of those factors lead to propensity among the local population to opt for piracy. We share the concerns expressed by previous speakers about the humanitarian situation in Somalia. Despite improvement with regard to the famine situation, humanitarian challenges persist and require our sustained attention. The humanitarian situation can unravel progress achieved in political and security spheres. We therefore need to remain seized of the humanitarian needs of the Somali people. The international community's engagement to address Somalia's myriad problems is propitious. Resolution 2036 (2012), as well as today's debate, with the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/4) backing the London communiqué, reflect our collective desire for peace and stability in Somalia. Pakistan will continue to support Somalia in bilateral terms, as well as in its quality as a member of the Security Council, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation contact group on Somalia and the United Nations Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. We look forward to the Istanbul conference as another milestone in our collective journey for peace in Somalia. As always, our Somali brethren will find us a steadfast partner. Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The situation in Somalia once again has the attention of the Security Council, which has devoted today's debate to that issue. First of all, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate the United Kingdom on its accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of March. I also thank your delegation for choosing the situation in Somalia as the subject of the first debate under its presidency. I also welcome the presence in New York of Under Secretary of State Bellingham in order to preside over this debate. As well, I would like to thank the Secretary-General and Ambassador Mahiga for their very informative statements. Taking place a few days following the holding of the international conference on Somalia in London, on 23 February, this debate is testament to the commitment and desire of the United Nations and the international community to pursue their efforts aimed at restoring peace and security in Somalia. We should recall that the outcome of the conference provides a guarantee of support for the federal transitional authorities in the effective implementation of the road map for the end of the transition, scheduled for August. Togo believes that this dynamic of solidarity vis-à-vis Somalia on the part of friendly countries and other bilateral and multilateral partners will undoubtedly have a positive impact on the future of a country that has been ravaged my many years of war. On 22 February, prior to the holding of the London conference, the Security Council adopted resolution 2036 (2012), which authorized increasing the numbers and necessary logistical support for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Quite clearly, the adoption of the resolution is a sign of support for Somali officials, but it is also a signal to them to shoulder their own responsibilities. It is important that Somali officials continuously bear in mind the fact that the numerous efforts made by the international community are but support for the efforts that they must themselves carry out to achieve the broader goals in the areas of security, humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and the economic development of their country. With regard to the process of promoting peace and reconstruction in Somalia, my country believes that the emphasis should be on strengthening the capacities of national security forces so that they can themselves ensure security and stability in the long term, in cooperation with AMISOM and after its departure. Togo therefore encourages the implementation of the specific programmes under way, with the support of various State and institutional stakeholders. In that regard, particular emphasis should be placed on reforming the security, judicial and humanitarian sectors. With regard to the latter, given the number of displaced persons, the needs are estimated to be quite significant. Togo also urges the international community to better coordinate humanitarian assistance so that it can reach those in greatest need in a timely manner and cover the entirety of the country. Piracy along Somalia's coasts and in the Gulf of Aden continues to post a serious threat to maritime security and the economic development of the countries of the region. Although the number of successful acts of piracy has decreased significantly owing to the specific measures taken, it is nevertheless worrying to note that there are still many instances of pirate attacks and hostage-taking, and that those now extend beyond Somalia's coasts. The resolve to adopt effective measures to address those challenges, as called for in presidential statement S/PRST/2012/4, just adopted by the Council, sends a message of resolve on the part of the international community to the armed groups and perpetrators of acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea, who must be dealt with without delay. Togo believes that, within the range of appropriate responses that must be brought to bear in the fight against that scourge, there also needs to be a vision for a long-term solution that will take into account the deeper causes of the phenomenon. We therefore hope that the international conference on Somalia that the Government of Turkey has proposed to host in Istanbul will explore those issues in greater depth. To conclude, Togo congratulates the United Kingdom for initiating the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/4) just adopted, which constitutes an additional milestone in the actions taken by the United Nations as part of the process of restoring security, peace and stability in Somalia. My country expresses its deep gratitude to the countries of the subregion, in particular those that contribute troops to AMISOM. We also thank the partners of the African Union, especially the European Union, which has provided AMISOM with financial and logistical support. The President: I shall now make a statement in my national capacity. At the London conference on Somalia 10 days ago, the international community set out a vision for bringing peace to Somalia and for supporting the Somali people in their search for a better future for their country. I would like to offer my thanks and sincere gratitude to all the countries that attended. We agreed that we needed to focus on addressing the underlying causes of instability, as well as to take immediate action to address the symptoms of Somalia's problems in the form of piracy, terrorism, poverty and famine. We were clear that, while the famine in Somalia was now over, the humanitarian situation remained grave, and that we should prioritize our support to the Somalis in need. I would like to focus today on how we can build on the platform of London to maintain our focus on those underlying causes, by sustaining the momentum of the political process, building security and justice capacity, and supporting stability at the local level. First, with respect to the political process, as my Prime Minister said in London, the Garowe meetings have made really positive steps towards replacing the Transitional Federal Institutions in August with something more accountable, more inclusive and more representative. Our responsibility now is to support the United Nations and the Somalis in order to ensure that the Somali-led process for selecting the independent interim electoral commission and the national Constituent Assembly are truly representative. Somali leaders must work towards a political process that is open to all those prepared to reject violent opposition. Only if Somalis have a say in the shape of their future institutions will they feel inclined to give their backing to a new Government. We need to consider how we can support the process, both by incentivizing those currently in positions of power to be prepared to step down and allow new arrangements to be introduced, and by maintaining pressure on potential spoilers to prevent them from blocking progress. I entirely agree with remarks made by the United States representative on that particular point. The timelines set out to lead the process up to August are tight. We need to help the Somalis maintain the momentum needed to meet them. Secondly, with regard to security and justice, I am delighted that we were able to adopt resolution 2036 (2012) ahead of the conference, thus providing a proper package of support to an expanded African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Along with a number of other speakers today, I would like to pay tribute to the brave soldiers, especially those from Uganda and Burundi, who have paid the ultimate price. They deserve proper logistics. We now look to partners in Africa to provide the additional troops mandated and to ensure the proper coordination of efforts in Somalia under the AMISOM banner. In the meantime, we and other international partners need to continue to support elements of AMISOM not funded through the United Nations, including troop stipends. In that respect, I join with the representative of France in welcoming the European Union's announcement of an additional Euro100 million in funding. The London conference sent a clear message. In addition to supporting AMISOM, the international community must redouble its support for the development of local Somali security solutions, including improved access to justice across the country, which is a vital ingredient of human security. Despite the efforts of a number of partners, Somali security and justice institutions are currently poorly resourced and lack capacity. We can and should do more. We should improve our coordination and focus in that area, in line with the principles agreed in London, and we should work closely with the United Nations Joint Security Committee. The end goal for us, as well as for Somalis, is a Somalia that can provide security for its own people without the need for international troops. The development of effective Somali judicial capacity will also enable Somalis to tackle the scourge of terrorism and piracy. Increased capability to prosecute pirates and the kingpins of piracy will complement vital work to undermine the piracy business model. I certainly agree with what the French representative said a moment ago, when he referred to a time in the future when we do not see any more catch-and-release taking place. I particularly welcome announcements at the London conference on the establishment of an anti-piracy intelligence centre and an international task force on piracy ransoms. Finally, with respect to building stability at the local level, the London conference saw the launch of a new stability fund as a vehicle to help deliver support in areas working to put in place accountable local authorities. It is essential that we support those areas. We must increase the number of people who feel safe and secure, and we must improve the access of Somalis to jobs, health, education and water. It is equally vital that we also help local institutions that are accountable for their actions and transparent in their management of resources and that represent the interests of all Somalis, not just the elite. That will serve as a foundation for large-scale investment in Somalia's economic development, thereby in the longer term paving a path to stability. It will demonstrate to people in areas liberated from Al-Shabaab that peace offers a real and better alternative. I welcome contributions to the stability fund announced in London, and call on others to support those efforts. At the London conference, there was wide recognition that this is a key moment in Somalia's history. We have an opportunity, now more than ever, to build stability in Somalia. We need to take that opportunity, build on gains on the ground, and turn our consensus in London into actions and change that make life better for the Somali people. If we succeed, then people will look back on these few months as a real turning point. If we fail, then the young of Somalia will continue to grow up surrounded by violence, helplessness, evil and degradation. We owe it to them to redouble our efforts. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I wish to remind speakers to limit their statements to no more than four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry on its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia. Mr. Duale (Somalia): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Somali Government and the people of Somalia, for convening this open debate on Somalia, the first general open debate of your presidency. This debate follows the successful international conference of 23 February 2012 in London, the outcome of which was applauded by most well-meaning Somalis, both inside and outside the country. I also thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive special report on Somalia (S/2012/74), and Mr. Augustine Mahiga, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, for his thorough briefing on the situation in Somalia. The Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia, in his statement at Chatham House in London on 24 February, expressed his appreciation and thanks, on behalf of Somalia and its citizens, to the United Kingdom for holding the London international conference on Somalia, in which all of the Somali regional authorities and other stakeholders were represented. It is worthwhile to note, in that connection, that there have been 20 international conferences on Somalia since the collapse of the central Government in 1991 -- all attempting to shape a viable Government and a semblance of peace and security in the country. It is true that commendable efforts were made during those conferences, and in good faith, especially by neighbouring countries hosting these conferences, including Ethiopia, Djibouti, and Kenya. The last such conference resulted in the creation of the Transitional Federal Government. The tangible difference of the London international conference is that, first, it was attended by 55 international leaders and all the Somali leaders from across the regions of Somalia, as well as by the Secretary-General and his top aides, and by multilateral and regional leaders and organizations. It focused on the most critical issues, such as the political process, governance, security, justice, piracy and terrorism, stability and recovery issues, international cooperation, effective coordination and humanitarian issues. Furthermore, what was unprecedented was the moral commitment and expressed will of both the international community and the Somali representatives to achieve fundamental change through a new approach, and to become engaged in Somalia, and not business as usual. In addition, Somalia welcomes with appreciation the planned meeting in Istanbul in June to further discuss vital issues, including recovery and maintaining recovery. Most of the issues have already been mentioned by members of the Security Council, and we appreciate and endorse the statements made by the Security Council members, including your good self, Sir. Today, Somalia is at a crossroads. The Somali leaders have agreed and committed themselves to delivering on schedule, as was stated, on the Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala Accord, the road map and the Garowe Principles, just as they are all fully committed to ending the protracted transition period by 20 August 2012. However, one remains a bit worried, given the past experiences of conferences on Somalia, at which good intentions were expressed and generous commitments were made that have not been seen through nor delivered in a timely as a result. Allow me to conclude my remarks by quoting two very brief paragraphs from the statement of His Excellency the Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government at Chatham House in London on 24 February: "The conference has created substantial expectations for all Somali stakeholders. The next stage is a long journey for Somalia, but I believe that we have embarked on this journey, and my Government is committed to putting in place the foundations needed to deepen peace, stability and development. "As a result of the conference, I expect there will be a noticeable change in enhanced international coordination for key sectors, improved financial management of Somalia's public assets, an increased African Union troop presence and enhanced support of the road map." Somalia's problems are long-standing and complicated; solving them will require serious, honest, coordinated and consensus-based partnership between the Transitional Federal Institutions, the Somali stakeholders, the African Union, the United Nations and the broader international community. More funding for local stability initiatives, including counter-piracy, security, justice and counter-terrorism, as well as funding for Somalia's productive sector and for youth employment. Mr. President, finally, while reiterating my Government's appreciation and thanks to you, may I seize this opportunity also to extend through you our thanks and appreciation to the members of the Security Council for the consensus on the presidential statement that you have read today, and for their positive and very supportive statements. The President: I call on the representative of Uganda. Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): Let me begin by congratulating you, Sir, and the delegation of the United Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I thank you for organizing this important and timely open debate on the situation in Somalia. I also thank the Secretary-General and his Special Representative for Somalia for their statements. This debate is being held hardly two weeks after the Security Council adopted resolution 2036 (2012). Uganda commends the Council for that resolution, which was a demonstration of the Council's commitment to the cause of peace and security on the African continent, and Somalia in particular. Uganda also commends the United Kingdom for organizing the London international conference on Somalia on 23 February. We welcome the outcome of that meeting, which affirmed international support for the stabilization of Somalia. We also wish to underscore the need to build on that outcome through the collaborative effort of all stakeholders in Somalia, the region and the rest of the international community. Uganda is convinced that durable peace and stability in Somalia are attainable. When we can look back from where we have come, I am sure we can say today, without any contradiction, that we have made visible progress in moving forward to stabilize Somalia. We commend the efforts of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the Somali people aimed at restoring peace, security and stability in the country, in spite of the challenges. We commend them because, ultimately, that is their primary responsibility. We also commend the international community for supporting the people of Somalia. In addressing the situation in Somalia, I would like to make the following points. First, we encourage the TFG to intensify its efforts to complete the outstanding transitional tasks. We welcome the commitments made at the London conference to work for a more representative Government in Somalia, in line with the Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala Accord, the end of transition road map and the Garowe Principles. We believe that a representative Government will lead to greater accountability and unity, which are essential to peace and stability in Somalia. Secondly, resolution 2036 (2012) was a significant outcome because the Security Council responded positively to the request of the African Union to continue its support of the Union's ongoing stabilization efforts in Somalia. That was an example of the envisaged United Nations-African Union strategic partnership that can enhance our collective efforts in the maintenance of peace and stability on the continent. Uganda appreciates the support that has been extended to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) by international partners, such as the bilateral support programmes of the United States of America and the African Peace Facility of the European Union. It is essential that that support continue because there is need to consolidate the security gains made in Somalia and deny a new lease on life for extremist groups such as Al-Shabaab. We need to build on our achievements and continue to support efforts aimed at developing the Somali security forces and institutions, the role of which remains vital to ensuring Somalia's long-term security and stability. Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Somalia remains a matter of concern. Uganda commends the humanitarian agencies and workers who continue to operate in Somalia under very difficult conditions. We call upon the international community to redouble its support for the humanitarian effort. Fourthly, piracy off the coast of Somalia is an international problem that requires our collective efforts and contribution. We welcome the counter-measures that have been undertaken but also note the increased incidence of attempted attacks. As we have said before, pirates are not aquatic. They live on the mainland. We would like to reiterate, therefore, that the most effective and durable approach to combating piracy off the coast of Somalia is to address its root causes and establish State authority and control on the mainland. That is where our collective efforts should be directed. Fifthly, the progress we see in Somalia is a signal to the Somali people and to the international community that a new phase and opportunity exist in Somalia. The people of Somalia want to be safe, to be well and to have access to basic services; and they are looking for economic opportunities. However, the Government is not in a position at this time to undertake certain critical activities. The country requires the support of the international community for its reconstruction and economic development, including for the provision of key basic services and infrastructure. That will promote resettlement, reintegration and reconciliation and lay the foundation for sustainable peace. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Uganda's commitment to supporting stabilization efforts in Somalia. We will continue working with our partners in the region and outside the region to that end. An opportunity exists that must not be lost. The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Kenya. Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): I thank the presidency of the Council for the month of March for arranging this debate and for according Kenya the opportunity to share its views. I also wish to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, for his briefing. This meeting on Somalia could not have come at a better time. It follows closely on intense work undertaken at the regional and international levels in the past three months, which culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution 2036 (2012). At this juncture, we wish to welcome and thank the United Kingdom for convening the London conference on Somalia, held on 23 February, at which Kenya was represented at the highest level. The conference demonstrated the United Kingdom's resolve and the international community's commitment to rallying to the cause of Somalia. Although Kenya welcomes resolution 2036 (2012), which reviews recommendations by the African Union for the future operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), we note that the resolution does not provide for a maritime component. Yet that component is critical to the eventual success of the campaign in Somalia, as well as to the fight against piracy and international terrorism. It is our expectation that this matter will be addressed by the Council when reviewing the mandate of AMISOM later on in the year. In the meantime, the huge costs of sustaining the maritime operation continue to weigh heavily on my country, and it will be necessary to identify alternative forms of assistance to enable Kenya to continue those operations. It is our hope that our international partners will support us in this crucial endeavour. The Somalia crisis is a matter of which Kenya has remained seized for years. While the crisis has generated a number of challenges, our determination to turn Somalia around has been unwavering. In this context, I wish to pay special tribute to Uganda and Burundi for their contribution to the search for lasting peace in Somalia. We also recognize the commitment of Ethiopia and its critical support to the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and allied forces; to Djibouti for the deployment of its first contingent to Somalia; and to my country Kenya, for its ongoing operation, which has liberated parts of the country and populations in southern and central Somalia. Kenya's agreement to rehat its forces as part of AMISOM will strengthen the mission and give a boost to the fight to eliminate the Al-Shabaab terrorist group, especially after that group's recent declaration that they are part and parcel of Al-Qaida. The present discussion is taking place at a time of unique opportunity for Somalia. The international community finally has before it an unprecedented window of opportunity to restore security, peace and stability in Somalia. This has been occasioned by the momentum created following the withdrawal of AlShabaab from Mogadishu after its defeat by AMISOM and TFG forces in August 2011, by the operations of Kenyan and TFG forces in south-central Somalia, and through assistance from Ethiopia, all of which have dealt a devastating blow to Al-Shabaab. Kenya's operation in pursuit of Al-Shabaab and other terrorist elements has so far liberated large areas of Somalia and freed the inhabitants from Al-Shabaab control. Additionally, Kenya's operation in Somalia has significantly reduced the incidence of piracy off the coast of Somalia. As we pursue political and military strategies in Somalia, it is also imperative that we focus attention on the humanitarian situation in Somalia. As Council members are aware, Kenya is host to more than 600,000 refugees in the Dadaab complex, who continue to face threats that require humanitarian interventions. In that regard, Kenya stands ready to work with the international community to map out a firm and durable solution, including the return of those people to their home country. Indeed Somalia, now more than ever, needs its displaced human resources to return home to work together to speed up its recovery. The humanitarian actors should now take advantage of the areas secured from the Al-Shabaab to resettle those people. This is a matter of utmost urgency, as Kenya can no longer continue carrying the burden occasioned by the situation. Further, we must focus on restoring normalcy to Somalia by, among other things, encouraging socioeconomic activities that will have an impact on the livelihoods of ordinary Somalis, especially in areas that have been liberated. Such efforts will form the basis for extending TFG governance to those regions, increase the legitimacy of the transitional process and boost reconciliation activities. In addition, we call on all concerned to seriously reflect on the next steps for Somalia after the end of the transitional period in August 2012. In that regard, we commend the efforts of States like Turkey for showing renewed interest in organizing further meetings on Somalia and for undertaking infrastructure development in Somalia, such as the reconstruction of Mogadishu airport. Finally, I call on the Council and the international community at large to support the efforts currently under way aimed at bringing lasting peace and stability to a country that has suffered the effects of conflict for over two decades. This time we must get it right and do right by Somalia. The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey. Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate. Allow me to commend the remarks made by the Secretary-General, who has been personally committed to peace efforts in Somalia. We would also like to commend the Government of the United Kingdom for having organized the international London conference on Somalia last month. The conference was important in consolidating the determination of the international community to support the process in Somalia. Turkey welcomes the conference and fully supports its communiqué. The Somalia issue has been on the agenda of the international community for far too long. Today, thanks to our joint efforts and those of the Somali people, we have come very close to a point of success for the first time after so many turbulent years. Now is the time to concentrate and enhance those efforts to solidify peace and stability in Somalia. As agreed by all parties, the transition period will end on 20 August, without any further extensions. With less than six months remaining, there are a number of key tasks that must be achieved by the transitional authorities in Somalia. Those responsibilities are clearly outlined by the Kampala Accord, the road map and the Garowe Principles. We believe that transitional federal institutions should spare no effort in realizing the set objectives. In the same vein, finalizing and adopting the draft constitution on time, selecting a new and representative Parliament and choosing the new Government of Somalia are the most critical tasks to be completed. Military gains without political progress will be in vain and will create a political vacuum, which will only serve the spoilers in Somalia. Turkey firmly believes that the main priority of the international community must be to support Somali authorities in fulfilling their responsibilities to successfully complete the transition period. In other words, Somali transitional institutions and the people of Somalia must feel the support of the international community more than ever for the remaining period. The significant efforts and sacrifice demonstrated by the forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the African Union in Somalia undoubtedly constitute the best and the most visible example of the support given by the international community. In that regard, Turkey commends the efforts of AMISOM and very much welcomes resolution 2036 (2012). We also welcome the increasing political, logistical and financial support provided to AMISOM and to Somalia by donor countries and organizations. Turkey attaches the utmost importance to the territorial integrity of Somalia. Bearing that in mind, we believe that the following steps must be taken for a better future in the country. First, all Somalis should work out their differences so as to reach genuine reconciliation, which is the recipe for long-term peace, stability and prosperity. Secondly, the development of security sector institutions in Somalia is an urgent necessity for sustaining security in the country. Somalia should be assisted in that field. Thirdly, it is equally important to establish public institutions, such as regulatory and administrative bodies, for a functioning State and economy. Fourthly, special attention should be given to development and reconstruction efforts in Somalia, so that the Somali people feel a sense of normalization in their lives. Turkey believes that public services -- particularly in health, education, water and sanitation and infrastructure projects, such as roads, power generation and irrigation -- should be carried without delay. Likewise, policies for job creation and the promotion of industrial and agricultural development must be put in effect. Once in place, such policies will also help eradicate extremism, marginalization and piracy. Fifthly, humanitarian assistance should continue to work to prevent a recurrence of last year's famine. On its part, Turkey has launched a comprehensive programme to support the Somali people, including reopening our Embassy in Mogadishu in November 2011. I am particularly happy to announce that, beginning today, Turkish Airlines will start flying regularly between Istanbul and Mogadishu. Furthermore, Turkey is planning to establish regional development offices in Garowe and Galkayo. The offices will focus on development and infrastructure projects. Finally, I would like to mention that Turkey will organize the second Istanbul conference on Somalia on 1 June. The Istanbul Conference will discuss the progress made on the conclusions of the London conference. It will also address the post-transition strategy. In doing so, Turkey will work closely with the United Nations, especially with the United Nations Political Office for Somalia and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga, who has the full support of the Turkish Government. Now is the time to end the two-decades long suffering of the Somali people. They deserve to see their country rise from the ashes of the past to a bright, peaceful and dignified future. It is our common responsibility to make that possible. The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil. Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank the United Kingdom for organizing this open debate and for having hosted the London conference on Somalia on 23 February. I also express appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing. And I thank Mr. Mahiga for his briefing and commend his work as Special Representative. Brazil welcomes the presidential statement just adopted (S/PRST/2012/4). As many have been saying, we are indeed at a turning point in Somali history. As we approach the end of the transitional period in August, the outlines of a new governmental and parliamentary structure are beginning to appear. We are encouraged by the agreements reached at the Garowe meetings and by the steady advance towards political progress and reconciliation. As Brazil stated during the London conference, the efforts of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and of neighbouring countries are weakening Al-Shabaab. We expect Somali authorities to consolidate their presence and stability in the recovered areas, through the provision of basic services and security. That will also be important to enable hundreds of thousands of refugees located in Kenya and Ethiopia to return to their homeland. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012), which authorized the expansion of AMISOM contingents and increased the support package for the Mission. As AMISOM strengthens its operations, it should redouble efforts to protect civilians from the consequences of conflict and avoid deepening humanitarian problems in the affected areas. It would also be useful for a path to be opened for those who want to reject extremism and help rebuild their war-torn country through constructive political engagement. Making Al-Shabaab unattractive, especially to the young, will be easier if Somalis are given enhanced social and economic conditions to improve their lives. The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains a source of major concern. Although famine has ended, Somalia continues to need assistance. As the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations reminds us, the crisis is not over. Progress in Somalia depends on a commitment on the part of the Somali transitional institutions to uphold the agreements reached among the stakeholders. The successful completion of the transitional period this August depends on such a commitment. Brazil is also convinced that a stable Somalia will require a comprehensive strategy that combines security and development. Whatever progress is achieved on the political, military and humanitarian fronts will need to be consolidated through the creation of conditions for long-term development and resilience against further crises. Generating economic opportunities for the Somali people is an issue that must be urgently addressed. The fact that Somalis have begun to exploit their natural resources is to be commended. It is of the utmost importance that the resulting wealth be used to foster development, stability and unity. The adequate management of resources is key to generating prosperity for current and future generations. Brazil has provided significant humanitarian assistance, through food donations and financial support. We will continue to follow the situation closely so as to provide further cooperation to the best of our ability. The people of Somalia can continue to count on Brazil, as they progress towards a more stable and inclusive nation. The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations. Mr. Mayr-Harting: I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding country Croatia, the candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia, the countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. I would like to thank and congratulate the United Kingdom for organizing the timely and successful Somalia conference in London on 23 February. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mahiga for their briefings here today. Allow me to begin by reiterating the European Union's deep concern about the situation in Somalia and about the regional implications of its conflict. The European Union is determined to support the people of Somalia. They need peace, a prosperous economy and a stable political future in which they are able to live in security under the rule of law. Only such improved governance in Somalia can bring to an end both Somali suffering and the consequent scourges of terrorism and piracy beyond its borders. The EU has set out its approach to Somalia in its strategic framework for the Horn of Africa. It has been putting its words into action through a wide range of interventions -- humanitarian, developmental, political, counter-piracy and maritime capacity-building -- re-establishing the rule of law and coordinating counter-terrorism. The EU's overall support to Somalia amounts to more than Euro1 billion. The European Union welcomes the progress that the Garowe Principles constitute in implementing the Kampala Agreement and the road map to end the transition. We look to Somalis to build a new Somalia on those Principles by putting in place a new constitution and a stable and accountable political structure that is acceptable to all, through an inclusive process that is representative of the Somali communities. All Somali groups that clearly renounce violence and allow unhindered humanitarian access should be included. The European Union encourages and supports Somalia's reconciliation process. We will work hard to help the process move forward in accordance with the agreed benchmarks and timelines, as there can be no extension of the transitional period. But conflict resolution happens when local communities agree to live in peace together, not when outsiders impose peace. It is reassuring that recent months have seen the withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from some key cities in the central and southern regions of Somalia. In fact, the EU's largest contribution has been in the area of security. The European Union welcomes the recent adoption of resolution 2036 (2012). The EU remains a steadfast supporter of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We praise the commitment and bravery of the Mission's troops. The European Commission will propose a further financial support of Euro100 million to AMISOM to help fund the troop increase. That will be in addition to the Euro325 million given to date, provided through the African Peace Facility. The EU expects that, with that increase, AMISOM will be able to deliver security outside Mogadishu. But the decision to introduce reimbursements for contingent-owned equipment places an additional burden on EU member States, which together pay more than 40 per cent of the United Nations peacekeeping budget. Burden-sharing on a more equal basis is necessary. The European Union therefore calls on new, additional donors to ensure the sustainability of AMISOM financing. Together with the political process, helping Somalis to establish their own effective security forces is our best exit strategy. The EU is therefore training the national security forces of Somalia through its training mission in Uganda. To date, together with partners, the mission has trained approximately 1,800 soldiers, specialists, trainers and junior leaders. We are currently training more trainers and officers to enable them to take command and control of the forces. The EU has also funded, through the United Nations Development Programme, the training and stipends of 7,000 Somali police officers. The European Union supports security to create space for good, inclusive governance and for improving lives through development. Already the largest donor to Somalia, the European Union is increasing its development assistance, which now totals more than Euro500 million, to support governance, education and economic development. We are working wherever adequate security and governance permit development to hold sway, including the regions of Puntland and Somaliland. That support ought to be expanded to more regions, as circumstances permit. The EU and its member States are encouraged by the United Nations announcement that famine conditions in Somalia have ended. However, concerns persist in relation to the 2.3 million people who remain in crisis. The onset of famine in Somalia spurred the EU to more than double its humanitarian aid to Euro77 million. The EU provided food, health care, water and sanitation facilities to those affected by the crisis. In tackling the humanitarian challenge, the EU and its member States emphasize how humanitarian assistance should be guided by the principles of humanity, independence, neutrality and impartiality. A clear distinction between humanitarian objectives and political and security objectives is essential. The European Union also plays an important role in combating piracy off the coast of Somalia through its Operation Atalanta naval force. Its mission is to ensure the protection of World Food Program shipments and of vulnerable shipping, including deliveries to AMISOM. Operation Atalanta, whose mandate was very recently extended until December 2014, works to deter, prevent and repress acts of piracy. The prosecution of suspected pirates continues to constitute a key task, to be solved in close cooperation with local and regional partners and within the longer-term goal of restoring the rule of law in Somalia. The European Union has signed memorandums of understanding with the Seychelles and Mauritius to transfer pirates arrested by Operation Atalanta, and is currently negotiating such agreements with other countries of the region. Additionally, the European Union welcomes the recent report by the Secretary-General on specialized Somali anti-piracy courts (S/2011/360). Regional ownership is important. That is why the European Union supports the anti-piracy strategy of the Eastern and Southern Africa and Indian Ocean regions adopted in Mauritius in October 2010. A new element of the EU's anti-piracy engagement will be a civilian mission to build regional maritime capacities that will benefit the littoral countries of the Red Sea and the Horn of Africa regions. In conclusion, the key to resolving the political impasse in Somalia lies with Somalis themselves. The EU notes the important contributions made by the European Union in Somalia under the leadership of Special Representative Augustine Mahiga. The European Union welcomes the relocation of United Nations staff to Mogadishu. A sustained presence in Somalia's capital will facilitate the international community's work in the country. The increased international attention, recent security improvements on the ground and the expansion of AMISOM constitute a window of opportunity in Somalia. Now is the time to redouble efforts to reach the ultimate goal, namely, the transfer of political and security responsibilities to a Somali Government with broad-based, local support. We look forward to the United Nations and the African Union exercising decisive leadership in promoting peace in Somalia. The European Union will contribute to attaining that goal through a comprehensive approach. At the same time, it is imperative that all Somali stakeholders, especially the Transitional Federal Institutions, act upon their promises to solve the tremendous political, economic and security challenges before them. The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Australia. Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes the opportunity to participate in today's important debate and thanks the United Kingdom and you, Mr. President, for its initiative, including through the London conference, in which Australia participated. Many today have already spoken of a window of opportunity in 2012, and Australia shares that guarded optimism. But as we all know, if Somalia is to truly turn a corner towards peace and stability, rapid, sustained and coordinated action from all stakeholders will be required. Progress will first and foremost depend on the Somali political leadership and on the Somali people themselves. Developing governance structures that are broad-based and representative is clearly a fundamental first step. The Somali National Consultative Constitutional Conferences in Garowe have made important progress. We welcome in particular measures to ensure women's participation in the political process. It is vital that the process be inclusive and that the way be left open for Somalis to lay down their arms and join in the process. With a significant Somali community in Australia, we welcome efforts to ensure inclusion of the diaspora. Expectations are clear; substantial progress must be made before August. Further obfuscation or delay simply cannot be tolerated. The international community has a crucial role to play in facilitating the process through the good offices of the United Nations and the African Union. Special Representative Mahiga clearly outlined the path ahead this morning, and we thank him for his clarity. We anticipate continued progress at the next National Consultative Constitutional Conference to be held this month, and welcome its proposed focus on fundamental rights. In order to ensure the space for political progress, effort clearly must be made to consolidate and build on security gains, create a functioning justice system and to uphold the rule of law. International support for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in that context and for Somalia's emerging security forces is therefore fundamental. We welcome resolution 2036 (2012) expanding AMISOM and providing more sustainable, flexible and predictable funding. We welcome the excellent cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, including in the development of the new strategic concept, as well as the enhanced cooperation with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. We particularly commend the Governments of Uganda, Burundi, Djibouti and Kenya for their contributions to AMISOM, and hope that the Mission can quickly reach its new authorized troop strength. Australia is pleased to have made some practical contributions, including of information technology, technical support and a further $2 million last month. We will be making an additional contribution shortly. Piracy, like terrorism, is not only a symptom but also a cause of Somalia's instability. Australian forces will continue their active participation in the anti-piracy coalition. Later in 2012, in just a few months, we will host a counter-piracy conference in Perth, an Indian Ocean city, which will consider ways to assist affected countries in addressing underlying drivers and root causes. The conference will draw on lessons learned from counter-piracy efforts in South-East Asia and also focus on the emerging piracy challenges in the Gulf of Guinea. Clearly, A vital element in the fight against piracy is ending impunity. We welcome the initiative to establish a regional anti-piracy prosecutions intelligence coordination centre in Seychelles, with which we will be cooperating closely, as well as the commitment of Mauritius, Seychelles and Tanzania to accepting suspected pirates for prosecution. Addressing piracy requires a focus on both sea and land. We all know that sustainable development in coastal communities is critical to diminishing the lure of piracy. We must find ways for fisheries management to be effective, which needs to be a particular focus for us in the Istanbul conference. Australia has committed over $60 million to Somalia since March 2011 as part of a broader response of $150 million to the Horn of Africa. That assistance is not just to meet basic needs, but is increasingly being directed to building long-term resilience, which is the key to the future. As the focus shifts from humanitarian support to longer-term development assistance, we welcome the establishment of a local stability fund. The London conference rightly identified Somalia's ability to manage revenues and aid flows as vital to securing sustainable international assistance. The joint financial management board will quickly need to focus quickly on strengthening Somali public financial management institutions. In conclusion, as we were reminded by the Permanent Representative of Somalia just a few minutes ago, there have been many conferences on Somalia over the past 20 years, and the consequences of the failures of those conferences are clear. The international community must not let the tentative progress of recent months dissipate. We look forward to the forthcoming Istanbul conference in June, and especially its focus on longer-term economic prospects. Much work remains to be done, but we really must ensure that 2012 becomes what we all say it should be -- not just a window of opportunity, but an actual turning point in Somalia's history. Australia remains committed to working with all partners towards that end. The President: There are still a number of speakers remaining on my list. With the concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m. The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. 