%%%MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|PALESTINE QUESTION|

Official communiqué of the 6863rd (closed) meeting of the Security Council Held in private at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 14 November 2012, at 9 p.m. In accordance with rule 55 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, the following communiqué was issued through the Secretary-General in place of a verbatim record: "At its 6863rd meeting, held in private on 14 November 2012, the Security Council considered the item entitled `The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question'. "The President, with the consent of the Council, invited the representatives of Algeria, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Mozambique, the Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey and United Arab Emirates at their request, to participate in the consideration of the item without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure. "The President drew attention to a letter dated 14 November 2012 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations (S/2012/841), in which he requested to be invited to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the Council's previous practice. In accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice in this regard, the President, with the consent of the Council, invited the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations to participate in the meeting. "In accordance with the understanding reached in the Council's prior consultations, the President, with the consent of the Council, extended invitations under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure to the representative of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations and to the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to the United Nations. "The Security Council heard a briefing under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under Secretary General for Political Affairs. "The Security Council heard statements by the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations and by the Permanent Representative of Israel. "Statements were made by the representatives of Morocco, the United States, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, South Africa, Portugal, Colombia, Guatemala, Pakistan, Togo, Germany, China, Azerbaijan, France and India." 