%%%WORK PROGRAMME|

99-04824 (E) 020399 United Nations A/53/841 General Assembly Distr.: General 23 February 1999 Original: English Fifty-third session Agenda item 165 Joint Inspection Unit Note by the Secretary-General In accordance with article 9, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit, the Secretary-General has the honour to transmit to the members of the General Assembly the work programme of the Unit for 1999 and the preliminary listing of potential reports for 2000 and beyond (see annex). A/53/841 Annex Programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit for 1999 and preliminary listing of potential reports for 2000 and beyond I. Introduction 1. The following work programme has been drawn up in accordance with article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU), contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution 31/192 of 22 December 1976, and takes into account the guidelines laid out in successive Assembly resolutions on the functioning of the Unit, in particular resolution 50/233 of 7 June 1996. Section II of the present annex contains the JIU programme of work for 1999; and section III, a preliminary listing of potential reports for 2000 and beyond which includes subjects the Unit has identified to be dealt with after the completion of the ongoing reports. As hitherto, the programme of work is subject to change in the course of the year: new reports may be added; planned reports may be modified, postponed or cancelled when circumstances warrant; and titles may be changed to reflect the new thrust of reports. The Unit would highly appreciate receiving any comments from the legislative organs, other external and internal oversight bodies and the secretariats of participating organizations on the content of the programme of work for 1999 and/or the preliminary listing of potential reports for 2000 and beyond. II. Work programme for 1999 A. Common and joint services in Vienna 2. This report will be part of the ongoing series of JIU reports on common administrative services for United Nations system organizations co-located at different duty stations. Previous reports in the series included: United Nations system common premises and services in the field (A/49/629); common services at United Nations Headquarters (A/51/686 and Add.1 and 2); and, more recently, United Nations system common services at Geneva: overview of administrative cooperation and coordination (JIU/REP/98/4). The shared objective of these reports is to provide impetus and a rational framework for the development and management of common administrative services in order to scale down overhead structures and costs and achieve more cost-effective methods and tools of programme delivery. B. Policies, practices and procedures for senior-level appointments in the United Nations system, part II 3. The objective of this report, covering the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), is similar to that for the one being prepared on the same subject with regard to the United Nations, its programmes and funds. Following the recommendation of the Open-ended High-level Working Group on the Strengthening of the United Nations System, which was contained in the text adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 51/241 of 15 September 1997 and annexed thereto, the report will focus on the examination of the current policies, practices and procedures for senior-level appointments with a view, in particular, to identifying those considered to be the most efficient, rational and transparent. Recommendations will be designed to enhance the selection processes used by the United Nations system. Due consideration will be given to the issues of geographical distribution and gender in senior-level appointments. C. Evaluation of INSTRAW 4. The United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) was established in 1976 as an autonomous institution within the framework of the United Nations. Its objectives are to stimulate and assist, through research, training and the collection and dissemination of information, the advancement of women and their integration in the developmental process as participants and beneficiaries. In line with recent resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council (Assembly resolution 52/95 of 12 December 1997 and Council resolution 1998/48 of 31 July 1998), the purpose of this report will be to evaluate the effective contribution of INSTRAW to the advancement of women, taking into consideration, inter alia, the declining resource base of the Institute. The report will identify areas of the INSTRAW work programme where performance falls short of expectations and will develop practical recommendations for improvement. In particular, the report will review the funding strategy of the Institute and suggest ways to strengthen its resource base, inter alia, by identifying additional sources of funds. D. Review of the management and administration of the International Court of Justice 5. The objective of this review is to assist the International Court of Justice in finding practical ways of further enhancing the cost-effectiveness of the support provided to it by its Registry, including review of the option of increased administrative cooperation and synergies between the Court’s Registry and other international bodies co-located at The Hague. The rationale for this review arises from the steadily expanding workload experienced in recent years by the Court owing to the sharp increase in the number of cases brought to it at a time when its human and financial resources have been adversely affected by the budgetary restrictions applied throughout the Organization. The Court has endeavoured to cope with this situation by initiating since February 1996 a series of measures designed to rationalize its methods of work and those of its Registry. The proposed JIU review is expected to build upon and broaden the implementation of these initial rationalization measures by the Court, with special focus on the administrative and financial practices of its Registry. E. Private sector involvement and collaboration with the United Nations system 6. Recent developments in the economic and financial fields worldwide are calling for a new approach and more productive cooperation between the United Nations and the private sector as part of an important component of civil society. Such a need has been highlighted in the context of the ongoing reform process of the Organization. Furthermore, the Organizational Committee (OC) of the Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) during its 1997 and 1998 sessions had held a wide-ranging discussion on the relationship between the United Nations system and civil society. The Secretary-General had also placed special emphasis, in the context of the follow-up to the ACC conclusions, on the strengthening of arrangements for the exchange of information and the sharing of experience at the inter-agency level on cooperation with the private sector. 7. The findings of the planned JIU report (proposed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)) would therefore be an input to the effort of the system which has included the issue in its agenda. The report will attempt primarily to define what “private sector” signifies, will examine the existing modalities and types of relations and will analyse the advantages and disadvantages of a closer cooperation with the business community. It will further attempt to identify the causes that have limited the relationship in the past and put into evidence the incentives deriving from the present economic and financial global juncture in the interest of both parties (the United Nations and the private sector). 8. The problems related to the establishment of policies, system-wide guidelines, the identification of mandates and rules of procedure, and the opportunity to make a compendium of past and current practices will also be addressed. A comparative analysis of the issue across the system will be made, taking into account the different structural realities of specific agencies and United Nations programmes. The report, as proposed by FAO, will devote a section to exploring policies and procedures for eliciting, recording, procuring and reporting commercial and other sponsorships for events and initiatives held within the United Nations system as a possible contribution to an intensified relationship and to the promotion of common values and principles. F. Review of the administration of justice in the United Nations 9. The main objective of this inspection is to review the United Nations administration of justice machinery from its legal foundation (Charter of the United Nations, staff regulations and rules, administrative instructions, procedures and so forth) to its functioning and impact, including the various bodies dealing with the administration of justice. 10. This review is aimed at helping to clarify the current administration of justice system and providing concrete recommendations to adjust it to the new management requirements. It also would serve as a solid basis for accountability and oversight in the United Nations by making administration-of-justice tools clear and transparent. G. Report on delegation of authority 11. The subject was proposed by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) on the understanding that a report of the Unit would focus on issues arising from the decentralization of decision-making processes (shift from Headquarters to the field). The Secretary-General of the United Nations also attaches importance to delegation of authority as part of managerial reforms in the United Nations Secretariat, some of which are already in place (on a tentative basis), while it is foreseen that others are to be implemented in the future. In his understanding, delegation of authority entails both a geographical concept (that is to say, the move of authority from Headquarters to offices other than Headquarters) and the move of authority from administrative to substantive departments. Member States have expressed their general interest in the subject and their opinion on proper delegation of authority (namely, through the implementation of checks and balances), inter alia, during the thirty-eighth session of the Committee for Programme and Coordination. 12. The report intends to take stock of the current situation in the secretariats of the United Nations and of UNIDO, to evaluate experience gained so far, and to develop certain standards for delegation of authority to be applied in future cases. H. Use of contractual services to support established staff resources in the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 13. Like other organizations in the United Nations system, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is under increasing pressure to “do more with less”, to improve its efficiency and to find more cost-effective means to conduct its activities. Pursuant to a request by the ICAO Council, JIU will conduct a study to determine, on the basis of cost-benefit analyses, whether or not the use of contractual services to supplement existing resources and the use of outsourcing may result in cost savings to the Organization and, if so, to identify candidate areas and/or services to which such contractual services and outsourcing may be applicable. The study will furthermore seek to define strategies and policies for the control and management of outsourced contracts. I. Safety and security of United Nations system civilian personnel 14. The Secretary-General points out that there has been a dramatic escalation of attacks on United Nations personnel, both civilian and military and that never before has the number of United Nations civilian casualties exceeded the number of United Nations military casualties. This is indicated in the Secretary-General’s latest report on safety and security of United Nations system personnel (A/53/501), which was presented on behalf of and with the approval of the members of ACC. The General Assembly in a number of its resolutions, in particular resolution 52/126 of 12 December 1997, urged Member States and secretariats to consider ways and means for strengthening the protection of United Nations system personnel. Responding to these concerns, JIU is preparing a report with the objective of recommending administrative/managerial measures to improve safety and security of United Nations civilian personnel and to enhance system-wide coordinated response to these challenging problems. This report will be based on a system-wide review and analysis of organizational, managerial, funding and staffing aspects of security and safety of United Nations system civilian personnel. J. Investigation capabilities in United Nations system organizations 15. The objective of this report will be to determine the investigation capabilities of United Nations system organizations compared with the requirements for such capabilities, and to recommend options for ensuring access to adequate investigation capabilities throughout the United Nations system. Issues to be addressed in the report will include: (a) the extent to which there is throughout the system an agreed understanding of the requirements for adequate investigation; (b) qualifications regarding background, training/experience and certifications for staff recruited to conduct investigations, and problems regarding the recruitment and retention of such staff; (c) the extent to which resource constraints prevent organizations from having adequate “in-house” investigation capabilities, and possible alternatives for ensuring them access to such; (d) the difficulty, for the smaller organizations especially, of budgeting for the episodic nature of investigation workloads; and (e) the use of inter-agency organs for coordination and exchange of information and experience among investigation professionals in the different organizations. For each of the organizations, the report will review and compare its (a) policy guidance regarding an operational definition of the functions included in investigation, and how it differs from that for audit and for inspection; (b) established standards and guidelines for conducting investigations; (c) established and publicized procedures for ensuring due process and confidentiality regarding matters under investigation, in order to protect appropriately the rights of those under investigation and the identity of those making allegations; and (d) established procedures for taking administrative and disciplinary actions in follow-up on a conclusive investigation. This will be the Unit’s fourth report on accountability and oversight issues, and a direct follow-up on an important aspect of the JIU report in 1998 concerning more coherence for enhanced oversight in the United Nations system (A/53/171). K. Review of the financial situation in the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) 16. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has been faced with a severe financial crisis for the last few years. This has compromised the ability of UNRWA to meet the need for basic services in education, health and relief and social services. The main objective of this report is to contribute to the amelioration of UNRWA’s financial situation by examining possible cost-saving efficiency measures without prejudice to the level and quality of services. It will also look into income-generating projects, and possibly additional or new sources of contributions. JIU carried out a previous review of UNRWA in 1983 (A/38/143, of 1 August). III. Preliminary listing of potential reports for 2000 and beyond 17. The following are indications of subjects that the Inspectors have identified for potential reports to be prepared during the course of 2000 and beyond. The list is tentative and does not necessarily imply that JIU is committed to taking up these subjects: (a) Review of management and administration in the World Health Organization (WHO); (b) Effectiveness of the Performance Appraisal System (PAS) in the United Nations system; (c) Planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation procedures in the United Nations system; (d) United Nations revenue-producing activities; income-generating activities financed from extrabudgetary resources; (e) Support costs on programmes and activities financed from extrabudgetary resources; (f) Practice of donors’ attaching conditions to special-purpose contributions; (g) Successfully extending technical cooperation projects to the end-beneficiaries. 