%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|LEBANON|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE|MAPS|

Sixty-seventh session Agenda item 158 (b) Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East: United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon Budget for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Page Mandate and planned results Overall Planning assumptions and mission support initiatives Regional mission cooperation Results-based-budgeting frameworks Financial resources Non-budgeted contributions Efficiency gains Vacancy factors Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment Training Mine detection and mine-clearing services Quick-impact projects Qana incident Analysis of variances Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Summary of follow-up action taken to implement the decisions and requests of the General Assembly in its resolution 66/264, and requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the General Assembly, and of the United Nations Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services General Assembly Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Board of Auditors Office of Internal Oversight Services Annexes Definitions Organization charts Map Summary The present report contains the budget for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014, which amounts to $484,558,800. During the 2013/14 period, UNIFIL will continue its operational activities, with particular focus on the strategic priorities and recommendations of the strategic review of the Force contained in the letter of the Secretary-General dated 12 March 2012 (S/2012/151) to the President of the Security Council, the implementation of which was fully supported by the Council in its resolution 2064 (2012). The Force will focus on the following strategic priorities: (a) the establishment of a comprehensive approach to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) which integrates the efforts of UNIFIL, the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon (UNSCOL) and the United Nations country team; (b) the further involvement of the Government of Lebanon in the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and an increase in its involvement in southern Lebanon; and (c) the increase in the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces in preparation for its gradual assumption of effective and sustainable security control of the UNIFIL area of operations and Lebanese territorial waters as well as in support of movements towards a permanent ceasefire. UNIFIL will maintain effective liaison and coordination arrangements with the parties and seek to reinforce the cessation of hostilities through engaging the parties in confidence-building and conflict mitigation measures. UNIFIL will continue to facilitate and lead the efforts of the tripartite mechanism to promote security arrangements and understandings between the parties; assist the Lebanese Armed Forces in maintaining a stable security environment free of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons south of the Litani River; undertake initiatives to build the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces; and maintain maritime support for the Lebanese navy to prevent the unauthorized entry of arms or related materiel by sea. During the 2013/14 period, UNIFIL, along with UNSCOL, will also host the implementation of the Umoja foundation phase as a pilot and support the implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS). For the 2013/14 period, the overall proposed resources for UNIFIL amount to $484,558,800, representing a decrease of $39.4 million, or 7.5 per cent, from the 2012/13 apportionment of $524,010,000. Cost estimates for military and police personnel are lower than the 2012/13 apportionment by $31.8 million, primarily due to the application of a higher delayed deployment factor. Estimates for civilian personnel reflect a decrease over the 2012/13 apportionment by $5.2 million as a result of the proposed net reduction of 21 international posts and positions and 23 national posts. The reduction of posts under the support component is mainly attributable to the streamlining and consolidation of a number of functions to facilitate value-added financial and management advisory services. Requirements for operational costs reflect a decrease of $2.4 million, primarily attributable to decreased requirements under facilities and infrastructure, communications and special equipment, offset in part by increased requirements under naval operations. The budget provides for the deployment of 15,000 military contingent personnel, 352 international staff and 694 national staff. The total resource requirements for UNIFIL for the financial period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 have been linked to the Force's objective through a number of results-based frameworks, organized according to components (operations and support). The human resources of the Force, in terms of the number of personnel, have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of the Force's executive direction and management, which can be attributed to the Force as a whole. The explanations of variances in resource levels, both human resources and financial resources, have been linked, where applicable, to specific outputs planned by the Force. (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is from 1 July to 30 June.) Category Expenditures Apportionment Cost estimates Variance Amount Percentage Military and police personnel Civilian personnel Operational costs Gross requirements Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total requirements Human resourcesa Military contingents International staff National staffb Temporary positionc Total Executive direction and management Approved 2012/13 Proposed 2013/14 Components Operations Support Net change a Represents highest level of authorized/proposed strength. b Includes National Professional Officers and national General Service staff. c Funded under general temporary assistance. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are set out in section V of the present report. A. Overall 1. The mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) was established by the Security Council in its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), expanded in its resolution 1701 (2006) and extended in subsequent resolutions of the Council. The most recent extension of the mandate was authorized by the Council in its resolution 2064 (2012), by which the Council extended the mandate until 31 August 2013. 2. The Force is mandated to help the Security Council to attain an overall objective, namely, the restoration of international peace and security in southern Lebanon. 3. Within that overall objective, UNIFIL will, during the budget period, contribute to a number of expected accomplishments by delivering related key outputs, shown in the frameworks set out below, which are organized according to components (operations and support) and are derived from the mandate of the Force. 4. The expected accomplishments would lead to the fulfilment of the Security Council's objective within the lifetime of the Force, and the indicators of achievement show a measurement of progress towards such accomplishments during the budget period. The human resources of UNIFIL, in terms of the number of personnel, have been attributed to the individual components, with the exception of the executive direction and management of the Force, which can be attributed to the Force as a whole. Variances in the number of personnel compared with the 2012/13 budget have been explained under the respective components. 5. The Security Council, by its resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), established a United Nations Interim Force for southern Lebanon for the purpose of confirming the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restoring international peace and security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area. By its resolution 1701 (2006), the Council decided, in order to supplement and enhance the Force in numbers, equipment, mandate and scope of operations, to authorize an increase in the Force strength of UNIFIL to a maximum of 15,000 troops. By the same resolution, the Council decided that the mandate of the Force, in addition to carrying out its mandate under resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), would include, inter alia, monitoring the cessation of hostilities, accompanying and supporting the deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces throughout southern Lebanon in parallel with the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces, ensuring respect for the Blue Line and assisting the Lebanese Armed Forces in ensuring that the area between the Blue Line and the Litani River was free of any unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons, taking all necessary action within its capabilities to ensure that its area of operations was not utilized for hostile activities, and assisting the Government of Lebanon, at its request, in securing its borders and other entry points in order to prevent the entry into Lebanon without its consent of arms or related materiel. 6. UNIFIL headquarters, which houses the Offices of the Head of Mission/Force Commander, the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs and the Director of Mission Support, is located in Naqoura, some kilometres from the Blue Line and 90 kilometres from Beirut. As the capital and the principal point of entry into Lebanon by sea and air, Beirut hosts a small UNIFIL office with liaison and political personnel, as well as support personnel who interface with immigration and customs authorities, vendors and United Nations offices in Beirut, primarily to facilitate the flow of personnel and equipment destined for or repatriating from UNIFIL. After 18 months of consultations on the relocation of the UNIFIL office in Beirut with the Government of Lebanon, an agreement has been reached on the acquisition process, to be completed by late March 2013, and on the completion of a lease agreement, by April 2013, for the new UNIFIL House. UNIFIL expects its move to the new premises by 1 July 2013. The establishment of a UNIFIL office in Tel Aviv, which is to provide enhanced liaison and coordination with the Israeli military and other relevant Government authorities, remains a high priority of UNIFIL. B. Planning assumptions and mission support initiatives 7. During the 2013/14 period, UNIFIL will continue its operational activities, with particular focus on the strategic priorities and recommendations set out in the strategic review of the Force, contained in the letter of the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council dated 12 March 2012 (S/2012/151), which were fully supported by the Council in its resolution 2064 (2012). 8. UNIFIL will continue its efforts to enable the three strategic priorities identified by the review, namely: (a) to establish an integrated, comprehensive approach to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) to prioritize United Nations goals and to ensure better integration between UNIFIL, the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon (UNSCOL) and the United Nations country team; (b) to further involve the Government of Lebanon in the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), in particular through seeking to increase its involvement in southern Lebanon; and (c) to increase the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces for their gradual assumption of effective and sustainable security control of the UNIFIL area of operations and Lebanese territorial waters, and also as a key element to support moves towards a permanent ceasefire. 9. UNIFIL will maintain effective liaison and coordination arrangements with the parties and advance the implementation of its mandated tasks by seeking to reinforce the cessation of hostilities through engaging the parties in confidence-building and conflict mitigation measures. At the strategic level, UNIFIL will continue to facilitate and lead the efforts of the tripartite mechanism in promoting security arrangements and pragmatic localized understandings between the parties in order to minimize the scope for frictions or incidents and mitigate, or swiftly de-escalate, tensions, and, to that end, to promote full respect for the Blue Line, in its entirety, including by furthering its visible marking and facilitating the full withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line. UNIFIL will continue to seek the establishment of an office in Tel Aviv, as agreed by the Government of Israel. 10. While maintaining a credible force for effective deterrence, prevention and deconfliction, UNIFIL will continue to assist the Lebanese Armed Forces in maintaining a stable security environment, free of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons south of the Litani River. UNIFIL will continue to provide assistance through enhanced coordinated activities, bolstered by independent Force operations, while remaining prepared to respond, within its capabilities, to any contingencies or hostile activities within the area of operations. In this regard, the Force will continue initiatives to build the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces, including through the strategic dialogue process, to enable it to take on a greater share of the security tasks stemming from resolution 1701 (2006) and as a key element to support moves towards a permanent ceasefire. At the same time, the Maritime Task Force will maintain maritime support for the Lebanese navy to prevent the unauthorized entry of arms or related materiel by sea into Lebanon, while continuing technical training and other assistance to enable the Lebanese navy to ultimately assume effective security control over Lebanese territorial waters. 11. UNIFIL will continue efforts to further involve the Government of Lebanon in the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), in particular through seeking to increase its involvement, and that of its ministries and security institutions, in southern Lebanon. At the same time, UNIFIL will build on its long-standing relations with the local population through a sustainable, long-term strategy, including greater outreach with requisite cultural sensitivity aimed at gaining the informed support of the people for the Force's mandate and activities. To that end, as recommended in the strategic review, UNIFIL proposes to reinforce its civil affairs capacity. The civil affairs, public information and community outreach components of UNIFIL will continue to build the confidence of the local population through the provision of humanitarian and development-related assistance, and will provide support for military contingents in reaching out to the local population to foster a better public understanding of the mandate and activities of the Force through the use of a variety of media tools. 12. In line with the recommendations in the strategic review, and focusing on the overarching objectives of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), UNIFIL will continue to expand and strengthen liaison and coordination with the parties, widen the scope of its strategic partnership with the Lebanese Armed Forces and seek the increased involvement of other arms of the Government in southern Lebanon. The accrued advantages of UNIFIL, and the stakes of the parties in UNIFIL, will continue to be effectively leveraged to further the political process towards the achievement of a permanent ceasefire and long-term solution to the conflict as essential parts of the United Nations engagement and that of other stakeholders. UNIFIL will continue to work towards an integrated and comprehensive approach to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), prioritizing United Nations goals and ensuring greater synergy between the military and civilian components within UNIFIL, as well as between the Force, UNSCOL and the United Nations country team, recognizing that UNIFIL cannot be isolated from the political nature of resolution 1701 (2006) and that security conditions and the political process towards a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution are mutually dependent. UNIFIL has commenced the implementation of the recommendations, which will continue through the 2013/14 period. 13. As explained above, whereas no changes are foreseen in the mandate of UNIFIL, pursuant to the recommendations contained in the strategic review, a qualitative shift in its implementation is envisaged to enhance the impact (of operational activities) in advancing the objectives of resolution 1701 (2006) with a view to capitalizing on UNIFIL's strengths to further the overarching objectives of a permanent ceasefire and long-term solution to the conflict. As recommended in the strategic review, it is proposed to reinforce the civil affairs capacity of UNIFIL, and to strengthen its coordination in the area of public outreach activities to support the following strategic priorities: (a) improve relations with the local population, including by expanding development and education initiatives and activities where the local population can engage with UNIFIL personnel; (b) reach out to various ministries and security institutions of the Government of Lebanon in order to facilitate their greater involvement in southern Lebanon; and (c) enhance engagement with the United Nations country team towards an integrated, comprehensive approach to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). 14. In the context of the above, changes are proposed to the civilian staffing complement of UNIFIL for the 2013/14 budget period, entailing a net reduction of 21 international posts and positions (1 D-1, 1 P-5, 2 P-3, 1 P-2 and 16 Field Service posts) and 23 national posts. The changes described and detailed in section E below also reflect, in accordance with the recommendations in the strategic review, the streamlining and strengthening of: (a) the operations component, through the delineation of the Office of the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs; and (b) the support component, through the streamlining and consolidation of a number of office functions to facilitate value-added financial and management advisory services, including the pilot implementation of Umoja. 15. During the 2013/14 period, UNIFIL, along with UNSCOL, will host the implementation of Umoja Foundation phase on a pilot basis. Umoja Foundation is expected to support the implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) and to cover functionalities and processes related to finance (funds management and financial accounting), the supply chain (real estate, plant maintenance, logistics execution and procurement), project management and sales and distribution (third-party procurement services and billing). The implementation of the Umoja Foundation phase is expected to become operational during the summer of 2013. UNIFIL users will connect to the Umoja servers at the Global Service Centre in Brindisi, Italy, using the Middle East terrestrial leased-line infrastructure, which will provide excellent access speed. UNIFIL will enhance redundancy on this network by adding an additional connection from Beirut, through the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), to the United Nations Support Base in Valencia, Spain. The Regional Communications and Information Technology Services of UNIFIL will create the stable foundation for these enterprise initiatives and improve responsiveness and resilience, including the development and deployment of ancillary enablers. The internal UNIFIL network and its gateways will be enhanced, allowing for greater bandwidth throughput and quality of service. 16. During the 2013/14 period, in accordance with the report of the Secretary-General on the Global Field Support Strategy (A/64/633), and as endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 64/269, UNIFIL will be ready to align its structure and optimize its delivery through integrated and high-quality support services. To that end, business processes in asset management, procurement and finance will be streamlined. The support structure will be modified at the section level to improve delivery of those streamlined processes under a Deputy Director of Mission Support in lieu of the existing, separate structure for administrative services and integrated support services. Central warehousing will be among the priority tasks in order to align the Force to a global supply chain approach and the requirements of Umoja. UNIFIL will leverage existing inter-mission cooperation arrangements and pursue further opportunities with other regional missions until a regional service centre is developed. Performance management will begin to measure progress in improvements to the quality, timeliness, and efficiency of services. Measures will reinforce preparatory efforts towards the implementation of Umoja and IPSAS, including cross-training and process re-engineering and standardization. C. Regional mission cooperation 17. UNIFIL will continue to act as a regional hub for the coordination of information and communications technology (ICT) services, conduct and discipline, HIV/AIDS and oversight activities for UNIFIL, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), UNFICYP and the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi (UNLB). It will also develop and implement regional coordination plans aligned to the objectives of the field missions, while being mindful of the specific mandates of each field mission, including strategies taken to enhance coordination and collaboration between missions in the same region with a view to achieving greater synergy in the use of resources. 18. UNIFIL will continue to maintain its close cooperation with UNSCOL, including by embedding substantive personnel in UNSCOL and providing various administrative, logistical and technical support to that Office when UNIFIL resources are available. UNIFIL has signed a memorandum of understanding with UNSCOL, which will be carried forward into the 2013/14 period, based on existing terms and conditions. In this connection, due regard shall be paid to the transitional services to be provided until the implementation of IPSAS and Umoja both at UNIFIL and UNSCOL. The transitional services with respect to the implementation of Umoja will include the utilization of existing UNIFIL facilities for the training of UNSCOL personnel, as well as other services and/or assistance that may be mutually agreed upon in connection with the UNIFIL piloting of the Umoja project. UNIFIL civilian and military personnel will continue to participate in inter-agency coordination meetings for south Lebanon organized under the auspices of the United Nations Resident Coordinator. 19. The regional initiative on ICT services placed the ICT components of UNIFIL, UNDOF, UNFICYP and UNTSO under a unified, regional management structure. As a result, effective 1 July 2010, the former Communications and Information Technology Section was renamed Regional Communications and Information Technology Services. The new entity reports directly to the Director of Mission Support and the UNIFIL Chief of Communications and Information Technology Services, who also acts as the Regional Chief of Communications and Information Technology services, with the Deputy Chief post in UNDOF. The main goals of this initiative are to eliminate duplication of effort, achieve economies of scale and remove disparity in the provision of ICT service across the four missions. Management of Regional Communications and Information Technology Services reports and is responsible to a governance board consisting of the directors of mission support/chiefs of mission support of the four established missions in the region. 20. Cooperation among the four established missions in the region (UNDOF, UNIFIL, UNFICYP and UNTSO) has resulted in the creation of a robust communications backbone and business continuity plan to enhance disaster recovery and crisis management and reduce operational risk. In areas such as compliance with minimum operating security standards, support to United Nations agencies and implementing partners in the region and radio frequency management, the formalized Middle East regional ICT services structure has begun to show results. For the 2013/14 period, the objective is to continue assessing the requirements of regional missions with regard to infrastructure and connectivity to UNLB/the United Nations Support Base in Valencia and to respond with optimal solutions for providing reliable ICT services and to build sufficient levels of redundancy into ICT systems, taking into account the security environment in UNIFIL. 21. UNIFIL will continue to lead regional training efforts through the provision of training support to other peacekeeping missions and United Nations entities within the region. The Force has a robust training capacity with a curriculum that is continually oversubscribed, with interest both from within UNIFIL and neighbouring missions. Through coordinated planning efforts, training requirements are identified and training calendars are shared among the missions. Training sessions are offered through the use of a combination of in-house resources and training consultants hosted by UNIFIL, thereby minimizing the number of instances where similar training needs will be provided separately by other regional missions. 22. The regional mandate of the UNIFIL Conduct and Discipline Team will continue to support related obligations set out in the compact between heads of mission and the Secretary-General. The Regional Office for the Conduct and Discipline Team covers UNIFIL, UNDOF, UNTSO, the Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process (UNSCO), UNFICYP, UNSCOL and UNLB. 23. Since Cyprus is the designated safe haven for UNIFIL staff and their dependants, the Force is heavily reliant on UNFICYP support in the event of a security evacuation. If the need should arise, UNFICYP would receive and host the UNIFIL administrative team tasked with processing evacuees and creating conditions to ensure business continuity from a remote location. 24. UNIFIL will maintain support for the observer group Lebanon personnel hosted by the Force through a letter of understanding with UNTSO, and will provide support in terms of infrastructure upkeep, office accommodation, ICT equipment and related services and maintenance, medical support, fuel and spare parts for vehicles, emergency rations and water and security. UNIFIL will continue to depend on the Brindisi-based Regional Aviation Safety Office, and will receive quarterly aviation-safety-assistance visits in lieu of maintaining its own civilian staff for that purpose. 25. UNIFIL will continue to participate in the inter-agency agreement for maintaining the Security Information and Operations Centre hosted by the United Nations Development Programme in Beirut. The Centre, which is under the umbrella of the North Litani designated official, will manage data relating to United Nations staff operating and/or living in Lebanon north of the Litani River, and will be responsible for the security clearance of UNIFIL staff travelling to Beirut. In the event of an emergency, the designated official (the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon) will ensure the evacuation of UNIFIL staff in Beirut. The head of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) will provide administrative support for the evacuation. UNIFIL will have a Field Security Adviser in Beirut, who will be in constant contact with the North Litani River Chief Security Adviser and will represent the UNIFIL Chief Security Officer at meetings of the Security Management Team and security cells. UNIFIL will provide security support, clearance and information about evacuation arrangements to staff of United Nations agencies operating within its area of operations. Staff of United Nations agencies based and operating in the UNIFIL area of operations will be fully integrated into the South Litani River security plan and will have full access to the UNIFIL emergency communications system and security services. A UNIFIL Military Liaison Officer and Security Officer will conduct weekly meetings with United Nations agencies operating in southern Lebanon in order to ensure full coordination and cooperation on security issues. Additionally, the North Litani Security Management Team in Lebanon has periodic meetings with the chief security advisers of all neighbouring missions and their security management teams. The Security Section represents UNIFIL and regularly attends the meetings and any other workshops and conferences related to the North Litani Security Management Team in order to share information and consider what assistance they can offer to one another in a fragile security scenario. D. Results-based-budgeting frameworks 26. In order to facilitate the presentation of proposed changes in human resources, six categories of possible action with respect to staffing have been identified. A definition of the terminology with respect to the six categories is contained in annex I.A of the present report. 27. Overall mission direction and management are to be provided by the immediate Office of the Force Commander. Table 1 Human resources: executive direction and management International staff staff a USG- ASG D-2- D-1 P-5- P-4 P-3- P-2 Field Service Subtotal Office of the Force Commander Approved posts 2012/13 Proposed posts 2013/14 Office of the Deputy Force Commander Approved posts 2013/14 Legal Affairs Section Joint Mission Analysis Centre a Includes National Professional Officers and national General Service staff. International staff: decrease of 3 posts (redeployment of 1 D-2, 1 P-4 and 1 Field Service posts) National staff: no net change (abolishment of 1 national General Service post and reassignment of 1 National Professional Officer post) 28. In line with the recommendations contained in the strategic review (S/2012/151), and with a view to the overarching objectives set out in Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), UNIFIL will continue to expand and strengthen liaison and coordination with the parties, widen the scope of its strategic partnership with the Lebanese Armed Forces and seek the increased involvement of the Government in southern Lebanon. In that context, in order to delegate the day-to-day military and civilian operational and coordination activities of the Force Commander and his immediate Office, with a view to strengthening operational and command structures, it is proposed that an Office of the Deputy Force Commander be established, comprising the existing posts of the Deputy Force Commander (D-2), a Political Affairs Officer (P-4) and an Administrative Assistant (Field Service). It is also proposed that one post of Language Assistant (national General Service) be abolished as the functions of the post can be absorbed by existing staff. 29. With a view to strengthening the coordination and liaison functions of the Office of the Force Commander, a post of Coordination Officer (National Professional Officer) is proposed, to be accommodated through the reassignment of a National Professional Officer post from the Medical Section in the Mission Support Division. The incumbent would: (a) facilitate the development of strategic partnerships with key political, religious, military and security actors as well as representatives of civil society in order to elicit support for the mandate of the Force; (b) provide advice to the Office on sensitivities that may influence the successful implementation of the UNIFIL mandate; and (c) assist in enhancing the understanding among the local population of the Force's mandate and activities. International staff: increase of 3 posts (redeployment of 1 D-2, 1 P-4 and 1 Field Service posts) 30. In order to ensure a clearer operations and command structure, the establishment of the Office of the Deputy Force Commander is proposed. The staffing establishment of this new office would be met through the redeployment of three existing posts (1 D-2, 1 P-4 and 1 Field Service) from the Office of the Force Commander, as set out in paragraph 28 above. The proposal is based on the recommendation in the strategic review, which recognized the need for UNIFIL to ensure greater synergy between its military and civilian components, as well as a particular need to optimize the capacity of the Force. International staff: increase of 1 post (upgrade of 1 P-3 post and establishment of 1 P-3 post) 31. The Legal Affairs Section will continue to provide legal advice and opinions to the Force Commander on all legal matters related to the implementation of the mandate of the Force. The Section also conducts legal reviews and provides advice on administrative, personnel, substantive and contractual matters related to UNIFIL operations, including participation in: boards of inquiry; conduct and discipline-related inquiries/investigations; the Local Committee on Contracts; the Local Property Survey Board; the Local Claims Review Board; the Strategic Dialogue Steering Committee; separate working groups within the strategic dialogue; the working group on the protection of civilians; the working group on Ghajar; teams for the investigations into violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006); the working group on follow-up to the serious attacks against peacekeepers and the forceful obstruction of UNIFIL activities; and panels organized by the Force Provost Marshall and other organizational units. In addition, the Section provides legal support focused on: the military aspects of mandated operations; the statutory parameters of mandated tasks and subjects related to the assistance and support of the Force to the Lebanese Armed Forces; the custodianship of the Blue Line; maritime operations; investigations into violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006); the strategic dialogue process between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces; military capability studies; and the tripartite mechanism framework. The Section also monitors the relevant aspects of law enforcement institutions, the judicial system, the legal framework and the rule of law in Lebanon and provides advice on related substantive and technical issues in the areas of law enforcement, judicial and criminal law. In order to ensure adequate representation in all of the Force's multifaceted activities, given the significantly increased requirements in the substantive sector, and in order to manage the increased scope and workload of the Section since its establishment in the 2006/07 period, it is proposed to upgrade the existing post of Legal Affairs Officer from the P-3 level to the P-4 level, to also serve as Deputy Chief of the Section, and to establish a post of Legal Affairs Officer (P-3) to augment the staffing complement of the Section in support of the Force's military, operational and substantive activities under the overall direction of the Head of Mission/Force Commander. 32. The Legal Affairs Officer (P-4) would provide support to the Force Commander and his immediate office, all substantive offices, including the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs, the military and the Maritime Task Force on maritime security issues. The incumbent would be responsible for providing legal support focused on UNIFIL involvement in complex legal matters of international, public, private and administrative law, such as the Blue Line custodianship by the Force, legal and security issues arising in the context of maritime operations, legal issues related to the occupied territories (Ghajar and adjacent area and Shebaa Farms) and relevant aspects of international humanitarian law. The incumbent would also support and participate in the coordination mechanisms and processes with the Government, not exclusively with the Lebanese Armed Forces (tripartite, strategic dialogue, protection of civilians) as indicated in the strategic review, and in investigations into violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). 33. The proposed establishment of the post of Legal Affairs Officer (P-3) would augment the staffing establishment of the Section to meet the increased workload related to support component activities, in particular legal arrangements for the Force, such as those concerning: privileges and immunities; a provision on protection from liability by the Government with regard to areas and premises utilized for the Force's purposes; third-party claims against the Force; procurement-related questions; contractual, commercial and corporate legal aspects; administrative issuances and matters; and personnel and disciplinary issues related to the interpretation of the applicability of the United Nations Staff Regulations and Rules. International staff: decrease of 6 posts (redeployment of 1 P-5, 2 P-4, 2 P-3 and 1 Field Service posts) National staff: decrease of 2 posts (redeployment of 2 national General Service posts) 34. Given that the oversight and responsibility for the work of the Joint Mission Analysis Centre would fall under the oversight and direct supervision of the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs, it is proposed that the entire staffing complement of the Centre be redeployed to the operations component of the Force. This proposed change follows closely the decision to delineate the functions of the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs under the operations component, in parallel to and at the same level as the Deputy Force Commander, in order to strengthen and institutionalize the relationship between the civilian and the military leadership of UNIFIL. This change would facilitate greater synergy between its military and civilian components, in particular the need to optimize the capacity of the Force's civilian component. Component 1: operations 35. Under the operations component, UNIFIL will continue to assist the Lebanese Armed Forces in maintaining a stable and secure environment free of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons south of the Litani River through enhanced coordinated activities bolstered by UNIFIL operations, while remaining prepared to respond, within its capabilities, to any contingencies or hostile activities within the area of operations. UNIFIL will continue initiatives to build the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces, including through the strategic dialogue process, to enable the Forces to take on a greater share of the security tasks stemming from Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), and as a key element to support moves towards a permanent ceasefire. The Maritime Task Force will maintain its support for the Lebanese navy in order to prevent the unauthorized entry of arms or related materiel into the country by sea, while continuing technical training and other assistance to the navy. UNIFIL will maintain effective liaison and coordination arrangements with the parties to reinforce the cessation of hostilities through engaging the parties in confidence-building and conflict mitigation measures. The Force will continue to facilitate and lead the tripartite mechanism in efforts to promote security arrangements and pragmatic understandings between the parties in order to minimize the scope for friction or incidents and to mitigate, or swiftly deescalate, tensions. To that end, UNIFIL will promote full respect for the Blue Line in its entirety, including by furthering its visible marking and facilitating full withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces from northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line. UNIFIL will also seek to establish a comprehensive approach to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), integrating the efforts of UNIFIL, UNSCOL and the United Nations country team and will continue its efforts to further involve the Government of Lebanon in the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), in particular through the increased involvement of its ministries and security institutions in southern Lebanon. UNIFIL will build on its long-standing relationship with the local population through a sustainable, long-term strategy, including greater outreach, with requisite cultural sensitivity, aimed at gaining the informed support of the local population for its mandate and activities. Expected accomplishments Indicators of achievement 1.1 Stable and secure environment in southern Lebanon 1.1.1 Absence of air, sea or ground incursions or firing incidents across the Blue Line 1.1.2 Lebanese Armed Forces deployed throughout the entire area south of the Litani River, including the part of the town of Ghajar north of the Blue Line and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line 1.1.3 Area between the Blue Line and the Litani River is free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons, except for those of the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL 1.1.4 Participation by both parties in tripartite meetings and maintenance of liaison and coordination arrangements Outputs :: 1,168,000 mobile patrol person days, to include reserve capacity and a quick-reaction capacity for reconnaissance of areas of tension and intervention and force protection, if required, in crisis situations to support other units (10 troops x 320 patrols x 365 days) :: 545,310 manned observation post person days (7 troops per post x 3 shifts per post x 63 permanent observation posts x 365 days and 3 troops per post x 57 random/temporary posts x 365 days) :: 450 air patrol hours for the Blue Line patrols and reconnaissance flights within the area of operations :: 1,350 flight hours for investigation of incidents and operational movements for transport of combat assets, reconnaissance, command and control function, liaison and training :: 1,752 naval vessel patrol days to monitor the maritime border of Lebanon, including joint operational exercises with the Lebanese Armed Forces (average of 4 frigates at 365 sea patrol days x 70 per cent sustainability; average of 4 patrol vessels x 365 days x 50 per cent sustainability) :: 1,460 flight hours for maritime interdiction patrols and operational activities inside the area of maritime operations (2 helicopters x 2 hours per day x 365 days) :: Coordinated operational activities with the Lebanese Armed Forces, including at least 16 counter-rocket-launching operations, 6 foot patrols and 10 co-located checkpoints per day :: Conduct of 750 joint/coordinated exercises, seminars, workshops, lectures and training courses with the land and maritime components of the Lebanese Armed Forces to improve their tactical and operational capabilities and to improve the coordination between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces at the operational and tactical levels for enhanced effectiveness of combined operations :: 3 reports of the Secretary-General to the Security Council :: Daily and weekly liaison, communication and exchange of information with both parties on issues requiring immediate attention relating to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) :: Chairing and provision of secretariat support services for tripartite meetings on a monthly basis and as required :: Provision of secretariat support services for meetings of the tripartite subcommittee, including the Blue Line subcommittee, as required, and support, on a weekly basis, for field work to visibly mark the Blue Line on the ground :: Conduct, on a regular basis, of strategic dialogue conferences and other high-level meetings with Lebanese Armed Forces officials, on the strengthening of coordination between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces :: Conduct, on an as required basis, of investigations into alleged violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and other incidents that risk escalating tensions in the area of operations :: Daily contacts with local authorities and community leaders on improving acceptance of the Force's mandated tasks, including addressing relevant complaints and concerns of communities in the area of operations, identifying confidence-building issues and potential areas of conflict between UNIFIL and the local population and taking necessary measures :: Meetings, on a weekly basis and as required, with Lebanese and Israeli authorities, diplomatic representatives and United Nations offices, agencies, funds and programmes on improving the understanding of the mandate, role and activities of UNIFIL :: Briefings to Member States, troop-contributing countries and donor countries, as required, on UNIFIL operational issues :: Daily monitoring and analysis of the media coverage of UNIFIL and regional news, including local and international daily newspapers/periodicals, electronic and Internet media reports, daily morning and afternoon news round-ups, daily and weekly summaries of the Arabic media and weekly analysis of media trends pertaining to UNIFIL :: Daily communications via e-mail, telephone, meetings and direct interaction with international and local media, organization of media coverage (events, visits, interviews and press briefings) on UNIFIL activities, regular press releases and photo coverage of UNIFIL activities and events and daily updates of the UNIFIL website in English and Arabic and in new media platforms (Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and Flickr) :: Production of bilingual audio and video materials for broadcast on local radio and television stations, official Internet channels (the UNIFIL website, Facebook, YouTube, and UNifeed), including production of fortnightly radio series and thematic television spots and documentaries on the Force's mandate, operations, peacekeeping activities and its coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces :: Production and distribution of a quarterly outreach magazine in English and Arabic (4 issues per year, 80,000 copies) on the activities of UNIFIL and United Nations agencies throughout the area of operations for the local population, local authorities, institutions, media outlets and international community, and of the in-house quarterly magazine in English (4 issues per year, 40,000 copies) :: Clearance of mines/unexploded ordnance to provide access routes for marking of the Blue Line 1.2 Normalization of the authority of the Government of Lebanon in southern Lebanon 1.2.1 All 134 municipalities in the UNIFIL area of operations fully functional and discharging municipal affairs; functional civic and religious institutions 1.2.2 Enhanced support for the involvement of the Government of Lebanon, its ministries and institutions, in southern Lebanon 1.2.3 Prevention, by the Lebanese Armed Forces, of the presence of any authority outside the jurisdiction of the Lebanese State 1.2.4 Strengthening of the civil-military coordination capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces :: Two meetings a month with Lebanese authorities at the central level, including service-related ministries, on the extension of the authority of the Lebanese Government in southern Lebanon, and with central or regional governmental institutions responsible for the provision of public services to communities in southern Lebanon :: Advice to and coordination through regular meetings and daily communications (phone, videoconference, e-mail, etc.) with UNSCOL, other United Nations offices, agencies, funds and programmes, diplomatic representatives and non-governmental organizations on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) and other resolutions and on the overall situation in southern Lebanon, in particular the security situation in the UNIFIL area of operations :: Liaison with United Nations country team, diplomatic representatives, potential donors and non-governmental organizations aimed at strengthening the integrated and comprehensive approach to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) :: Weekly meetings with United Nations agencies and international and local non-governmental organizations operating in southern Lebanon on programme coordination, information-sharing and contingency planning, including those related to recovery, development and other cross-cutting issues :: Advice, through weekly meetings, to local authorities on the development of project proposals for funding by external donors, technical advice on project management and other special initiatives that contribute to the extension of the Government's authority and the discharge of local governance responsibilities :: Coordination with and provision of capacity-building assistance and support with resource mobilization to the Lebanese Armed Forces to enhance civil-military coordination :: Implementation of 25 quick-impact projects in support of the extension of State authority, civic education and capacity-building, conflict management/confidence-building initiatives and improving basic services in the areas of education, water/sanitation, health and environment :: Monthly consultations with local authorities, civil society, local women's groups and United Nations agencies and other international partners on promoting core United Nations goals :: Management of quarterly public perception survey in the UNIFIL area of operations :: Conduct of quarterly public information campaigns through printing and distribution, including Internet uploads, handbills (15,000) and tri-folders (15,000), with corresponding press briefings/events/releases, fortnightly radio episodes and video spots, photo coverage and exhibitions/dissemination, the issuance of an outreach magazine every other month as well as regular news media feeds on the mandate and activities of UNIFIL :: Organization of community outreach activities to promote better relations between UNIFIL and the local population External factors All parties will remain committed to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006); UNIFIL will be accorded full freedom of movement by all parties Table 2 Human resources: component 1, operations I. Military contingents II. Civilian staff Field Service National staff a Office of the Deputy Head of Mission/ Director of Political and Civil Affairs Public Information Section Civil Affairs Office Tripartite Coordination Unit Beirut Office HIV/AIDS Unit Subtotal, civilian staff Total (I-II) Office of the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs International staff: No change National staff: No change 36. The strategic review recommended the appointment of a civilian Deputy Head of Mission, in parallel to and at the same level as the Deputy Force Commander, in order to strengthen and ensure greater synergy between the civilian and the military leadership of UNIFIL. Accordingly, it is proposed to streamline and strengthen the operations component through the designation of the post of Director of Political and Civil Affairs as Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs. The Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs will have oversight and direct supervisory responsibility for the Joint Mission Analysis Centre and the HIV/AIDS Unit in addition to his immediate Office, the Civil Affairs Office, the Tripartite Coordination Unit, the Public Information Section and the Beirut Office. International staff: increase of 6 posts (redeployment of 1 P-5, 2 P-4, 2 P-3 and National staff: increase of 2 posts (redeployment of 2 national General Service posts) 37. As indicated in paragraph 36 above, the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs would have oversight and direct supervisory responsibility for the work of the Joint Mission Analysis Centre. Accordingly, with a view to better aligning the Force's civilian and military resources, facilitating greater synergy between its military and civilian components and optimizing the capacity of the Force's civilian component, it is proposed to redeploy the entire staffing complement of the Joint Mission Analysis Centre from the executive direction and management component to the operations component. International staff: increase of 2 posts (upgrade 1 P-4 post and reassignment of 2 P-3 posts) National staff: increase of 4 posts (establishment of 4 National Professional Officer posts) 38. The Civil Affairs Office supports the efforts of the Force to accomplish its mandate under Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) through local-level liaison and representation, supporting inter-agency coordination, facilitating the work of external actors, monitoring social, political and economic developments and attitudes towards UNIFIL within local communities, conflict management and confidence-building. The Office comprises two field-based teams (Sector East and Sector West) and a special projects team based at UNIFIL headquarters. 39. The strategic review highlighted the importance of the impact of UNIFIL operational activities in advancing the objectives of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). The review also noted the importance of improving relations with the local population, and in this regard recommended the development of a sustainable, long-term strategy, the reinforcement of UNIFIL's civil affairs capacity, particularly its national staff component, and the strengthening of the Force's coordination of public outreach activities. In addition, the Force is also expected to facilitate greater involvement on the part of the various ministries of the Government of Lebanon in southern Lebanon and to enhance engagement with the United Nations country team towards an integrated, comprehensive approach to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). 40. With a view to strengthening civil affairs capacity and facilitating the implementation of additional tasks, as recommended in the strategic review and subsequently mandated by the Security Council in its resolution 2064 (2012), it is proposed to upgrade one existing post of Civil Affairs Officer from the P-4 to the P5 level and to reassign two P-3 posts (1 from the Finance Section and 1 from the Medical Section in the Mission Support Division) to function as Civil Affairs Officers. In addition, it is proposed to establish four posts of Associate Civil Affairs Officer (National Professional Officer). 41. The Senior Civil Affairs Officer (P-5) would be responsible for overseeing civil affairs activities in the UNIFIL area of operations through the two Sector-based civil affairs teams. The functions would encompass initiatives to address: local apprehensions emanating from the large-scale UNIFIL troop deployment; conflict prevention and conflict resolution; ensuring good relations between UNIFIL and the local population; management of quick-impact projects and a range of community initiatives; survey of the public perceptions in the UNIFIL area of operations; conflict and cultural sensitivity training of UNIFIL staff; support to enhance the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces in civil-military coordination and community outreach; implementation of cross-cutting issues (gender, child protection, protection of civilians) within UNIFIL; support to the participation of civil society organizations in the areas of good governance; institution-building and support for access to public services through joint vocational training and awareness campaigns in southern Lebanon and regular liaison with the local authorities at the region, district and municipal levels. The incumbent of the post would assist the Chief Civil Affairs Officer in related initiatives with the Government, the United Nations country team and other partners towards the implementation of new strategic priorities/tasks. 42. One post of Civil Affairs Officer (P-3) would be based in the civil affairs coordination cell in Naqoura, while the other post of Civil Affairs Officer (P-3) would be based in the civil affairs team in Sector East. The Civil Affairs Officer based in Naqoura would be responsible for liaison, representation and coordination with the United Nations country team and with Lebanese Government ministries at the central level as well as for the coordination of UNIFIL's special projects and initiatives in the area of civil affairs. The incumbent would manage the quick-impact projects and the public perceptions survey project. He/she would also provide support to local livelihoods including through the organization of vocational courses and agricultural events, and to the strengthening of the civil-military coordination capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces. The incumbent would be assisted/supported in carrying out these responsibilities in Naqoura by two new posts of Associate Civil Affairs Officer (National Professional Officer). 43. The Civil Affairs Officer based in Sector East would be responsible for liaison and coordination with local informal community leaders and civil society groups, coordination of the implementation of quick-impact projects in the field, training for civil-military cooperation activities between UNIFIL peacekeepers and Lebanese Armed Forces, the implementation of UNIFIL special projects and initiatives in the area of civil affairs and the coordination of cross-cutting issues (gender, child protection, protection of civilians, environment) at the sector level. The incumbent would be assisted/supported in carrying out these responsibilities in Sector East by two new posts of Associate Civil Affairs Officer (National Professional Officer). International staff: increase of 3 posts (redeployment of 1 P-4, 1 P-2 and 1 Field Service posts) National staff: increase of 2 posts (redeployment of 1 National Professional Officer and 1 national General Service posts) 44. In view of the decision to align the Force's civilian and military resources, thereby facilitating greater synergy among the respective components, and to optimize the capacity of the Force's civilian component, the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs would have oversight and direct supervisory responsibility for the work of the HIV/AIDS Unit. Accordingly, it is proposed that the entire staffing complement of five posts (1 P-4, 1 P-2, 1 Field Service, 1 National Professional Officer and 1 national General Service) of the Unit be moved from administrative services in the support component to the operations component. With regard to the results-based-budgeting frameworks, it is also proposed that the related indicators of achievement and outputs continue to be reflected under the support component, given the overarching support nature of the functions of the Unit for the entire Force. Component 2: support 45. During the reporting period, the support component will continue to provide effective and efficient logistical, administrative and security services in support of the implementation of the mandate of the Force through the delivery of related outputs, the implementation of service improvements, and the realization of efficiency gains. Support will be provided to the authorized strength of up to 15,000 military contingent personnel as well as to the proposed civilian staffing establishment of 352 international staff and 694 national staff. The range of support will comprise all support services, including the implementation of conduct and discipline programmes, personnel administration, health care, ICT, ground transport operations, monitoring and control over the supply of rations, fuel and general supply items, and the provision of security services Force-wide. 46. UNIFIL continues to participate in the pilot project aimed at improving the presentation of the results-based-budgeting frameworks for the support component. The framework set out below reflects the indicators of achievement and relevant outputs related to service improvements. The standard support outputs and mission-specific non-standard or specialized outputs, reflecting two comparative periods, are presented in tables 3 and 4. 2.1 Increased efficiency and effectiveness of logistical, administrative and security support to the Force 2.1.1 Implementation and improvement of connectivity to the United Nations Support Base in Valencia and UNLB using leased lines through Middle East regional cooperation with UNTSO, UNDOF, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and UNFICYP (2011/12: 20 Mbps bandwidth; 2012/13: 30 Mbps bandwidth; 2013/14: 60 Mbps bandwidth) 2.1.2 100 per cent compliance by all staff with United Nations HIV/AIDS policies 2.1.3 Progress on the implementation of IPSAS and Umoja Service improvements :: Continuous implementation of the Lotus Notes-based results-based-budgeting monitoring project, introduced in 2011/12 as a pilot project, providing tools for the constant monitoring and evaluation of the status of the implementation of results-based budgeting for the operations and support components of the Force :: Increased efficiency in the utilization of ground and air transportation assets through increased reliance on surface transportation in order to reduce the number of VIP, liaison and delegation flights and aviation fuel consumption and for optimal support of the Force, with a maximum of seven aircraft with 1,600 planned flying hours :: Full implementation of the centralized warehousing and acquisition system without interruption of services and support to the Force :: Implementation of training and development of procedures, including standard operating procedures, for Umoja and IPSAS :: Optimal use of generators with a resultant reduction in diesel fuel consumption by 5 per cent (1 million litres) :: Use of chartered flights and utilization of Naqoura-based passenger/ferry ships for troop rotations with resultant reduction in estimated troop rotation costs by 5 per cent :: Support for the implementation of IPSAS, including the re-engineering of business processes for IPSAS compliance, updating mission standard operating procedures to reflect IPSAS requirements and training of all finance, budget and property management staff in the Force :: Support for the implementation of Umoja, including data quality analyses and data cleansing of the legacy systems in UNIFIL Freedom of movement will be provided by the Government of Lebanon; vendors/contractors/suppliers will be able to deliver goods and services as contracted Table 3 Standard support outputs: component 2, support Output Emplacement, rotation and repatriation of military and police personnel and administration of civilian personnel Authorized strength of 15,000 military contingents and 1,090 civilian personnel (including 3 temporary positions) Authorized strength of 15,000 military contingents and 1,046 civilian personnel Monitoring of contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment services provided 47 formed units inspected and verified through mandatory contingent-owned equipment inspections 45 formed units inspected and verified through mandatory contingent-owned equipment inspections 348 contingent-owned equipment verification reports forwarded to Headquarters for reimbursement purposes 364 contingent-owned equipment verification reports forwarded to Headquarters for reimbursement purposes 24 verification reports for the Maritime Task Force forwarded to Headquarters for reimbursement purposes 3 contingent-owned equipment/memorandum of understanding Management Review Boards conducted 100 per cent accountability for United Nations-owned equipment 100 per cent accountability for 13,000 items of United Nations-owned equipment verified and accounted for Rations 3,683,061 person-days of rations distributed to 24 locations 3,534,784 person-days of rations distributed to 22 locations Fuel supply 16.6 million litres of diesel for generators, 6.0 million litres of petrol for vehicles and 0.8 million litres of aviation fuel 15.8 million litres of diesel for generators, 5.8 million litres of petrol for vehicles and 0.8 million litres of aviation fuel Maintenance of premises 180 hard-wall premises in 63 locations 347 hard-wall premises in 54 locations Maintenance of generators 203 generators operated and maintained 183 generators operated and maintained Maintenance of prefabricated buildings 1,706 properties and facilities maintained 1,712 properties and facilities maintained Maintenance and rehabilitation of roads 100 kilometres of roads Fleet of vehicles 1,055 vehicles 1,024 vehicles Fleet of aircraft 5 aircraft 7 aircraft Flight hours 1,800 flight hours 1,600 flight hours Airfield locations 31 helicopter landing sites at 21 locations Medical facilities 19 level-I clinics, 2 level-II medical facilities 16 level-I clinics, 2 level-II medical facilities Communications 2 satellite networks, 10 VSAT systems, 41 telephone exchanges, 120 microwave links, 81 HF and 64 VHF repeaters and transmitters 2 satellite networks, 10 VSAT systems, 36 telephone exchanges, 111 microwave links, 42 HF and 115 VHF repeaters and transmitters Geographic information and maps 70 operational maps, 95 thematic maps, 130 satellite-image maps, 12 web-based e-maps produced 250 maps, including operational, thematic, satellite-image and web-based e-maps 10 services provided for terrain analysis, geospatial intelligence and study 12 services provided for terrain analysis, geospatial intelligence and study 20 Geographical Positioning System (GPS), Geographic Information System (GIS) and map-related training sessions for UNIFIL staff 36 GPS, GIS and map-related training sessions for UNIFIL staff 2,300 square kilometres of coverage of geospatial data collected for Force operations Information technology 56 servers, 1,697 desktop computers, 337 laptop computers, 327 printers, 115 digital senders, 33 local-area networks and wide-area networks 56 servers, 1,735 desktop computers, 275 laptop computers, 313 printers, 116 digital senders, 33 local-area networks and wide-area networks Conduct and discipline Implementation of a conduct and discipline programme for all military and civilian personnel, including training, prevention, monitoring and recommendations on remedial actions where misconduct has occurred Mission-specific, non-standard (or specialized) outputs: component 2, support Operation and maintenance of wastewater treatment plants 26 plants in 15 locations 26 plants in 16 locations Operation and maintenance of water-purification plants and water wells 11 water-purification plants in 8 locations and 16 water wells in 13 locations 11 water purification plants in 7 locations and 15 water wells in 13 locations Provision of training and assessment programmes for drivers/operators of all types of vehicles 600 military and civilian drivers 700 military and civilian drivers Operation of daily shuttle service 5 days a week for UNIFIL personnel For an average of 17 personnel For an average of 20 personnel Operation and maintenance of maritime vessels 7 vessels (3 frigates, 3 patrol boats and 1 support ship) 8 vessels (3 frigates, 4 patrol boats, 1 offshore patrol boat) and 1 passenger/car ferry Maintenance of mission-wide land and air evacuation arrangements 1 level-III hospital 3 level-IV hospitals 1 level-IV medical facility in 3 locations 16 level-I clinics 1 level-III hospital in Tyre, Lebanon 3 level-IV hospitals (one in Saida, Lebanon, two in Beirut) 2 level-IV medical facilities outside mission area (one in Haifa, Israel, and one in Cyprus) Maintenance of HIV/AIDS prevention and education for all mission personnel, induction training and promotion of safer sex practices and condom use 8,000 participants in mandatory HIV/AIDS orientation/induction training sessions for all categories of UNIFIL personnel Development and distribution of HIV/AIDS information, education and communication materials targeting all UNIFIL personnel 1,500 customized UNIFIL posters; 1,000 customized UNIFIL T-shirts; 10,000 customized UNIFIL brochures/flyers; 1,000 spring desk calendars; 5,000 lanyards/ID card holders; 2,500 pens with HIV/AIDS messages; 1,000 customized UNIFIL drafting boards; 2,500 UNIFIL key rings 1,000 T-shirts; 2,000 spring desk calendars; 2,000 posters; 15,000 ID card holders; 15,000 red ribbons; 15,000 brochures Training of peer educators and scaling up of peer education, including monitoring and supervision of peer educator sessions for UNIFIL personnel 25 peer educators Training of multidisciplinary health-care workers on voluntary confidential counselling and testing protocols, procedures, universal safety precautions and guidelines for post-exposure prophylaxis 25 multidisciplinary health-care workers in lieu of uniformed personnel rotations Training of voluntary, confidential counselling and testing counsellors, and strengthening and scaling up of the provision and promotion of ethical and professional voluntary confidential counselling and testing services for all UNIFIL personnel 25 voluntary and confidential counselling and testing counsellors Provision and promotion of ethical and professional voluntary and confidential counselling and testing services for UNIFIL personnel and family members Provision of security services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for all mission area sites Security services provided 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 7 international staff and 7 national staff for the emergency communications system 6 national security personnel for the Security Information and Operations Centre 7 international security officers on call at all times 6 international staff and 5 international security officers on call at all times Provision of 24-hour close protection to senior UNIFIL staff and visiting high-level officials Close protection of senior UNIFIL staff and visiting officials at the level of Assistant Secretary-General and above Mission-wide security risk assessment updated according to the Department of Safety and Security mandatory returns Security risk assessment is up to date (updated twice per year) Conduct of information sessions on security awareness and contingency plans for all UNIFIL personnel 12 sessions 20 sessions Induction security training and primary fire training/drills for all new UNIFIL staff 26 induction security training sessions 1 fire drill for all staff 32 induction security training sessions Provision of 24/7 security information management in coordination with UNIFIL counterparts and other related departments Development of security reports, advisories and related information Conduct of zone warden exercises/meetings 12 exercises/meetings Conduct of safe and secure approaches in field environments training courses for all United Nations staff members in the South Litani River area 4 training courses per year Provision of security supervision and services for maintenance and repair all security equipment at the UNIFIL gates 24 machines at 7 gates Transport of passengers and cargo within the mission area by UNIFIL air transport assets 9,000 passengers and 2.6 tons of cargo Surface transport of cargo by commercial means and UNIFIL vehicles 1,140 tons of cargo Table 5 Human resources: component 2, support Civilian staff Conduct and Discipline Team Approved temporary positionsb 2012/13 Proposed temporary positionsb 2013/14 Security Section Mission Support Division Office of the Director of Mission Support Office of the Chief of Administrative Services Office of the Deputy Director of Mission Support Regional Communications and Information Technology Services Subtotal, component 2 Total, component 2 b Funded under general temporary assistance. International staff: no net change (conversion of 1 P-4, 1 P-2 and 1 Field Service temporary positions to posts) 47. The regional role of the Conduct and Discipline Team in UNIFIL is to implement a strategy to eliminate misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse, based on three core elements: prevention activities, enforcement activities, and remedial action activities. As the related functions have become an integral part of peacekeeping operations, and are considered to be of a continuing nature, it is therefore proposed to convert three temporary positions of Conduct and Discipline Officers (P-4, P-2 and Field Service) to posts. International staff: net decrease of 1 post (conversion of 1 P-2 post to the Field Service category and conversion of 1 Field Service post to the National Professional Officer category) National staff: increase of 1 post (conversion of 1 Field Service post to the National Professional Officer category) 48. The Security Section is responsible for: the continuous provision of close protection to senior UNIFIL staff and high-ranking official visitors; the monitoring of the mission-wide security risk assessment; the Force security plan; threat assessments; and ensuring adherence to overall fire safety policies and procedures. Within the context of the recommendations of the strategic review, it is proposed to convert two Security Officer posts (1 P-2 and 1 Field Service) to the Field Service and National Professional Officer categories, respectively. The proposed conversions would meet the requirement to strengthen fire safety as well as the planning and training functions in the Force. 49. The conversion of one P-2 post to the Field Service category is proposed to: (a) strengthen the staffing complement of the Fire Safety Unit functions in the area of planning; (b) establish the structure of the fire safety service for the Force; and (c) conduct specialized training for personnel involved in firefighting and ensure adherence to proper fire safety protocols throughout the area of operations. The incumbent would develop, coordinate and manage all fire safety and prevention programmes in UNIFIL, including coordination with the Lebanese fire safety authorities and the provision of fire risk assessment and mitigation plans. The incumbent would ensure the conduct of a fire drill per fire zone and also manage private contractors in the maintenance of fire alarm systems and fire extinguishers in accordance with the Force's fire safety policy. 50. The proposed conversion from the Field Service to the National Professional Officer category of the other Security Officer post would strengthen the national capacity in the Force in the area of planning and training. The incumbent would be responsible for: ensuring the maintenance of the Department of Safety and Security mandatory documents, register and reporting requirements; the maintenance of the Force security plan and minimum operating security standards; the coordination of the implementation of the annual relocation, evacuation and security awareness training schedule; preparation of a training programme for UNIFIL zone wardens; and the conduct of LIVEX and MAPEX exercises with the UNIFIL senior commanders on the security plan and the implementation of a security training programme for all dependants and spouses through a series of awareness briefings. The incumbent would also undertake liaison and coordination with local government authorities on security and training-related matters. 51. With a view to improving the delivery of services and to seeking synergies by consolidating related financial, logistical and administrative functions, the Mission Support Division has undertaken an internal review of its structure and staffing requirements. As a result of the review, and in light of the introduction of the global field support strategy and Umoja, a realignment of the structure of the Division is proposed to reflect its evolving requirements. The major significant changing roles include: (a) the reprofiling and consolidation of the roles of the Chief of Integrated Support Services and the Chief of Administrative Services into one role, of Deputy Director of Mission Support, with overall operational responsibility for the administrative and integrated support services of the Force; and (b) the merger and streamlining of the Budget Section and the Finance Section as a consolidated Budget and Finance Section. The realignment and structural changes are driven by, inter alia, the need to improve the monitoring and reporting structure of the Force in the areas of financial, logistical and service delivery areas and the need to simplify and streamline various processes in line with the introduction and implementation of Umoja. 52. The proposed changes in the staffing establishment of the Office of the Director of Mission Support, Administrative Services and Integrated Support Services would be accommodated through the abolishment, conversion, reassignment and redeployment of posts, with a net reduction in the staffing establishment of the Mission Support Division by 26 international posts and 30 national posts. These changes are outlined and described in paragraphs 53 to 75 below. Further changes in resource levels, particularly in the areas of finance, asset management and supply chain, may result upon the completion of change impact analysis, role mapping, organizational alignment and the consequent roll-out/implementation/go-live of the Umoja pilot project in UNIFIL commencing 1 July 2013. International staff: net increase of 8 posts (redeployment of 1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 6 Field Service posts, abolishment of 1 P-5 post, and conversion of 1 P-3 post to the Field Service category) National staff: increase of 18 posts (redeployment of 1 National Professional Officer and 17 national General Service posts) 53. In the 2013/14 period, the Office of the Director of Mission Support would comprise the immediate office of the Director, the Compliance and Monitoring Unit, the Mission Support/Policy Planning Unit and the Budget and Finance Section. The proposed staffing changes, detailed in paragraphs 54 and 55 below, include: (a) the conversion of a P-3 post to the Field Service category in the Compliance and Monitoring Unit; and (b) the abolishment of the post of Chief Budget Officer (P-5) and the consolidation/merger of the Finance Section in administrative services with the Budget Section into the new Budget and Finance Section. 54. The proposed conversion of a P-3 post of Administrative Officer to the Field Service category in the Compliance and Monitoring Unit is in line with the need to realize the full benefits of the recent human resources management reforms, to facilitate effective workforce planning and succession management operations and to ensure a suitable balance both from a structural hierarchy perspective and from a career development perspective. 55. The proposed abolishment of the post of Chief Budget Officer (P-5) and the consolidation/merger of six posts (1 P-4, 1 Field Service and 4 national General Service) of the Budget Section and 27 posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 6 Field Service, 1 National Professional Officer and 17 national General Service) of the Finance Section stems from the management decision to streamline and align under one section the financial resources management and accounting processes to improve monitoring and reporting. Administrative Services International staff: decrease of 70 posts (redeployment of 1 D-1, 4 P-5, 7 P-4, 12 P-3, 1 P-2, 45 Field Service posts) National staff: decrease of 138 posts (redeployment of 5 National Professional Officers and 133 national General Service posts) 56. With the reprofiling of the administrative services of the Force under the oversight and supervision of the Deputy Director of Mission Support, it is proposed to redeploy the entire staffing establishment of 208 posts (1 D-1, 4 P-5, 7 P-4, 12 P-3, 1 P-2, 45 Field Service, 5 National Professional Officers and 133 national General Service posts) to the Office of the Deputy Director of Mission Support. The proposed reprofiling/reconfiguration of the various offices under administrative services is provided in detail under the heading of Office of the Deputy Director of Mission Support below. Integrated Support Services International staff: decrease of 131 posts (redeployment of 1 D-1, 7 P-5, 9 P-4, 15 P-3, 3 P-2 and 96 Field Service posts) National staff: decrease of 448 posts (redeployment of 5 National Professional Officer and 443 national General Service posts) 57. With the reprofiling of Integrated Support Services of the Force under the oversight and supervision of the Deputy Director of Mission Support, it is proposed to redeploy the entire staffing establishment of 579 posts (1 D-1, 7 P-5, 9 P-4, 15 P-3, 3 P-2 and 96 Field Service, 5 National Professional Officer and 443 national General Service posts) to the Office of the Deputy Director of Mission Support. The proposed reprofiling/reconfiguration of the various offices under integrated support services is set out in detail under the heading of Office of the Deputy Director of Mission Support below. International staff: net increase of 170 posts (redeployment of 2 D-1, 10 P-5, 13 P-4, 26 P-3, 3 P-2 and 134 Field Service posts; abolishment of 1 D-1, 1 P-5, 1 P-3 and 13 Field Service posts; and reassignment of 2 P-3 posts) National staff: net increase of 535 posts (redeployment of 7 National Professional Officer and 557 national General Service posts; abolishment of 26 national General Service posts; and reassignment of 1 National Professional Officer and 2 national General Service posts) 58. With the exception of the Regional Communications and Information Technology Services, the reprofiling of the administrative services and integrated support services of the Force under the oversight and supervision of the Deputy Director of Mission Support follows from the recommendations for large peacekeeping missions made in the third annual progress report on the implementation of the global field support strategy (A/67/633). The strategy calls for, inter alia, a Director and a Deputy Director of Mission Support to allow for greater coherence of administrative and support functions on the ground and to allow for more efficient use of available resources, including the development of inter-mission cooperation and the capability to leverage experiences gained to date of the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe and the Kuwait Joint Support Office. 59. The proposed Office of the Deputy Director of Mission Support will comprise the immediate Office of the Deputy Director of Mission Support, the Integrated Training Unit, the Civilian Personnel, Procurement, General Services, Property Management, Supply, Medical, Movement Control, Engineering, Transport and Aviation Sections and the Joint Logistics Operation Centre. The reconfiguration and changes to the current staffing establishment of these organizational units are provided in detail in paragraphs 60 to 73 below. 60. The immediate Office of the Deputy Director of Mission Support would have a staffing complement of 11 posts (1 D-1, 1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 2 Field Service and 5 national General Service posts) to be accommodated through the reassignment and reprofiling of one post of Chief of Integrated Support Services (D-1) as the Deputy Director of Mission, the Deputy Chief (P-5) and three posts of Administrative Assistant (1 Field Service and 2 national General Service) from the Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services and the redeployment of one post of Staff Counsellor (P-4), one post of Administrative Assistant (Field Service), two posts of Welfare Assistant (national General Service) and one post of Team Assistant (national General Service) from the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services. It is proposed that the remaining posts of Chief of Administrative Services (D-1) and Assistant to the Staff Counsellor (Field Service) be abolished. It is also proposed that the post of Logistics Officer (P-3) in the Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services be abolished. As a result of the reprofiling and reorganization of the Division, the Offices of the Chief of Administrative Services and the Chief of Integrated Support Services are proposed for abolishment. 61. The changes in respect of administrative services, in addition to the reprofiling and the consequential abolishment of the Office of the Chief of Administrative Services, include: (a) the redeployment of the entire HIV/AIDS Unit and its staffing establishment to the operations component in view of the oversight and supervisory responsibilities of the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs for the Unit; (b) the consolidation/merger of the entire staffing establishment and functions of the Finance Section into the new Budget and Finance Section under the direct oversight and supervisory responsibility of the Director of Mission Support; (c) the abolishment of two posts of Human Resources Assistant (Field Service) and one post of Database Administrator (Field Service) in the Civilian Personnel Section; (d) the abolishment of a post of Procurement Assistant (national General Service) in the Procurement Section; (e) the redeployment of one post of Receiving and Inspection Officer (P-3) and seven posts of Receiving and Inspection Assistant (national General Service) from the General Services Section to the Property Management Section; and (f) the abolishment of five national General Service posts (1 Receiving and Inspection Assistant, 1 Team Assistant in the Travel, Visa and Shipping Unit and three Maintenance Workers in the Facilities Management Unit) in the General Services Section. 62. As indicated in paragraph 61 above, the proposed realignment of the HIV/AIDS Unit and its entire staffing establishment (1 P-4, 1 P-2, 1 Field Service, 1 National Professional Officer and 1 national General Service posts) from the support component to the operations component follows from the decision to align the Force's civilian and military resources and to optimize the capacity of the Force's civilian component under the oversight and supervisory responsibility of the Deputy Head of Mission/Director of Political and Civil Affairs. 63. The proposed redeployment and merger with the Budget Section under the Director of Mission Support of the staffing establishment of 27 posts (1 P-5, 1 P-4, 1 P-3, 6 Field Service, 1 National Professional Officer and 17 national General Service posts) and functions of the Finance Section is based on the decision to merge the two sections in order to streamline and align the financial resources management and accounting processes under one Budget and Finance Section and to improve monitoring and reporting. At the same time, in view of the streamlining and merger of the functions, it is proposed to abolish 1 Finance Assistant post (Field Service) and reassign 1 post of Finance Officer (P-3) to the Civil Affairs Section. 64. In the Civilian Personnel Section, it is proposed to abolish two posts of Human Resources Assistant (Field Service) and one post of Database Administrator (Field Service). The proposed abolishment takes into account the current workload and the redistribution of the functions, as well as a combination of increased effectiveness among remaining staff within the Section. 65. In the Procurement Section, it is proposed to abolish one post of Procurement Assistant (national General Service), given the decreased workload in the procurement of goods and services and increased effectiveness of the existing staff in the execution of their tasks. 66. In the General Services Section, it is proposed to redeploy the staffing complement and functions of the Receiving and Inspection Unit to the Property Management Section, based on the results of the Lean Six Sigma analysis of UNIFIL's processes. Accordingly, it is proposed to redeploy one post of Receiving and Inspection Officer (P-3) and seven posts of Receiving and Inspection Assistant (national General Service) to the Property Management Section. In addition, it is proposed to abolish one post of Receiving and Inspection Assistant (national General Service). With the outsourcing of grounds maintenance services and the consequential decrease in the workload of the Facilities Management Unit in the 2012/13 period, as well as the reduced workload in the Travel, Visa and Shipping Unit, the abolishment of four national General Service posts (1 Team Assistant in the Travel, Visa and Shipping Unit and 3 Maintenance Assistants in the Facilities Management Unit) is proposed. 67. In addition to the reprofiling and the consequential abolishment of the Office of the Chief of Integrated Support Services, changes to the staffing complement of the Property Management, Supply, Medical, Movement Control, Engineering, Transport and Aviation Sections, and the Joint Logistics Operations Centre are proposed, as follows: (a) the abolishment of one post of Property Control Inventory Officer (Field Service) and two posts of Asset Disposal Assistant (national General Service) in the Property Management Section and the redeployment of one post of Receiving and Inspection Officer (P-3) and seven posts of Receiving and Inspection Assistant (national General Service) from the Receiving and Inspection Unit of General Services Section; (b) the abolishment of one post of Fuel Officer (Field Service) in the Supply Section; (c) the reassignment of one post of Medical Officer (P-3) to the Civil Affairs Office and of one post of Pharmacist (National Professional Officer) to the Office of the Head of Mission/Force Commander from the Medical Section; (d) the abolishment of one post of Movement Control Officer (Field Service) in the Movement Control Section and the redeployment of 3 posts of Language Assistant (national General Service) from the Joint Logistics Operations Centre to the Movement Control Section; (e) the abolishment of two posts of Facilities Management Officer (Field Service) and three posts of Mason (national General Service) in the Engineering Section and the redeployment of three posts in the Environment Management Unit (1 P-4, 1 National Professional Officer and 1 national General Service) from the Engineering Section to the Regional Communications and Information Technology Services; (f) the abolishment of 1 post of Logistics Assistant (Field Service) and 10 posts of Language Assistant (national General Service) in the Joint Logistics Operations Centre as well as the redeployment of three Driver/Language Assistant posts from Joint Logistics Operations Centre to the Movement Control Section and the reassignment of two Language Assistant posts (national General Service) from Joint Logistics Operations Centre to the Regional Communications and Information Technology Services; and (g) the abolishment of the post of Chief Transport Officer (P-5), two posts of Transport Assistant (Field Service) and five posts of Administrative Assistant (national General Service) in the Transport Section. 68. In the Property Management Section, it is proposed to abolish one post of Property Control Inventory Officer (Field Service) and two posts of Asset Disposal Assistant (national General Service) following a realignment of responsibilities within the Section. In addition, it is proposed to redeploy one post of Receiving and Inspection Officer (P-3) and seven posts of Receiving and Inspection Assistants (national General Service) from the Receiving and Inspection Unit of the General Services Section, based on the decision to functionally redeploy the Unit to the Property Management Section resulting from the recommendation to streamline UNIFIL's related process based on a Lean Six Sigma analysis. 69. In the Supply Section, it is proposed to abolish the post of Fuel Officer (Field Service) as a result of the plan to restructure the Section in order to centralize the main responsibilities for budgeting, accounting and verification of invoices of the Rations, Fuel and General Supply Units into a single cell and in light of the fact that the post has been vacant since July 2012. 70. In the Medical Section, it is proposed to reassign 1 post of Medical Officer (P-3) to the Civil Affairs Office and 1 post of Pharmacist (National Professional Officer) to the Office of the Force Commander as a result of the review of the staffing structure of the Section and the determination by senior management that the Section can continue to operate effectively with four (4) international staff and six (6) national staff. 71. In the 2012/13 period, the Force contracted and deployed a coastal vessel (passenger/car ferry) to transport military personnel between the Naqoura seaport and the Beirut seaport at the time of their deployment, rotation and repatriation. This arrangement is expected to improve the security of troops by reducing the requirement to move troops by a single main supply route, while at the same time entailing additional workload related to ground transportation from the Beirut seaport to Beirut's Rafic Hariri International Airport. Accordingly, it is proposed to augment the staffing of the Movement Control Section through the reassignment of three Language Assistant posts (national General Service) to that Section as Drivers. At the same time, owing to a reconfiguration of the staffing within the Section, the abolishment of one Movement Control Assistant post (Field Service) is proposed. 72. In the 2012/13 period, the Engineering Section is expected to complete the establishment and construction of 63 military positions throughout the area of operations. In the 2013/14 period, the focus of its work will be related to maintenance activities, namely the improvement of support infrastructures and completion of the ongoing infrastructure projects related to the Force's previous expansion. Given the decreased workload of the Section, it is proposed to abolish two posts of Facilities Management Officer and Assistant (Field Service) as well as three posts of Mason (national General Service) in Sectors East and West. In addition, taking into account the Headquarters' policy on reporting lines of the Environment Management Units in all peacekeeping missions, and based on the decision of the Force's senior management to consolidate support offices under one management structure, it is proposed to redeploy the entire staffing establishment (1 P-4, 1 National Professional Officer and 1 national General Service post) and the functions of the Unit from the Engineering Section to the Regional Communications and Information Technology Services. 73. Since the transfer of responsibility to the Joint Logistics Operations Centre in November 2008, the provision of language support services has been reorganized to improve operational output and create efficiency gains and to respond to related audit recommendations. The improved levels of professional language support services, including the introduction of a Force Headquarters stand-by duty roster providing 24/7 coverage and consideration of pooling common services to meet operational tempo and the repatriation of over 1,000 military personnel in December 2012 has resulted in a decrease in the workload and the staffing. Accordingly, it is proposed to reduce the staffing complement of Joint Logistics Operations Centre through the abolishment of one post of Logistics Assistant (Field Service) and 10 posts of Language Assistant (national General Service). In addition, with a view to consolidating the functions of the Environment Management Unit under Regional Communications and Information Technology Services, the reassignment of two posts of Language Assistant (national General Service) to carry out functions of Environmental Assistants is proposed. With the deployment of a coastal vessel (passenger/car ferry), it is proposed to redeploy three posts of Language Assistant/Driver (national General Service) to the Movement Control Section. 74. In the Transport Section, it is proposed to abolish the post of Chief Transport Officer (P-5), taking into account that it has been vacant for over two years and that the duties and responsibilities of the Chief Transport Officer have been absorbed and carried out by the senior officers in the Section. With the centralization of the functions of the Transport Stores Unit under a centralized warehouse and the decrease in the workload of the Transport Section as a result of the redistribution of its functions, it is proposed that its staffing complement be further reduced through the abolishment of two posts of Transport Assistant (Field Service) and five posts of Administrative Assistant (national General Service). International staff: net decrease by 3 posts (abolishment of 3 Field Service posts, conversion of 1 Field Service post and redeployment of 1 P-4 post) National staff: net increase by 3 posts (abolishment of 2 national General Service posts, conversion of 1 post to the National Professional Officer category, redeployment of 1 National Professional Officer and 1 national General Service posts and reassignment of 2 national General Service posts) 75. The Regional Communications and Information Technology Services is responsible for: the installation, operation and maintenance of the communications infrastructure and systems throughout the Force's area of operations, inclusive of terminal systems, telephone exchanges, repeaters and transmitters, microwave links and radio studios and relay; the operation, maintenance and repairs of ICT and infrastructure; application development; network security; access control and data integrity; applications and database systems administration; and user support and training. In accordance with peacekeeping environmental policy and the decision to integrate environmental measures into all phases of UNIFIL's activities in order to protect human health and natural resources, it is proposed to redeploy the posts from the Environment Management Unit of the Engineering Section, comprising one post of Engineering Officer (P-4), one post of Engineering Assistant (National Professional Officer) and one post of Administrative Assistant (national General Service). In addition, it is proposed to redeploy two posts of Language Assistant (national General Service) from the Joint Logistics Operations Centre to carry out continuous environmental assessments at all mission locations and facilities, therefore reducing the UNIFIL in-country environmental impact to the fullest extent possible. Furthermore, with the decrease in the workload of the Assets Management Unit in connection with the consolidation of the Warehousing, Asset Management, Heavy Goods Storage and Customer Service Units, it is proposed to abolish the three Field Service posts (Administrative Assistant, Inventory and Supply Assistant and Information Technology Assistant) and two national General Service posts (Maintenance Assistant). In addition, the conversion to the National Professional Officer category of one post of Telecommunications Technician (Field Service) in the Communications Section as part of the overall process of nationalizing international posts is proposed. Based on the scope of the workload and nature of functions, it has been determined that it is possible to identify national candidates with sufficient levels of experience and knowledge to assume the functions of an Information Technology Officer. (Thousands of United States dollars; budget year is 1 July to 30 June.) Expenditures (2011/12) Apportionment (2012/13) Cost estimates (2013/14) Military observers United Nations police Formed police units National staff United Nations Volunteers General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Facilities and infrastructure Ground transportation Air transportation Naval transportation Medical Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment B. Non-budgeted contributions 76. The estimated value of non-budgeted contributions for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 is as follows: (Thousands of United States dollars) Estimated value Status-of-forces agreementa a Inclusive of land and premises provided by the host Government, including UNIFIL House in Beirut, an evacuation centre in Tyre, movement control offices at the seaport and airport, UNIFIL headquarters at Naqoura and military positions as well as services, value-added tax (VAT) refunds and duty waivers. C. Efficiency gains 77. The cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 take into account the following efficiency initiatives: Savings Project Rotation travel of military contingents 5 per cent reduction in troop rotation costs through wider utilization of chartered flights and utilization of Naqoura-based passenger/ferry ship Reduction by 200 flight hours from 1,800 in 2012/13 to 1,600 in 2013/14 period for the helicopter fleet through the revision of the training routes and decrease in the number of VIP and other delegations transported by air Generator fuel 5 per cent reduction (1.0 million litres) in generator fuel consumption, from 19.4 million litres in 2011/12 to 18.4 million litres in 2013/14 Information and communications technology spare parts Application of 2.5 per cent of the inventory value for ICT spare parts, as compared to 3 per cent applied in the 2012/13 period Official travel, non-training Combining of within-mission travel tasks of military personnel resulting in a reduction of military escort and liaison travel from 1,500 in 2012/13 to 1,425 in 2013/14 Official travel, training-related Through increased internal, online and regional training arrangements resulting in decrease by 17 per cent from the approved 2012/13 provision D. Vacancy factors 78. The cost estimates for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 take into account the following delayed deployment/vacancy factors: (Percentage) Actual 2011/12 Budgeted 2012/13 Projected 2013/14 National Professional Officers National General Service staff 79. The proposed delayed deployment factor of 26.5 per cent for military contingent personnel takes into account the military capability study and assessment of the possibility of troop adjustment within the authorized strength of 15,000 troops, the prevailing situation on the ground, as well as a number of observations in the military capability study contributing to a leaner but no less capable Force. The proposed vacancy factors for the 2013/14 period for international and national staff are based on recent incumbency patterns, the actual average vacancy rates for the period from 1 July to December 2012, and the net reduction in civilian staffing by 44 posts and positions (21 international and 23 national). E. Contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment 80. Requirements for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 are based on standard reimbursement rates for major equipment (wet-lease) and self-sustainment in the total amount of $97,234,600 as follows: Estimated amount Major equipment Self-sustainment Mission factors Effective date Last review date A. Applicable to Mission area Extreme environmental condition factor 1 July 2007 26 Dec. 2007 Intensified operational condition factor Hostile action/forced abandonment factor B. Applicable to home country Incremental transportation factor F. Training 81. The estimated resource requirements for training for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 are as follows: Training consultants Official travel, training Training fees, supplies and services 82. The number of participants planned for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 compared to previous periods is as follows: (Number of participants) Actual Planned Proposed Internal Externala a Includes UNLB and outside the mission area. 83. The UNIFIL training programme for the 2013/14 period primarily focuses on internal and external training programmes for 13,163 and 150 personnel, respectively. Of the total of 217 courses (119 internal and 98 external), gender mainstreaming and awareness and mandatory HIV/AIDS training courses are geared for approximately 12,000 military and civilian personnel, while the balance of personnel to be trained will undertake courses to enhance leadership, management and organizational skills as well as substantive and technical skills. The training programmes are to be conducted in the areas of administration, budgeting and finance, air operations, political and civil affairs, information systems, communications, human resources management/development, procurement and contract management, supply/property management, security and engineering. G. Mine detection and mine-clearing services 84. The estimated resource requirements for mine detection and mine-clearing services for the period 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 are as follows: 85. The estimate of $1,215,400 for the United Nations Mine Action Support Team provides for the costs of four international and six national contractual personnel as well as related relocation and travel costs under an agreement with the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) to support and enable UNIFIL mine action activities within the area of operations. In this respect, the Support Team works with the UNIFIL Deputy Force Commander and the military to provide pre-validation training support, validation, quality assurance monitoring, technical advice and safety briefings, as required. The Support Team also ensures that all UNIFIL mine action activities are carried out in accordance with the International Mine Action Standards (IMAS), relevant national mine action standards and standard operating procedures, thus ensuring safe and effective operations. Support will be provided to the clearance of cluster bomb sites in support of UNIFIL operations in southern Lebanon. H. Quick-impact projects 86. The estimated resource requirements for quick-impact projects for the period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 compared to previous periods are as follows: Period Number of projects 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 (actual) 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013 (approved) 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014 (proposed) 87. Given that UNIFIL's military presence in the area of operations significantly impacts the lives of local inhabitants, there is the continuing need for the Force to support communities in: the extension of State authority, civic education and capacity-building (10 projects); conflict management and confidence-building initiatives (7 projects); and access to basic services (8 projects). It is of paramount importance that UNIFIL demonstrates its continued support to the local population in the entire area of operations. III. Qana incident 88. In paragraph 13 of its resolution 66/277, the General Assembly reiterated its request to the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary to ensure the full implementation of paragraph 8 of resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of resolution 52/237, paragraph 11 of resolution 53/227, paragraph 14 of resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of resolution 55/180 B, paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 A, paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of resolution 57/325, paragraph 13 of resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of resolution 60/278, paragraph 21 of resolution 61/250 A, paragraph 20 of resolution 61/250 B, paragraph 20 of resolution 61/250 C, paragraph 21 of resolution 62/265, paragraph 19 of resolution 63/298, paragraph 18 of its resolution 64/282, and paragraph 15 of its resolution 65/303 stressed once again that Israel should pay the amount of $1,117,005 resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996, and requested the Secretary-General to report on this matter to the Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. Pursuant to the requests in those resolutions, the amount has been recorded under accounts receivable in the Special Account for UNIFIL, and the Secretariat has transmitted 18 letters to the Permanent Mission of Israel on the subject, the most recent of which was dated 29 January 2013, for which no response has been received. IV. Analysis of variances 89. The standard terminology applied with respect to the analysis of resources variances in this section are defined in annex I.B of the present report. The terminology used remains the same as in previous reports. :: Management: reduced inputs and same outputs 90. The lower requirements are attributable to: (a) the application of a 26.5 per cent delayed deployment factor to related requirements, as compared with 20 per cent for the 2012/13 period; and (b) the exclusion of the provision for a supplemental payment to troop-contributing countries approved for the 2012/13 period. The variance is offset in part by additional requirements for rations, owing to an increase in the actual average feeding requirement by 15 per cent over the 2012/13 period in contrast to the budgeted amount. :: Management: additional inputs and same outputs 91. The additional requirements are attributable primarily to: (a) the application of a 5 per cent vacancy factor as compared to 10 per cent in the 2012/13 period; and (b) the increase in average net salaries and staff assessment for Field Service personnel based on actual average step levels as at 31 October 2012. The variance was offset in part by the discontinuation of danger pay effective 1 July 2012 and the proposed net reduction of 18 posts. 92. The reduced requirements are attributable to: (a) the discontinuation of danger pay effective 1 July 2012; and (b) the proposed reduction of 23 national posts. The variance is offset in part by the application of vacancy factors of 10 per cent and 8 per cent on the estimates for National Professional Officers and national General Service posts, respectively, compared with the vacancy factors of 20 per cent and 9 per cent, respectively, applied in the 2012/13 budget. :: Management: conversion of temporary positions to posts 93. The exclusion of a provision under this heading is attributable to the proposed conversion of three international temporary positions (1 P-4, 1 P-2 and 1 Field Service) in the Conduct and Discipline Team to posts, taking into account the continuing nature of the functions. 94. The additional requirements are attributable to the engagement of consultants for the preparation and conduct of training in the areas of team-building, leadership, management and organizational skills as well as a mission-specific skills training in civil affairs. 95. The reduced requirements are attributable to: (a) the increased utilization of online and in-house training resources; and (b) the reduction in the planned within-mission travel from 3,551 trips in the 2012/13 period to 3,374 trips in 2013/14. 96. The reduced requirements are mainly attributable to: (a) the application of a delayed deployment factor of 26.5 per cent on self-sustainment requirements for military contingent personnel compared to 20 per cent for 2012/13 period; (b) the reduction by 5 per cent in the estimated requirements for diesel fuel based on recent consumption patterns; and (c) the reduced levels of acquisition of refrigeration equipment and maintenance supplies. The variance is offset in part by increased requirements for the replacement of generators and accommodation equipment. 97. The reduced requirements are mainly attributable to: (a) the lower projected consumption of 5.8 million litres of petrol and diesel fuel in the 2013/14 period, compared to 6.0 million litres in the 2012/13 period; (b) the acquisition of fewer pieces of equipment for the vehicle workshop as a result of the completion of the establishment of two new vehicle workshops in the 2012/13 period; and (c) lower requirements for liability insurance as a result of the decrease in the number of contingent-owned vehicles from 2,554 in the 2012/13 period to 2,106 in the 2013/14 period. 98. The variance is offset in part by additional requirements for the replacement of two ambulances and for the rental of additional heavy buses for the road transportation of troops to and from the Beirut seaport to Beirut airport. 99. The reduced requirements are mainly attributable to: (a) the decrease in the number of planned flight hours for seven helicopters from 1,800 in 2012/13 to 1,600 in 2013/14; and (b) the decrease in the unit cost of aviation fuel from $0.93 per litre in 2012/13 to $0.89 per litre in 2013/14, based on the average actual fuel cost for the six-month period from July to December 2012. The variance is offset in part by additional requirements for liability insurance. 100. The additional requirements are mainly attributable to: (a) the rental and operation of a passenger/car ferry vessel contracted on an "as-required" basis in support of logistics operations, including the transport of military personnel between Naqoura and Beirut on deployment, rotation or repatriation; (b) the average deployment of vessels of the Maritime Task Force for 10 months in the 2013/14 period compared with the average deployment of 9 months for the 2012/13 period; and (c) increased fuel consumption related to the rental of the passenger/car ferry. 101. The reduced requirements are primarily attributable to: (a) the application of a delayed deployment factor of 26.5 per cent on self-sustainment requirements for military contingent personnel for the 2013/14 period, compared with 20 per cent for the 2012/13 period; (b) lower prorated share for the Force of transponder charges in 2013/14 as compared to 2012/13; and (c) the application of 2.5 per cent of the total inventory value for communications spare parts in 2013/14, as compared to 3 per cent applied in the 2012/13 budget. The variance is offset in part by additional requirements for the replacement of the Force's radio production and broadcast studio system and contractual public information services for the conduct of quarterly public information opinion polls. :: Management: additional inputs and outputs 102. The additional requirements are attributable to contractual services in respect of the provision for first, second and third level support as well as for the upgrade/update of software systems and applications at a rate of $320 per computing device, inclusive of the Field Support Suite (Umoja enabler consisting of 18 modules) and the centrally provided support services of the Office of Information and Communications Technology at a rate of $75 per user. The variance is offset in part by reduced requirements for centrally managed enterprise licenses for 2,020 desktop and laptop computers and the application of 2.5 per cent of the total inventory value for information technology spare parts in 2013/14 as compared to 3 per cent in the 2012/13 budget. 103. The reduced requirements are attributable to the application of a delayed deployment factor of 26.5 per cent for self-sustainment requirements for military contingent personnel. The variance is offset in part by increased requirements for medical services, particularly hospitalization costs in external medical facilities. 104. The reduced requirements are attributable to the application of a delayed deployment factor of 26.5 per cent on self-sustainment requirements for military contingent personnel in the 2013/14 period, compared with 20 per cent applied in the 2013/14 period. 105. The reduced requirements are mainly attributable to: (a) lower projected costs for training fees, supplies and services, owing to the increased utilization of online, regional and internal resources for training activities; (b) lower costs for uniforms and related accoutrements owing to the lower projected deployment of military personnel; and (c) lower costs for mine clearance services as a result of the discontinuation of danger pay for UNOPS-contracted personnel. The variance is offset in part by increased requirements for the acquisition of trash bins for the recycling project and for the reproduction/printing of materials related to the work of the HIV/AIDS Unit. V. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 106. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNIFIL are: (a) Appropriation of the amount of $484,558,800 for the maintenance of the Force for the 12-month period from 1 July 2013 to 30 June 2014; (b) Assessment of the amount of $80,759,800 for the period from 1 July to 31 August 2013; (c) Assessment of the amount of $403,799,000 for the period from 1 September 2013 to 30 June 2014 at a monthly rate of $40,379,900, should the Security Council decide to continue the mandate of the Force. VI. Summary of follow-up action taken to implement the decisions and requests of the General Assembly in its resolution 66/264, and requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the General Assembly, and of the United Nations Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services A. General Assembly Cross-cutting issues (Resolution 66/264) Decision/request Action taken to implement decision/request Welcomes improvements regarding, inter alia, the physical verification of non-expendable property, stresses the importance of strengthening the full cycle of supply-chain management within peacekeeping operations, and in this regard reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to strengthen internal controls in the management of those assets to ensure adequate safeguards that would prevent waste and financial loss to the Organization (para. 30) UNIFIL has implemented two non-expendable verification cycles for the period from July 2013 to June 2013. Currently, 99.9 per cent of non-expendable property has been verified and only 0.1 per cent is reported as "not found yet" ... requests the Secretary-General to ensure the application of liberty usage guidelines for all mission vehicles and to report thereon in the next overview report on the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations (para. 31) The request has been fully implemented by UNIFIL (A/66/718) Request/recommendation Action taken to implement request/recommendation In this regard, the Advisory Committee also cautions against equating the deferral of capital expenditures with the implementation of sustainable efficiency measures that are based on changes in business processes which enable the more cost-efficient delivery of mandates. The Committee further expects that careful planning will be undertaken to ensure that any restoration of delayed capital expenditures during the 2012/13 period does not create a significant additional financial burden on Member States in subsequent financial periods (para. 34) The Department of Field Support continues with its approach of advancing its decision-making process in identifying strategic priorities for resource requirements to guide the budget formulation exercise for all peacekeeping missions. In this regard, missions are expected to prioritize existing resources, scrutinize asset replacements according to priorities and justify any remaining new requirements. Identifying the strategic priorities and linking targeted proposals at an earlier stage would allow for a cross-cutting approach to resource management for the Department of Field Support/Department of Peacekeeping Operations. While capital expenditure remains key to the effective delivery of the peacekeeping mandate, this approach is expected to mitigate the impact of the financial burden of capital expenditures in coming years The Advisory Committee is of the view that the delayed deployment factors and vacancy rates to be applied should be based on fully justified budgetary assumptions that take into account both historical data and foreseeable factors. In this regard, clear justification should be provided in budget documents for the rates used, particularly when these differ from the actual rates at the time of budget preparation (para. 36) During the 2011/12 financial period, the vacancy rates for both international and national staff have been affected by two developments, the United Nations-wide implementation of the harmonization of conditions of services for field staff and the availability of qualified candidates under the Field Central Review Board arrangements In January 2011, the Force had contributed its share for the harmonization of conditions of services exercise, as approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/247, by abolishing 29 international and 15 national posts in the 2011/12 period. The vacancy rate for international staff was approved at 11 per cent and for National Professional Officers at 33 per cent, based on the six-month actual average vacancy rates for these categories of personnel The Advisory Committee considers that the human resources management reforms approved by the General Assembly in recent years and the availability of pre-cleared candidates on the roster should result in a demonstrable and sustained reduction in actual vacancy rates for civilian staff throughout peacekeeping operations. The Committee is therefore of the view that this issue should be kept under review in the context of future budget submissions (para. 38) The Force has reduced its vacancy rate during the two last budget periods from around 20 per cent in 2010/11 to 9 per cent as of 31 August 2012. Part of this improvement has been attributed to the existence of rosters cleared by the Field Central Review Board for most occupational groups. The Force strongly believes that well-stocked rosters for all occupational groups are essential for the continued success of keeping vacancy rates within the mandate of the human resources management system The Advisory Committee reiterates its position that the continuing requirement for long-vacant posts should be reviewed on an ongoing basis and, in particular, before requests for new posts are made to the General Assembly (see A/65/743, para. 43, and A/66/7, para. 92). It is not clear to the Committee that such reviews are being systematically undertaken by each peacekeeping operation. In this regard, it is recalled that in the context of the proposed programme budget, the General Assembly, in its resolution 66/246, endorsed the recommendation of the Advisory Committee that the continuing need for posts that have been vacant for two years or longer should be rejustified together with an explanation for the vacancy (see A/66/7, paras. 92 and 93). The Committee recommends that a similar requirement apply to posts in peacekeeping operations and that information on posts that have been vacant for two years or longer should be included in mission budget proposals, along with specific justification for any that are proposed for retention (para. 54) It should be noted that regarding long-standing vacancies, the Force currently has only four (4) long-standing national vacant posts. Of these four (4) posts, three (3) are Language Assistant posts which were held vacant owing to the strategic decision made at the highest levels of the Organization that the actual deployment of military personnel averaged approximately 12,000 despite the authorized military strength of 15,000. As the military component never reached its full authorized strength, there was a corresponding decreased requirement to provide language support and as a result, these posts were not filled In light of the recent strategic review and the military capability study, the Force is not expecting any increase in the military component, and therefore all three (3) Language Assistant posts (national General Service), which have been vacant since prior to 1 July 2010, are proposed for abolishment in the 2013/14 period The fourth vacant post is at the GS-2 level and is in the process of being reclassified to the GS-3 level so that it may be utilized and recruitment can take place in line with established guidelines by the Office of Human Resources Management raising the entry level for General Service staff in peacekeeping missions to GS-3 In addition, the abolishment of one post of Chief Transport Officer (P-5) is proposed as it has been vacant for over two years and the functions have been carried out by senior officers of the Transport Section In this regard, the Advisory Committee remains concerned at the proportion of peacekeeping training resources that are for training-related travel. The Committee reiterates its position that travel for training should be kept under close review and limited to the extent possible (see A/65/743, para. 135) (para. 74) The Force's efforts in this area are evidenced by a reduction in total training-related travel in recent periods. UNIFIL is confident that further efficiencies will be derived from the establishment of a more prescriptive direction by Headquarters, aimed at ensuring more consistency in the quality and quantity of staff training at different missions The Committee recommends that in future reports on benefits and cost savings, further effort be made to gather and provide reliable supporting information to enable the cause and effect relationships between actions taken and any reported benefits or savings being reported to be clearly demonstrated. The Committee notes that reporting on the evaluation of the impact of efficiency measures on mandate and service delivery remains deficient at this stage (para. 86) For the 2013/14 period, UNIFIL projects benefits and cost savings in the amount of $2.5 million, as reflected in section II.C of the present report, in the areas of air transportation, troop rotations, official travel, ICT, spare parts and fuel consumption. All cost efficiency measures are clearly defined with impact on the service delivery explained, and the estimated cost savings implications have been calculated UNIFIL agrees, however, that reporting on the impacts of benefits and cost savings should be strengthened The Advisory Committee recommends that the Secretary-General be requested to review vehicle and information technology equipment holdings in peacekeeping operations and to align such holdings with the standard ratios established by the Department of Field Support and promulgated in the Standard Cost and Ratio Manual. The Committee requests that information in that regard be provided in the context of the next overview report. The Committee recognizes that mission-specific operational circumstances may exist that justify holdings in excess of the standard ratios and requests that, where applicable, such justification be clearly outlined in the 2013/14 budget proposals for the missions concerned (para. 91) The recommendation has been taken into consideration in the formulation of the 2013/14 budget. However, it should be noted that operational requirements may override the standard ratio. Full justification will be provided should this occur The Committee is of the view that Rotation Coordinators provide a valuable service to troop- and police-contributing countries and expects that the Secretary-General will seek to identify the resources necessary to ensure their use (para. 102) The Force has taken note of this recommendation The Committee further requests that future budget proposals for peacekeeping operations include specific information on all construction projects for which resources of more than $1 million are sought for the financial period in question (para. 106) During the 2013/14 period, UNIFIL will be implementing two multi-year projects, including the construction of hard-wall ablution units and concrete tanks for sewage treatment plants, which are estimated to cost $0.8 million and $0.3 million, respectively The Advisory Committee notes the actions taken to transfer vehicles between missions to meet emerging requirements but remains of the view that a further review of the vehicle holdings of peacekeeping missions is required (para. 110) The Force is committed to following all existing guidelines on vehicle acquisitions and fleet management The Committee recognizes that operational developments may, on occasion, lead to additional requirements for travel. The Committee is concerned, however, about the level of overexpenditure on travel reported for the 2010/11 period. The Committee stresses the importance that travel requirements be properly budgeted and that every effort be made to ensure that travel expenditures remain within approved provisions (para. 137) UNIFIL is making efforts to permit a more accurate forecast of travel requirements in successive budget periods, so that actual travel corresponds with budgeted travel and total travel costs remain within approved resources. There are a number of challenges which arise in this regard, not least the responsive nature of within-mission travel related to maintenance and trouble-shooting, which is not conducive to accurate forecasting, and the regular announcement by Headquarters of previously unforeseen travel requirements, including the uncertainty during budget planning, in relation to which it is possible that thematic conferences and workshops may take place during the 2013/14 period The Committee notes the reduction in the provision for official travel but is of the view that requirements in this area should continue to be kept under close review. While the Committee accepts that the effective delivery of mandates necessitates travel, it is concerned about the disruption to the day-to-day work of staff and the possible impact on programme delivery of prolonged absences from duty stations (see also A/66/739, paras. 3 and 26). As such, the Committee considers that maximum use should be made of advances in information and communications technology and other methods of representation to reduce the need for travel. The Committee has also raised particular concerns about the level of training-related travel being undertaken (para. 138) UNIFIL is increasing its dependence on technological advances, which permit remote face-to-face collaboration, to reduce travel costs and total time spent away from regular duties and responsibilities. Statistics in UNIFIL support this trend, and there has been an overall net reduction in official travel costs in recent periods. In considering each training-related travel activity, beginning from the preparation of cost estimates, close consideration is given to the cost/benefit, including productive time lost for travel, of sending staff for external training compared with bringing training to the staff, as well as the availability of web-based alternatives to identified training needs or the possibility of securing similar training at locations that involve the least amount of travel (A/66/718/Add.4) The Advisory Committee recognizes the need for staff to have access to vehicles for the performance of their official duties. However, the Committee is concerned at the finding of the Board of Auditors with respect to the number of passenger vehicles that appear to be used primarily to commute to and from work. The Committee expects that UNIFIL will further review vehicle utilization in the mission and make necessary adjustments to align its vehicle holdings with the standard ratios. The Committee requests that information in this regard be provided in the context of the budget proposal for 2013/14, including, if applicable, justification for proposed holdings in excess of the standard ratios (para. 40) UNIFIL continuously reviews vehicle utilization in the Force and makes necessary adjustments to align its vehicle holdings with the standard ratios. The Force's proposed budget for ground transportation is based on actual staffing. The Force continues to run and analyse reports generated by the CARLOG system on vehicle usage between Tyre and Naqoura, and it will use the data to make further adjustments, where and if required. However, it should be noted that, notwithstanding the Force's efforts to improve vehicle utilization by implementing group shuttle bus transportation between Tyre and Naqoura, the group transportation measure has been suspended by the Force Commander since 19 April 2012 owing to heightened security risks. The Force continuously encourages staff members to share available transport resources for daily commuting to ensure maximum occupancy. The Force not only monitors the effectiveness of vehicle fleet usage through the CARLOG system, but also conducts vehicle occupancy surveys and carefully considers modifications to the way in which surface transportation is provided to staff. The results of these analyses will be used to identify and implement measures that will result in operational savings While noting the reduction in the level of acquisition of information technology equipment, the Advisory Committee is of the view that the mission should further review its computer holdings (para. 41) Information and communications technology services are currently transitioning from personal computer (PC) desktop technology to "thin client" (virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI)) devices, in line with the guidelines and recommendations of the Information and Communications Technology Division. The complexity of this transition means that a larger holding of desktop devices will be apparent until the project is completed in March 2013 The Advisory Committee remains of the view that budget proposals should be based on fully justified budgetary assumptions that take into account both historical data and foreseeable factors (para. 43) UNIFIL budget proposals are based on the assumptions developed after a thorough analysis of current and future operational needs The Advisory Committee reiterates its position that travel for training should be kept under close review and limited to the extent possible (see A/65/743, para. 135) (para. 46) Travel for training is being kept under close review, as evidenced by the increase in the travel of trainers to the Force, with benefits that include a greater number of staff who can be trained for a particular requirement, as well as elimination of travel time and proportionally lower travel costs The Advisory Committee trusts that the Compliance and Monitoring Unit will facilitate the expeditious implementation of the recommendations of oversight bodies. The Committee requests that information on the functioning of the Unit, including with respect to risk management, be provided in the context of the budget proposal for 2013/14 (para. 53) The main efforts in the monitoring and compliance area included all matters related to Boards of Inquiry, oversight reports and compliance. By consolidating Force oversight in these key areas, the Force benefited from lessons learned and best practices in monitoring compliance. The Force is now positioned to undertake immediate remedial action to close outstanding recommendations. As a result, there has been a significant reduction in outstanding audit recommendations; there are no outstanding Boards of Inquiry recommendations; and there are no outstanding Boards of Inquiry issues for 2012. A strong working relationship and understanding exists between the staff of the Boards and the Force Provost Marshall/United Nations Military Police, and consultations take place on a regular basis The outstanding recommendations of the Board of Auditors made in 7 out of 10 previous years have been implemented and closed. Only three recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (one of which is not within the purview of UNIFIL) are open as at 31 January 2013 and are set to be implemented by the target dates. The activities of the Unit expanded to a proactive area system of risk management through increased attention to risk areas and active monitoring of performance benchmarks. A risk register, which considers various areas of exposure for likelihood of occurrence and impact of identified risks, was adopted and 62 risks identified in 11 focus areas. The majority of risks have been treated and/or mitigated. The current status of the risks is as follows: (a) high risk -- 2; (b) medium risk -- 32; (c) low risk -- 27; and (d) implemented -- 1. The risk register was supplemented with a treatment plan that is actively managed by the Compliance and Monitoring Unit The UNIFIL key performance indicators report was rolled out on 30 June 2012 and the Force is using the indicators, inter alia, as a management tool both for its portfolio on its annual results-based budgeting and service delivery C. Board of Auditors (A/66/5 (Vol. II) chap. 11) The Board identified invalid obligations of $69,096 at UNIFIL (para. 19). The Board reiterates its previous recommendation that the Department of Field Support require missions to comply with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations with respect to the criteria for the creation of obligations (para. 20) Force Management has implemented the recommendation and liquidated the obligation by $69,700. Supporting documentation has been provided to the Board The Force has implemented strict monitoring of unliquidated obligations and will carry forward only those obligations for medical services (at the year end) for which services have been delivered and become due on 30 June of each year. UNIFIL has improved on its cancellation of prior-period obligations from 13 per cent to 3 per cent in the last three periods. UNIFIL will continue to review its obligations and ensure that only necessary obligations are carried over The Board noted that UNIFIL was one of six missions that made individual net redeployments across groups of over $10 million (para. 46). The Board recommends that the Administration require field missions to strictly adhere to the Controller's requirement that they seek prior approval for redeployments prior to incurring expenditures (para. 48) UNIFIL managed its allotment, including redeployments of funds, in accordance with standard policy on the administration of allotments and within the delegation of authority granted by the Controller. All redeployment requests were approved by the Controller and issued in allotment advices The Board noted that UNIFIL did not change the title of eight vehicles bought by the Government of a Member State in 1991 as contingent equipment after full reimbursement by the United Nations. This resulted in difficulty in confirming the ownership of these vehicles when the mission disposed of them in 2010 (para. 85 (c)). The Board reiterates its previous recommendation that the Department of Field Support strengthen the monitoring of write-off and disposal of assets at missions to ensure that appropriate measures are taken to expedite all pending write-off or disposal cases (para. 86) The write-off case of 8 UNIFIL armoured personnel carriers was issued on 25 October 2011. UNIFIL provided its comments, including supporting documentation for the write-off case The Board noted that at UNIFIL, there were still long-vacant posts for both international and national staff (para. 119). The Board recommends the Department of Field Support make a comprehensive review and develop suitable criteria on the long-vacant posts to identify whether those posts are eligible for further abolition and nationalization, and require missions to conduct periodical review for compliance (para. 122) The Force has been proactive in expediting the recruitment processes aimed at reducing the vacancy rates UNIFIL reviewed all vacant posts and abolished a total of 148 posts from the 2010/11 period to date. During the 2010/11 budget period, the recruitment process was further impacted by the implementation of the harmonization of conditions of service across the United Nations system through the abolishment of vacant posts As earlier communicated to the Board, a monthly key performance indicator has been introduced in the Force to notify management of the status of vacancy aging in order to improve the efficiency of management in this regard. The Force also considered utilizing the MATRIX application to manage the staffing table by automatically notifying key personnel once a post has been vacant for longer than a predetermined date with follow-up reminders The Board observed that at UNIFIL there was still a gap between the actual lead time and targeted time of 120 days set by the Secretary-General in his report (A/55/253) (para. 126). The Board recommends that the Department of Field Support: (a) require missions to fully justify and document the non-use of the recruitment roster; and (b) take measures to keep the roster database up to date (para. 128) With the establishment of the field central review bodies for field missions, the lead time for recruitment has been reduced significantly, especially with regard to international recruitment. Another factor that contributed in the reduction of the vacancy rates was the delegation of authority to the Force for recruitment up to the D-1 level. The full implementation of the roster-based system, with rosters in all occupational groups filled with suitable candidates at all times, will considerably shorten selection times. In filling the vacancies, priority is given to available candidates cleared by the field central review bodies, which has helped in reducing the lead time, as the interviews in the Force would be held only for the occupational groups where there are no available rosters. UNIFIL liaises regularly with United Nations Headquarters and the secretariat of the Field Central Review Board in order to populate the rosters of qualified candidates, with due regard to gender and geographical balance, for all occupational groups. As communicated earlier to the Board, UNIFIL has amalgamated the current process for national staff recruitment by creating rosters for different occupational groups and building rosters of pre-cleared candidates who have gone through a competitive selection process (against a vacancy announcement) and have been cleared by the local subsidiary panel. It should be noted that the indicator related to recruitment lead time was removed from the human resources management strategy soon after its implementation in the summer of 2011; however, UNIFIL is endeavouring to onboard selected staff members in the shortest and most practical time possible. Recent recruitments to UNIFIL of candidates rostered have been with an average lead time of 80 days (A/66/286 (Part II)) UNIFIL's Aviation Safety Council did not always establish implementation target dates (see para. 19). UNIFIL has not fully developed and integrated the aviation operational risk management framework into its operations. It was noted that UNIFIL lacked finalized standard operating procedures; its implementation task group had not been formally established or had not been active; and there was a lack of comprehensive training on operational risk management and aviation safety management (para. 20) During the meeting of the UNIFIL Aviation Safety Council on 28 July 2011, issues of concern were transformed into action points for implementation, with estimated dates of completion, and assigned to a responsible person. This is done through an action item list, and it is being followed up through bimonthly meetings on the list as well as by the Aviation Safety Council. Additionally, action item list software has been developed and is being used The aviation emergency response plan, which has been revised based on lessons learned from the most recent live exercises, was promulgated on 14 April 2012. The finalized operational risk management standard operating procedures were promulgated on 12 July 2012. The Chief Aviation Officer organized operational risk management training for aviation staff in 2011, and aviation safety management system training for aviation staff in 2012 The Conduct and Discipline Team of UNIFIL had been functioning as the regional office covering UNLB, UNIFIL, UNDOF, UNFICYP, UNTSO and UNSCO since its inception in 2007. It has been recommended that UNIFIL draft regional-specific terms of references for the approval of the Department of Field Support (para. 73) The authority of the Conduct and Discipline Team with respect to other field missions in the region (UNTSO, UNDOF, UNFICYP, UNSCO and UNLB) was issued by the Under-Secretary-General of the Department of Field Support on 28 December 2010. Procedures for focal points with respect to reporting and training have also been established in standard operating procedures on reporting and training A. Terminology related to proposed changes in human resources The following terminology has been applied with respect to proposed changes in human resources (see section I of the present report): :: Post establishment. A new post is proposed to be established when additional resources are necessary and when it is not possible to redeploy resources from other offices or otherwise accommodate specific activities from within existing resources. :: Post reassignment. An approved post that was intended to cover a certain function is proposed to implement other priority mandated activities unrelated to the original function. While a post reassignment may involve a change of location or office, it does not change the category or level of the post. :: Post redeployment. An approved post is proposed to be redeployed to cover comparable or related functions in another office. :: Post reclassification. An approved post is proposed to be reclassified (upgraded or downgraded) when the duties and responsibilities of the post have changed substantially. :: Post abolishment. An approved post is proposed to be abolished if it is no longer needed to implement the activities for which it was approved or to implement other priority mandated activities within the mission. :: Post conversion. Two possible options for post conversion are as follows:  Conversion of general temporary assistance positions to posts: approved positions financed under general temporary assistance are proposed for conversion to posts if the functions being performed are of a continuing nature.  Conversion of international staff posts to national staff posts: approved international staff posts are proposed for conversion to national staff posts. B. Terminology related to variance analysis Section III of the present report indicates the single largest contributing factor of each resource variance according to specific standard options encompassed in the four standard categories listed below: :: Mandate: variances caused by changes in the scale or scope of the mandate, or changes in the expected accomplishments as driven by the mandate :: External: variances caused by parties or situations external to the United Nations :: Cost parameters: variances caused by United Nations regulations, rules and policies :: Management: variances caused by management actions to achieve planned results more effectively (e.g. by reprioritizing or adding certain outputs) or efficiently (e.g. by taking measures to reduce personnel or operational inputs while maintaining the same level of outputs) and/or from performance-related issues (e.g. by having underestimated the costs or quantities of inputs required to produce a certain level of outputs, or by delayed recruitment) Annex II Organization chartsa A. Operations 