%%%AIRSPACE|CYPRUS|AIRCRAFT|TURKEY|CYPRUS QUESTION|

General Assembly Sixty-seventh session Agenda item 43 Question of Cyprus Security Council Sixty-eighth year Letter dated 7 March 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 7 March 2013 addressed to you by Mr. Mehmet Dânâ, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I would be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly under agenda item 43, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Y. Halit Çevik Ambassador Permanent Representative Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to refer to the letters dated 28 February 2013 and 4 March 2013 addressed to you by the Greek Cypriot representative in New York and circulated as documents of the General Assembly and of the Security Council (A/67/773-S/2013/127 and A/67/779-S/2013/135), which yet again contain well-known allegations of violation of "international air traffic regulations and the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus" and to bring to your kind attention the following. In response to such pretentious claims, I wish, once again, to reiterate that flights inside the sovereign airspace of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus take place with the full permission and knowledge of the relevant authorities of the State, over which the Greek Cypriot administration in South Cyprus has no jurisdiction or right of say whatsoever. It must be stated that assertions of so-called abuses of air traffic regulations are invalid, as the civil aviation authority of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is the only competent authority to provide air traffic and aeronautical information services within its own national airspace. As noted in our previous letters, such assertions are based on the false and illegal claim that the sovereignty of Greek Cypriot administration extends over the whole island, including the territory and national airspace of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. This pretentious contention by the Greek Cypriot side ignores the present realities on the ground, namely, the existence of two independent, self-governing States on the island of Cyprus, each exercising sovereignty and jurisdiction within its respective territory. Continuous attempts by the Greek Cypriot side, through often-repeated false claims, to confer legitimacy upon an illegal administration are futile since the Turkish Cypriot people will never give in to their unjust demands. What would indeed be conducive to a better atmosphere on the island would be for the Greek Cypriot side to stop misappropriating for itself the rights and responsibilities it does not legally have, and to cease its hostile and derogatory acts against the Turkish Cypriot people. Moreover, the Greek Cypriot administration should also be reminded that its counterpart is, and has always been, the Turkish Cypriot side, not Turkey, and that its insistent denial of the Turkish Cypriot rights in the North of the island does not bode well for the prospects of finding a lasting settlement of the Cyprus conflict in line with the established United Nations parameters, namely, a new partnership on the basis of the political equality of the two peoples of the island and within the framework of a bizonal, bicommunal federation with two Constituent States of equal status. Availing myself of this opportunity, I would like to put on record, once again, that the Turkish Cypriot side is ready for the commencement of the full-fledged negotiations between the two leaders within the context of a result-oriented process. It is our considered view that if our sincere and constructive approach is reciprocated by the Greek Cypriot side, long-overdue settlement of the Cyprus problem is achievable in the shortest possible time. In the wake of the elections in Southern Cyprus, we hope that the new Greek Cypriot leadership will show the necessary political will for a fair and durable settlement in Cyprus. I should be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 43, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Mehmet Dânâ Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 