%%%IMPUNITY|SECURITY SECTOR REFORM|CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION|CENTRAL AMERICA|

Sixty-seventh session Agenda item 42 The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development Letter dated 20 March 2013 from the Secretary-General to the President of the General Assembly I have the honour to write with regard to agenda item 42, "The situation in Central America: progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and development", which, in accordance with decision 60/508, remains on the agenda for consideration upon notification by a Member State. The General Assembly, in its resolution 65/181 on the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala, requested that I periodically keep it apprised of the work of the Commission and the implementation of the resolution. Pursuant to that provision, I wish to inform the Assembly about developments concerning the Commission. The present letter updates the information contained in my letters to the President of the Assembly dated 10 December 2010 (A/65/618) and 10 November 2011 (A/66/567). In 2006, the Government of Guatemala and the United Nations signed an agreement aimed at dismantling clandestine groups and illegal security forces that contributed to the perpetuation of impunity in Guatemala. The agreement was ratified by the Guatemalan Congress in August 2007. The key goal of the Commission is to support, strengthen and assist Guatemalan State institutions responsible for investigating and prosecuting crimes allegedly committed by illegal security forces and clandestine security organizations. It seeks to achieve this goal through: (a) Identification of illegal security groups and clandestine security structures; (b) Assistance to the State in dismantling such groups and structures; (c) Promotion of investigations, criminal prosecutions and the punishment of crimes committed by such groups and structures; (d) Recommendations to the State concerning public policies for eradicating and preventing the re-emergence of such groups and structures. To fulfil the tasks outlined above, the Commission investigates and helps to prosecute criminal cases within the Guatemalan national justice system, being able to join criminal proceedings under Guatemalan law as a complementary prosecutor (querellante adhesivo). The Commission also has the power to file criminal and/or administrative complaints with relevant authorities against civil servants who contribute to impunity by interfering with the administration of justice. The procedural and substantive activities derived from the initiatives of the Commission remain primarily the responsibility of the State of Guatemala. The Commission's mandate was renewed through exchanges of letters between the Government of Guatemala and the Secretariat in 2009 and 2011, thereby extending the operation of the Commission for two-year periods. On 30 November 2012, the President of Guatemala, Otto Fernando Pérez Molina, wrote to me proposing that the Commission's mandate, which was set to expire on 3 September 2013, be extended for an additional two years, until 3 September 2015. In a letter dated 15 January 2013, I responded positively to the President's proposal. The President's letter and my response constitute an agreement on the mandate's extension during what is expected to be the Commission's final period of operation. The Commission enjoys the broad support of its Guatemalan institutional counterparts. On 6 September 2012, the Secretariat hosted an information meeting with countries supporting the work of the Commission. The meeting was organized to allow the Commission to explain its workplan, which had been developed in close cooperation with its institutional counterparts in Guatemala. The Guatemalan delegation to the meeting, which was led by the country's Vice-President, Ingrid Roxana Baldetti Elías, was represented at the senior level of the three branches of the Government. The delegation included the President of Congress, the President of the Supreme Court of Justice, the Minister of the Interior, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Attorney General. The authorities underscored their commitment to strengthening the rule of law in Guatemala in collaboration with the Commission. The Vice-President verbally conveyed her Government's call for the extension of the Commission's mandate and requested continued international support for its work. The Minister of the Interior, the Attorney General, the President of the Supreme Court and the President of Congress, key institutional partners in the fight against impunity, emphasized their close collaboration with the Commission. The Attorney General, in particular, underscored that the Office of the Public Prosecutor had seen major improvements in its work, become more professional and developed better investigation techniques. Specific signs of progress included the establishment of security and financial analysis units, as well as a functioning witness protection programme developed, in large measure, with the assistance of the Commission. In recent years, the Commission has developed a productive working relationship with the Office of the Public Prosecutor, a key national counterpart. The appointment of the current Attorney General in December 2010 contributed to reinforcing a collaborative approach that has begun to bear fruit. Under its present leadership, the Office of the Public Prosecutor has demonstrated practical results in the investigation and criminal prosecution of grave crimes in relation to both cases of drug trafficking, electoral violence and organized crime and major human rights violations. The Commission has been working productively with the Ministry of the Interior of Guatemala, which has embarked on the important task of creating a new Investigative Police General Directorate, which will play a central role in supporting the investigation of crimes. The Commission has been requested to assist the Ministry with the development of the Directorate, which is expected to constitute an important task for the Commission during the extended mandate. With regard to the judiciary, the Commission has engaged in a dialogue with the Supreme Court of Justice with a view to assisting with the improvement of judicial performance and has sought to identify practices that have impeded the advancement of justice. On 28 November 2012, it published a thematic report on the judiciary detailing alleged irregularities in judicial proceedings. In accordance with its strategic plan for 2011-2013, the Commission is currently giving priority to ongoing investigations and prosecutions and to institutional strengthening activities with a view to enhancing national capacities. The Commission's institutional strengthening activities focus on: (a) Support for specialized prosecutors; (b) Creation of an international relations office in the Office of the Public Prosecutor; (c) Strengthening of the national Office for the Protection of Victims and Witnesses; (d) Strengthening of the Analysis Unit of the Office of the Public Prosecutor; (e) Creation of a special police unit to handle criminal investigations; (f) Strengthening of the Special Methods of Investigation Unit, comprising staff from the National Civilian Police and the Office of the Public Prosecutor; (g) Creation of a police information platform. During the period ahead, the Commission intends to redouble its efforts to promote institutional and legal reforms so as to strengthen the ability of Guatemalan institutions to fight against crime and impunity and to ensure that the progress made in the work of the Office of the Public Prosecutor lasts. The Commission is currently in the process of preparing a strategic workplan for the 2014-2015 period in collaboration with Guatemalan institutional counterparts. The Commission is currently staffed by 162 national and international staff representing 21 nationalities, including Guatemala. Not counting staff in security functions, 60 per cent of the staff of the Commission are men and 40 per cent are women. The Commission is headed by Francisco Javier Dall'Anese Ruíz (Costa Rica) and is composed of five units: the Office of the Commissioner, the Investigation and Litigation Unit, the Information and Analysis Unit, the Administration Unit and the Safety and Security Unit. It has an annual budget of $16 million for 2013. From its establishment to 2012, the Commission received 2,361 requests to investigate, of which 289 were active investigations. In 21 of those investigations, the Commission became a complementary prosecutor, which, under Guatemalan law, permits it to participate in judicial proceedings as an independent prosecutor alongside the Office of the Public Prosecutor. In 2012, verdicts were issued in 17 emblematic cases in which the Commission was involved. Analyses of national legislation on criminal and security matters undertaken by the Commission have allowed the identification of norms that hinder the functioning of the justice system. As a result, in 2008 the Commission presented a first package of reforms containing six proposals to modify and reform laws. In 2009, it presented a second package containing nine proposals. Of the 15 individual proposals for legislative reform put forward by the Commission, only 4 have been adopted. The Secretariat backs the important efforts of the Commission to strengthen the rule of law in Guatemala. At United Nations Headquarters, as well as in the field, there is strong collaboration with the Commission. The United Nations is also supporting efforts to guarantee human rights and strengthen the security and justice systems in Guatemala through a $10 million contribution from the Peacebuilding Fund. National institutions, United Nations agencies and programmes, the Commission and civil society organizations have designed projects aimed at strengthening institutional capacity and reinforcing the Guatemalan justice and security sectors. The Commission continues to face challenges in the completion of its mandated tasks. Its investigations have touched upon powerful interests, including within Guatemalan justice institutions. It continues to require strong backing as it seeks to finalize investigations, transfer knowledge and practice to Guatemalan institutions and promote the adoption of a legal framework that enables a more effective fight against impunity. The Commission has been instrumental in promoting the notion that professional investigations and prosecutions can be effective and deliver justice in Guatemala. I am reassured by the explicit commitment of the State of Guatemala to working closely with the Commission in the fight against impunity. Just as the commitment of national authorities and institutional counterparts is essential if the Commission's objectives are to be met, so too is the ability of the Commission to operate effectively and with adequate resources. The Secretariat is grateful for the financial, in-kind and political support that Member States have provided to the Commission and hopes that the Commission will be able to count on generous international support for the completion of its mandate. (Signed) BAN Ki-moon 