%%%AIRSPACE|TERRITORIAL SEA|LEBANON|AIRCRAFT|ISRAEL|MIDDLE EAST SITUATION|

General Assembly Sixty-seventh session Agenda item 36 The situation in the Middle East Security Council Sixty-eighth year Identical letters dated 14 August 2013 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government, I transmit herewith a statistical summary of Israeli violations of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) committed in June 2013 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex issued as an official document of the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly, under agenda item 36, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Caroline Ziade Chargé d'affaires a.i. Land violations Date Time Nature of violation 1 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol comprising two Hummer vehicles, a Land Rover and a Kaminkar moved from the Ghajar bridge to the area opposite the Wazzani observation point, where 20 soldiers stepped out, opened the gate and crossed the technical fence to the area opposite the Wazzani Fort resort. At 0920 hours, the patrol headed back to the Ghajar bridge position. An Israeli enemy patrol comprising three Hummer vehicles moved from the Ghajar bridge position to the area opposite the Wazzani observation point, where two soldiers stepped out, opened the gate and crossed the technical fence to the area opposite the Wazzani Fort resort. At 2300 hours, the patrol returned to the Ghajar bridge position. 2 June 2013 A member of an Israeli enemy patrol opposite point B83 (Kafr Killa) trained his weapon on the driver of a vehicle that happened to be passing on the Lebanese side. 3 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol comprising four Hummer vehicles, three Land Rover vehicles and a civilian car moved from the Ghajar bridge position to the area opposite the Lebanese Army observation point of Wazzani, where 16 soldiers stepped out and opened the gate. Eight of them crossed the technical fence to the area opposite the Wazzani Fort resort and measured the dimensions of the area. At 1315 hours, the patrol returned into occupied territory. An Israeli enemy patrol comprising a Hummer vehicle moved from a position east of Maysat to the area opposite the Lebanese Army observation point of Wazzani, where five soldiers stepped out and opened the gate. Three of them crossed the technical fence by some 40 metres, reaching a point opposite the Wazzani Fort resort. At 1635 hours, the patrol left for the Ghajar bridge position. 4 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol comprising three Merkava tanks moved to the area opposite the Lebanese Army observation point of Wazzani, where five soldiers stepped out and opened the gate. Three of the soldiers and two of the tanks crossed the technical fence by some 40 metres. The third tank took up a position overlooking the Wazzani Fort resort. An Israeli enemy Merkava tank trained its cannon on the Lebanese Army position of Markaba. 5 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol comprising two Hummer vehicles and three Land Rover vehicles moved into the area opposite the Lebanese Army observation point of Wazzani, where three soldiers stepped out, opened the gate, crossed the technical fence and approached the riverbank. 8 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol comprising a Hummer and five Land Rover vehicles, one of them equipped with a surveillance camera, drove up to the gate opposite the Lebanese Army observation point of Wazzani, where 20 soldiers stepped out, opened the gate and crossed the technical fence by some 50 metres. 10 June 2013 An Israeli enemy Merkava tank crossed the technical fence opposite the Wazzani resorts, positioning itself behind the berm, followed by four trucks, a Falasha construction machine and a roller. Some workers paved the road that the Israeli enemy had recently damaged, accompanied by a hostile patrol comprising three Hummer vehicles and three Land Rover vehicles. At 1600 hours, work stopped and they left the site. 11 June 2013 An Israeli enemy foot patrol comprising 11 soldiers entered the Wazzani area opposite the Lebanese Army observation point, where its members opened the gate and crossed the technical fence into the work site in the above-mentioned area. 12 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol comprising nine soldiers accompanied by a police dog in the area opposite the town of Abbasiyah crossed the technical fence by some 80 metres within the territory with regard to which Lebanon maintains a claim. 13 June 2013 Powerful explosions and bursts of medium machine-gun fire were heard within the occupied Shab`a Farms. 14 June 2013 Two Israeli enemy Merkava tanks positioned themselves behind the berm opposite the Lebanese Army observation point in the Wazzani area, followed by another patrol comprising two Hummer vehicles and a Defender, at which point six soldiers stepped out and crossed the technical fence onto the road that the enemy had previously repaired. At 0945 hours, the Merkava tank crossed the technical fence and positioned itself on the hill opposite the observation point. Bursts of medium machine-gun fire were heard near the Radar position within the occupied Shab`a Farms. While Lebanese citizen Fadi Rabah Awadah was fishing within Lebanese territory on the west bank of the Wazzani river, some 400 metres from the Wazzani Fort in the direction of the Roman bridge, nine Israeli enemy soldiers lowered themselves into the river, crossed the withdrawal line and fired at him without hitting him. They took the fishing equipment that was with him. 16 June 2013 Several explosions were heard within the occupied Shab`a Farms while a helicopter flew overhead. 19 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol comprising a Merkava tank, two Hummer vehicles and a Land Rover moved into the area opposite the Lebanese Army observation point in the Wazzani area, where 15 soldiers stepped out of their vehicles and crossed the technical fence. The tank followed them, positioning itself behind the berm and training its cannon on Lebanese territory. The soldiers deployed along the length of the road that had recently been repaired. 20 June 2013 The Israeli enemy fired three flares over the Radar position within the occupied Shab`a Farms. 21 June 2013 Two Israeli enemy soldiers near the Hanita area within occupied Palestinian territory directed a searchlight towards the Lebanese Army position for approximately one minute. 22 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol comprising a Land Rover went into the Wazzani area opposite the Lebanese Army observation point, where two soldiers stepped out. The patrol was followed by a Merkava tank that crossed the technical fence and positioned itself behind one of the hills in the area. 24 June 2013 Two Israeli enemy Merkava tanks positioned themselves on the hill opposite a Lebanese Army position in Kafr Shuba and trained their cannons on Lebanese territory. Three members of an Israeli enemy patrol trained their weapons on Lebanese Army soldiers near point TP37 (Udaysah). The Israeli enemy fired three flares over the Radar position. Three explosions were heard within the occupied Shab`a Farms. 26 June 2013 An Israeli enemy patrol stopped at the separation wall opposite Kafr Killa and its members loaded their weapons in the direction of a Lebanese Army patrol. 27 June 2013 A group of Israeli enemy soldiers was seen departing from the area between Duhayrah and Alma al-Sha`b. The group had been positioned north of the Blue Line opposite 1-BP7, in violation of Lebanese sovereignty by a distance of some 50 metres. 29 June 2013 From the Labbunah-Jall al-Alam position, the Israeli enemy directed a searchlight towards Lebanese Army military equipment in Labbunah for approximately one minute. Sea violations 6 June 2013 An Israeli enemy launch directed a searchlight towards Lebanese territorial waters in the region of buoy No. 5 for 20 seconds. An Israeli enemy launch crossed the line of buoys by some 100 metres within Lebanese territorial waters north of buoy No. 6. The launch then returned to occupied Palestinian territorial waters south of the line of buoys. An Israeli enemy launch crossed the line of buoys by some 10 metres within Lebanese territorial waters next to buoy No. 2. The launch then returned to occupied Palestinian territorial waters south of the line of buoys. Three Israeli enemy launches on the open sea at the line of buoys opposite Ra's Naqurah installed two new buoys along the line of buoys beyond buoy No. 8. Air violations An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South, Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 1830 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South, Riyaq, Baalbek and Zahlah before leaving at 1440 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South, Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 2100 hours over Kafr Killa. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1100 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over the South and the Western Bekaa before leaving at 1710 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Aytarun. It circled over the South before leaving at 2120 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1635 hours over Kafr Killa. Two Israeli enemy helicopters were seen dropping approximately 20 heat balloons off Tyre. Two helicopters were seen over Kafra town, and two other helicopters were seen over the sea off Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over the South before leaving at 0720 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut and its suburbs before leaving at 1740 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1915 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Shikka. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1335 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy helicopter violated Lebanese airspace, circling over Lebanese territorial waters off Tyre. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over the South before leaving at 1500 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1800 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South and the Western Bekaa before leaving at 2015 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Beirut. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1345 hours over Rumaysh. A foreign object was seen circling above Shab`a town towards the Radar position in the occupied Shab`a Farms. A black and white appendage was attached to the lowest part of the object. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 1315 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1940 hours over Naqurah. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1315 hours over Alma Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1600 hours over Aytarun. 7 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1615 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Aytarun. It circled over the South before leaving at 1810 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1230 hours over the occupied Shab‛a Farms. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over the South before leaving at 1230 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1840 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. 9 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1400 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea west of Sidon. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1110 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1445 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut and the South before leaving at 1655 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and the South before leaving at 2120 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1630 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek, the South and Hirmil before leaving at 2110 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut and its suburbs and the South before leaving at 1840 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1720 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Aytarun. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek, Hirmil, Akkar and Tripoli before leaving at 1425 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1425 hours over Naqurah. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the occupied Shab‛a Farms. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1145 hours over the occupied Shab‛a Farms. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1220 hours over the sea off Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1640 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over the South, Riyaq, Baalbek and the South before leaving at 1750 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 2125 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Juniyah, Beirut and its suburbs and Jubayl (Byblos), then over Beirut and its suburbs again before leaving at 1310 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1220 hours over the sea off Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1805 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South, Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 1730 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1810 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over the South before leaving at 1835 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut and its suburbs and the South before leaving at 0610 hours on 14 June over Rumaysh. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 2150 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South, Beirut and its suburbs, Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 1830 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1230 hours over Alma 15 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa and heading north. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek, and Hirmil before leaving at 1620 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek, Hirmil and the South before leaving at 1410 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Aytarun. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1135 hours over Naqurah. 17 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over the South, Beirut and Dahiyah before leaving at 2350 hours over Naqurah. 18 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South, Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 2215 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1315 hours over Alma al-Sha`b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over the South before leaving at 1730 hours over Alma Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1355 hours over the sea west of Naqurah. Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace. They circled over Lebanese territorial waters off Tyre as far as Ra's Naqurah, releasing heat balloons. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha`b. It circled over the South before leaving at 2020 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled between Iqlim al-Kharrub and the South before leaving at 1405 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1700 hours over the sea west of Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut and its suburbs and the South before leaving at 1500 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 1530 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1300 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut and its suburbs and the South before leaving at 1815 hours on 22 June over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1920 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. 23 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 0920 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1215 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over the South before leaving at 1250 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Beirut, Juniyah, Jubayl, Beirut and Matn before leaving at 1440 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over the South before leaving at 1745 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1340 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 0255 hours on 25 June over Naqurah. 25 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 1730 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 2015 hours over Rumaysh. Four Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1130 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South and Beirut and its suburbs before leaving at 0030 hours on 26 June over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1840 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 1410 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1955 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1210 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 2040 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1600 hours over Alma An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 1330 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1055 hours over the sea off Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek, Hirmil and Akkar before leaving at 1340 hours over Kafr Killa. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over the South before leaving at 1215 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1400 hours over the sea off Tripoli in the direction of Turkey. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 2020 hours over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1620 hours over Alma Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1720 hours over Kafr Killa. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1920 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea west of Shikka. It circled over Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 0740 hours on 28 June over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea west of Shikka. It circled over the sea off Shikka before leaving at 0700 hours on 28 June over the sea west of Naqurah. 28 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Shikka. It circled over Baalbek and Naqurah before leaving at 1345 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1820 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1010 hours over Alma Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Shikka. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1130 hours over the sea off Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Shikka. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1335 hours on over the sea off Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 1905 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. It circled over Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 0710 hours on 29 June over Rumaysh. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1955 hours over Naqurah. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over the South before leaving at 1800 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Alma al-Sha‛b. It circled over Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 1400 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Riyaq and Baalbek before leaving at 2215 hours over Rumaysh. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 1320 hours on 30 June over Kafr Killa. 30 June 2013 An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Naqurah. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 2130 hours over Naqurah. Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Kafr Killa. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1455 hours over Alma Two Israeli enemy warplanes violated Lebanese airspace, entering over the sea off Naqurah. They circled over all regions of Lebanon before leaving at 1715 hours over Alma al-Sha‛b. An Israeli enemy reconnaissance aircraft violated Lebanese airspace, entering over Rumaysh. It circled over Riyaq, Baalbek and Hirmil before leaving at 0500 hours on 1 July over Naqurah. 