%%%SANCTIONS|CUBA|UNITED STATES|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|

Sixty-eighth session Item 40 of the provisional agenda* Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba * A/68/150. Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba Report of the Secretary-General Summary In its resolution 67/4, entitled "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba", the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the appropriate organs and agencies of the United Nations system, to prepare a report on the implementation of the resolution in the light of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law and to submit it to the Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. The present report reproduces the replies of Governments and bodies of the United Nations system to the request of the Secretary-General for information on the matter. Page Introduction Replies received from Governments Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belize Benin Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Botswana Brazil Brunei Darussalam Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chile China Colombia Comoros Congo Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Democratic People's Republic of Korea Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Ethiopia European Union Fiji Gabon Gambia Georgia Ghana Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Holy See Honduras India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Jamaica Japan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Liechtenstein Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Norway Oman Pakistan Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Qatar Russian Federation Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sri Lanka State of Palestine Sudan Suriname Swaziland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Thailand The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Republic of Tanzania Uruguay Vanuatu Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Replies received from organs and agencies of the United Nations system Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations International Atomic Energy Agency International Civil Aviation Organization International Fund for Agricultural Development International Labour Organization International Maritime Organization International Telecommunication Union Office of the Resident Coordinator of the United Nations system for operational activities for development, Cuba Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees United Nations Children's Fund United Nations Conference on Trade and Development United Nations Development Programme United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization United Nations Environment Programme United Nations Human Settlements Programme United Nations Industrial Development Organization United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime United Nations Population Fund Universal Postal Union World Food Programme World Health Organization/Pan American Health Organization World Intellectual Property Organization World Meteorological Organization World Tourism Organization World Trade Organization 1. In its resolution 67/4, entitled "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba", the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the appropriate organs and agencies of the United Nations system, to prepare a report on the implementation of the resolution in the light of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law and to submit it to the Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. 2. Pursuant to that request, in a note verbale dated 1 April 2013, the Secretary-General invited Governments and organs and agencies of the United Nations system to provide any information they might wish to contribute to the preparation of his report. A further note verbale was sent on 31 May 2013. 3. The present report reproduces the replies from Governments and organs and agencies of the United Nations that had been received as of 8 July 2013. Replies received after that date will be reproduced as addenda to the present report. II. Replies received from Governments [Original: French/Arabic] [31 May 2013] In the face of the continuation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo that has been imposed by the United States of America against Cuba for over 50 years, Algeria once again calls for an end to that unilateral act, which, in its view, is contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law. Algeria is deeply concerned about that situation, the dramatic impact of which on the economic and social development of the Cuban people, particularly in the context of the ongoing global economic and financial crisis, is worsening. Through the annual resolutions of the General Assembly, the international community has continued to reaffirm that Cuba, like all other States Members of the United Nations, has the right to freedom of trade and navigation and to the expansion of trade with its economic partners. Similarly, during its most recent summit, held in Teheran on 30 and 31 August 2012, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries reiterated its commitment to global peace and harmony and its rejection of extraterritorial measures aimed at strengthening the embargo imposed against Cuba. The South Summit, held in Doha in June 2005, also rejected the imposition of all forms of coercive economic measures, including unilateral sanctions against developing countries. Algeria, which is committed to the achievement of peace and cooperation among peoples, joins the international community in calling for an end to this unjust and anachronistic embargo on a United Nations Member State. [Original: French] [5 July 2013] The Government of the Principality of Andorra has not promulgated or applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble to General Assembly resolution 67/4. In that regard, the Government of the Principality of Andorra has always voted in favour of the above-mentioned resolution and reaffirms its commitment to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. [Original: English] [8 May 2013] The Republic of Angola expresses deep concern over the continuation of the economic, commercial and financial blockade against Cuba which has lasted half a century and which consequently has caused serious obstacles to the development and the fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of its people. The Republic of Angola recognizes the efforts of the Secretary-General to foster a unanimous feeling among all Member States regarding the need for an end to the economic, commercial and financial blockade against Cuba and strict compliance with the sublime objectives and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. The Republic of Angola reiterates its rejection of any unilateral action that imposes restrictions on another sovereign State to freely exercise its political, diplomatic, economic and commercial rights. Angola seeks to strengthen cooperative relations between States and reaffirms its respect for the principle of sovereign equality among nations. Thus, considering the socioeconomic damage and losses caused to the development of Cuban society, the Republic of Angola once again encourages the international community to reflect and redouble efforts to promote a constructive and transparent dialogue between the two countries, in order to achieve the end of the economic, commercial and financial blockade. The Republic of Angola reiterates its unconditional support for the recommendations made in resolution 67/4 and takes this opportunity to reaffirm the recognition of the dedication of the Secretary-General in this matter and encourages him to spare no effort until all the resolutions already adopted by the United Nations on this matter are effectively implemented. [29 May 2013] The Government of Antigua and Barbuda remains fully committed to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in particular the principles of sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation. The Government of Antigua and Barbuda expresses its concern at the continued promulgation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, despite the overwhelming support by Member States for resolution 67/4, previous resolutions against the embargo and other relevant international treaties. Further, in accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 67/4, the Government of Antigua and Barbuda continues to refrain from promulgating and applying laws and measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of the aforementioned resolution, in conformity with its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and international law, which, inter alia, reaffirms the freedom of trade and navigation. [Original: English/Spanish] [30 May 2013] Argentina traditionally supports the elimination of unilateral measures, such as the embargo imposed against Cuba by the United States of America. Our country is fully committed to the Charter of the United Nations, international law and multilateralism. Argentine support for Cuba's demands is a key element of the two countries' close bilateral ties. Act No. 24871, enacted on 5 September 1997, currently in force in Argentina, establishes the legislative framework governing the scope of application of foreign legislation within the national territory. Article 1 of that Act provides that foreign legislation which, by imposing an economic embargo or restricting investment in a given country, purports to have extraterritorial legal effects in order to bring about a change of Government in a country or to affect its right to self-determination shall be absolutely inapplicable and devoid of legal effects. The United States embargo against Cuba is regulated by federal legislation, particularly the Torricelli Act (Cuban Democracy Act) of October 1992 and the Helms-Burton Act (Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act) of March 1996. The Government of the Argentine Republic has fully implemented the provisions of General Assembly resolution 67/4, adopted on 13 November 2012, and of previous General Assembly resolutions concerning the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba. Since then, there have been no instances that could be considered violations of the aforementioned instrument. A draft declaration, currently under consideration in the Argentine Congress, will welcome the adoption of the General Assembly resolution condemning the economic and financial embargo imposed against the Republic of Cuba by the United States of America for the past 50 years and the firm and unanimous position on that issue that has been adopted by the countries of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC). In addition, with regard to multilateral forums such as CELAC, the dialogue between CELAC and the European Union and the Ibero-American Summit, the following measures have been taken in the spirit of compliance with General Assembly resolution 67/4: At the First Summit of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and the European Union, held in Santiago, Chile, on 27 and 28 January 2013, a special communiqué on the necessity of ending the United States economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba was issued. Paragraph 6 of the Santiago Declaration, adopted at the First Summit of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and the European Union, held in Santiago, Chile on 26 and 27 January 2013, expressed support for General Assembly resolution 67/4 and condemned the embargo: "We firmly reject all coercive measures of unilateral character with extraterritorial effect that are contrary to international law and the commonly accepted rules of free trade. We agree that this type of practice poses a serious threat to multilateralism. In this context, and with reference to resolution 67/4, we reaffirm our well-known positions on the application of the extra-territorial provisions of the Helms-Burton Act". At the twenty-second Ibero-American Summit of Heads of State and Government, held in Cadiz, Spain, on 16 and 17 November 2012, a special communiqué on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the Government of the United States of America against Cuba, including the application of the so-called Helms-Burton Act, was issued. Similarly, paragraph 28 of the Agreements section of the Declaration adopted at the sixteenth Ibero-American Conference of Ministers responsible for Youth on the theme of youth, sustainable development and global governance, held in Brasilia from 29 November to 1 December 2012, expressed support for international community's call for condemnation of the policy of economic, commercial and financial embargo to which the Republic of Cuba has been subject for over 50 years and said that it had an impact on and hindered the proper development of public policy on youth aimed at improving young peoples' living conditions and opportunities. Lastly, it should be noted that at the first meeting of the Political Dialogue and Cooperation Mechanism between the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) and the Republic of Cuba, held in Brasilia on 29 October 2012, the question of the United States embargo against Cuba was discussed and its increasingly adverse effects on the Cuban population were highlighted. [20 May 2013] The national legislation of Armenia does not promulgate or apply any laws or decrees or regulations, referred to in General Assembly resolution 67/4, which can have a devastating influence on the economic and social development of Cuba. The Government of the Republic of Armenia has on a number of occasions expressed its negative position on the policy of economic blockades and closed borders, being itself the subject of a continuing blockade by Turkey and Azerbaijan. The Government of Australia reaffirms its position in support of General Assembly resolution 67/4. Since 1996, the Government of Australia has consistently supported General Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the trade embargo on Cuba. Australia has no trade or economic legislation or measures which restrict or discourage trade or investment to or from Cuba. [27 June 2013] The Republic of Azerbaijan firmly upholds the norms and principles of international law in its foreign policy. The Republic of Azerbaijan enjoys friendly diplomatic, economic and trade relations with the Republic of Cuba. Azerbaijan has not promulgated or applied laws or measures against Cuba that would prohibit economic, trade or financial relations between Azerbaijan and Cuba. Eight cooperation agreements currently exist between Azerbaijan and Cuba. The Republic of Azerbaijan will continue to undertake appropriate measures to strengthen cooperation and develop friendly relations with the Republic of Cuba. The Commonwealth of the Bahamas enjoys normal diplomatic and trade relations with the Republic of Cuba. The Bahamas has not promulgated or applied laws or measures against Cuba that would prohibit economic, commercial or financial relations between the Bahamas and the Republic of Cuba. In this context, the Bahamas recalls and affirms the position of regional and interregional bodies such as the Caribbean Community, the African, Caribbean and Pacific States and the Non-Aligned Movement. [Original: Arabic] [3 June 2013] The Kingdom of Bahrain voted in favour of General Assembly resolution 67/4 of 13 November 2012 on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. It did so in accordance with its obligations under the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which are based on cooperation among States, the constant endeavour to promote friendly relations and non intervention in the internal affairs of States. Acting on those premises, the Kingdom of Bahrain supported the resolution in its entirety. That principled position stems from its conviction that the Security Council is the international body responsible for taking decisions regarding the imposition of measures under Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter concerning the maintenance and restoration of international peace and security. [2 July 2013] The Government of Bangladesh has neither promulgated nor applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in General Assembly resolution 67/4. Bangladesh has consistently supported the aforementioned resolution in the Assembly and voted in its favour. [24 May 2013] The Government of Barbados has no laws which in any way restrict freedom of trade and navigation with and to Cuba. Barbados voted in favour of resolution 67/4 and has consistently voted in favour of previous resolutions on this matter, since it was first introduced in the General Assembly during the forty-sixth session in 1991. [Original: Russian] The Republic of Belarus unwaveringly condemns the use of unilateral economic measures to exert political and economic pressure on developing countries, regarding them as running counter to the basic principles of international law and the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and other international legal instruments. The Republic of Belarus supports the inalienable right of all States to define their own development models. Any unilateral attempts by certain States to change the domestic political system of other States, using military, political, economic or other forms of pressure, are unacceptable. The unilateral embargo against the Republic of Cuba and the imposition by the United States of America of unilateral coercive measures on other countries not only act as a brake on the development of the Cuban economy, but also infringe the rights and legal interests of Cuban citizens and thereby create an unacceptable obstacle to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. The Republic of Belarus calls on the United States of America to conduct, in relation to the Republic of Cuba and the other countries to which it applies coercive measures, a policy based on unconditional respect for the universally accepted principles of international law, in particular the sovereign equality of States, noninterference in internal affairs and respect for the freedom of international trade and navigation. In this connection, the Republic of Belarus calls for a rapid end to the United States economic, commercial and financial embargo against the Republic of Cuba and other countries. The abolition of United States sanctions could provide a basis for the normalization of relations between the United States of America and the Republic of Cuba and other countries. Belarus regards as unacceptable the absence of a reaction to the unilateral coercive measures imposed by the United States of America and the European Union from the Secretary-General, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other United Nations representatives responsible for international action to uphold peace, security, human rights and sustainable development. The Republic of Belarus also supports the use of the Human Rights Council special procedures to report on human rights and other coercive measures and thus draw the attention of the international community to the unilateral coercive measures imposed on Cuba and other countries in violation of human rights. [11 April 2013] Belize reaffirms its absolute commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, including, in particular, the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, which also form fundamental principles of international law. Belize and Cuba maintain a constructive and mutually beneficial partnership which has yielded concrete benefits for all our peoples. Our policy of engagement is further enhanced through regional cooperation between the Caribbean community and Cuba. [30 April 2013] Benin firmly believes in dialogue as the only means of settling disputes and restoring trust among States. It fully supports the principles outlined in the Charter of the United Nations and considers that the challenges of modern times require States to work together for the public good in a spirit of solidarity. For this reason, the Government of the Republic of Benin has never adopted legislation restricting free trade with Cuba, fully supports General Assembly resolution 67/4 and considers that the unilateral measures imposed against Cuba should be lifted without conditions in order to allow the Cuban people to prosper and to better participate in the development of their country and in international cooperation. Like the majority of peace-loving and fair-minded countries, Benin enjoys friendly relations and effective cooperation with Cuba and seeks to strengthen those ties. It calls for the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba to be lifted promptly, as requested repeatedly by the majority of the United Nations Member States, in order to end the suffering of the Cuban people caused by the embargo and to enable the country to participate fully in the expansion of international trade and to build a better world for all peoples. [Original: Spanish] On paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 67/4 The Bolivian Government strongly rejects the application by some States or groups of States of unilateral laws, regulations, provisions and measures for the purpose of imposing an economic, commercial and financial embargo against any other State, as well as the use by any country of unilateral measures of coercion, discredit and disinformation against another country. In accordance with the principles of the sovereign equality of States, nonintervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, noted in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations and in General Assembly resolution 67/4, the Plurinational State of Bolivia again condemns in the strongest terms the embargo and economic war policies that the Government of the United States has imposed on the fraternal Republic of Cuba. It considers these actions to be a flagrant violation of international law, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and that of the Organization of American States, which affects all the peoples of the world and those of Latin America, particularly the Cuban people and the supporters who are doing what little they can to counter this injustice. The embargo imposed and economic war waged by the United States Government violates the principle of national sovereignty, particularly because they are being applied within the territory of another State. The extension by the Government of the United States of its territorial jurisdiction over legislative matters is contrary to every principle of international law, and particularly the principles of sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs of another State. The Cuban people are entitled to exercise their right to sovereignty, self-determination and development, established in the Charter of the United Nations and in various international instruments to which even the United States is a party. For over 20 years, Cuba has received significant international support in the highest political forum of the United Nations system, the General Assembly, for its opposition to the policy imposed by the United States Government, In 2012, 188 of the 193 Member States voted against this unjust trade embargo; thus, over the past 15 years, more than 90 per cent of countries have voted against it. This is convincing proof of the international community's almost unanimous rejection of this policy, which violates international law and calls that system itself into question by demonstrating that there are countries which attached great importance to the establishment of the United Nations but fail to respect the growing will of nearly all of its members. Given this situation, the Plurinational State of Bolivia joins in solidarity with and fully endorses the struggle that Cuba is waging on the international front and therefore expresses its support for General Assembly resolution 67/4, which reflects the international rejection of this type of unilateral measure, as well as its commitment to the Charter of the United Nations, international law and multilateralism. It also affirms its support for the principle of the equality of all States before the law in respect of their sovereignty and stresses that respect for this principle should take priority over any economic, political or other type of dispute. Relations between the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Cuba are currently better than at any time since the re-establishment of diplomatic relations between Bolivia and Cuba in 1983. That relationship places special emphasis on education and health services targeting the most disadvantaged groups of the Bolivian population, as evidenced by the significant increase in Cuban cooperation efforts in Bolivia since 2006. This cooperation is specifically technical in nature; there is no direct financial cooperation. Bolivia and Cuba maintain a relationship of cooperation and complementarity based on the principles of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America -- Peoples' Trade Agreement (ALBA-TCP). The Plurinational State of Bolivia acknowledges Cuba's effort to cooperate with the Bolivian people despite the significant harm to its economy caused by the embargo. This cooperation is clearly illustrated by some statistics: Cuba's medical brigade is currently serving in the nine departments of Bolivia, where it covers 79 of the 112 provinces (70.5 per cent) and provides services to 151 of the 337 municipalities (44.8 per cent); to date, 6,407,483 patients have been treated. During the seven years prior to May 2013, 54,047,109 free medical examinations were performed, 56,961 lives were saved and 632,097 eye operations were performed at no cost as part of "Operation Miracle", which has restored or improved the sight of Bolivian men and women regardless of their background or social status. This important ophthalmological treatment project has benefited not only the Bolivian people, but the people of neighbouring countries as well. Human resource training cooperation is pursued through the Scholarship Programme. There has been an unprecedented increase in the number of scholarships awarded to low-income Bolivian students of peasant or indigenous origin in rural areas under new projects initiated recently to supplement the existing cooperation. Consequently, there are currently 5,834 Bolivian scholarship-holders in Cuba in various subject areas; most of them are studying medicine, while the remaining 10 per cent are studying other subjects. Some of these scholarship-holders have now returned to Bolivia to complete their medical studies and find jobs in their own country. In addition, as at March 2012, 150,502 people had participated in the national post-literacy programme known as "I can continue", which is being conducted in all of Bolivia's 112 provinces and in 336 municipalities. The Plurinational State of Bolivia has unconditionally opposed the embargo against Cuba in the various international forums of which it is a member. In view of the foregoing, the Plurinational State of Bolivia reaffirms its continued support for the adoption of another resolution expressing the need to put an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, which will do much to consolidate and support the international call for the United States to move towards the definitive elimination of this unjust and illegal policy against the Cuban people. Accordingly, the Plurinational State of Bolivia firmly states that the United States embargo against Cuba must be ended unconditionally, unilaterally and immediately. On paragraph 3 The Government of the Plurinational State of Bolivia has not adopted any laws or measures that are contrary to the spirit of General Assembly resolution 67/4 and regrets that other States have resorted to this illegal, harmful and inhumane practice in violation of international law. On paragraph 4 The Plurinational State of Bolivia requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in accordance with this paragraph, to continue to keep Member States and the relevant bodies informed regarding the negative impact on Cuba of the policies and practices imposed by the Government of the United States of America under its economic, commercial and financial embargo against that sovereign country, which not only affects the sovereignty of the other States Members of the United Nations but calls into question the essence of the Charter of the United Nations, its principles and purposes. [24 April 2013] The Republic of Botswana has never, promulgated, applied or enforced any laws or measures of the kind referred to in General Assembly resolution 67/4 and does not intend to do so. As reflected by its vote on the above-cited resolution, Botswana is opposed to the continued adoption and application of such extraterritorial measures and in this regard, supports the immediate lifting of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. [7 June 2013] In accordance with resolutions 47/19, 48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10, 53/4, 54/21, 55/20, 56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12, 61/11, 62/3, 63/7, 64/6, 65/6, 66/6 and 67/4, Brazil has not promulgated or applied any law, regulation or measure with extraterritorial effects which could affect the sovereignty of other States and the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction, as well as the freedom of trade and navigation. Brazil's legal system does not recognize the validity of the application of measures with extraterritorial effects. Furthermore, Governments not complying with resolution 67/4 should urgently take further steps to eliminate discriminatory trade practices and bring to an end unilaterally declared economic, commercial and financial embargoes. The Brazilian Government is committed to diplomacy, to the peaceful settlement of disputes, to economic and trade cooperation and to the prevalence of the principles and purposes enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, as well as to respect for international law. The Brazilian Government not only opposes the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba, but has also developed a growing economic relationship with the country. This relationship is based on the belief that the proper way to support Cuba is through its integration into economic international flows. In her speech at the opening of the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly in September 2012, Her Excellency the President of Brazil, Dilma Rousseff, stated that: "Cuba has progressed in bringing its economic model up to date. To continue on this path, it needs the support of partners both near and far. Cooperation for Cuba's progress is, however, hampered by the economic embargo that has assailed its population for decades. The time has long since passed for us to put an end to this anachronism, which is condemned by the immense majority of members of the United Nations." Brazil and all Governments in Latin America and the Caribbean repudiate the blockade against Cuba, which seriously affects the Cuban people. That position was restated in a special communiqué of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), adopted at the summit of Heads of State and Government held in Santiago in January 2013. In accordance with resolution 67/4, Brazil considers that there is an urgent need to put an end to the adoption and implementation of unilateral measures. In addition to the adverse impacts they impose on the population of the country under sanctions, the extraterritorial nature of these measures is in clear contradiction with the basic principles of international law, as well as with the harmonious relations between peoples, which implies respect for sovereignty and freedom of trade and navigation. For fear of being sanctioned by the United States Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC), under the Department of the Treasury, banks in Europe and Latin America have blocked accounts and transactions with any reference to Cuba, even in those cases in which the United States financial system is not involved. As a result, this has shrunk the number of international providers which are willing to risk undertaking operations with private and corporate actors in Cuba, thus further aggravating the scarcity of products and services in the country. The inclusion of Cuba in the list of States sponsors of terrorism published by the State Department of the United States, which contributes to increasing this problem, has been promptly repudiated in a further CELAC special communiqué adopted in May 2013. Sanctions and embargoes harm the populations of countries involved, especially the poorest. Such measures have shown scant effects in achieving the results that would have justified their creation. A clear example of this was the $100,000 Brazilian contribution to the Cuban victims of Storm Sandy blocked by the American authorities in 2012. The transfer from the Banco do Brasil, Miami Agency, to the UBS Agency in Geneva still awaits authorization by OFAC. There is growing support at the United Nations for the lifting of the embargo, taking into account in particular its questionable character in relation to the principles of international law and the rules of the multilateral trade system. Intensifying economic relations with Cuba without any conditionality is the correct path that should be followed by all countries interested in supporting the development of the island. [12 June 2013] Brunei Darussalam reaffirms its support for all General Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the trade embargo on Cuba. Brunei Darussalam is generally against the unilateral use of sanctions on Member States, as it affects their economic and social development. Brunei Darussalam takes the view that such sanctions are contrary to international law and the Charter of the United Nations. [5 June 2013] Burkina Faso is a peace- and justice-loving country that places full faith in the principle of the sovereign equality of States, as called for in the Charter of the United Nations. With its constant faith in the virtue of dialogue, which it has always supported as a way to resolve disputes between States, Burkina Faso firmly believes that exchanges between States, whether economic, commercial or cultural, are likely to encourage the development of their people and help reconcile their differences. It remains convinced that, in an ever-globalizing world suffering from an international economic and financial recession, the continued imposition of economic, commercial and financial isolation on a State leads inevitably to its stagnation and thus is not the preferred option for the settlement of disputes. For this reason, Burkina Faso expresses concern at the continuation of the embargo, which is contrary to the basic norms of international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States. These unilateral measures, which violate the principles of the sovereignty of States and non-intervention and non-interference in their internal, affairs are also contrary to the guidelines of the World Trade Organization (WTO). For this reason, it once again calls for an end to the embargo imposed on Cuba by the United States of America in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the basic rules of public international law. It urges the two parties to focus on dialogue as a means to settle their disputes in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations. In accordance with its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and international law, which establish freedom of trade and navigation, Burkina Faso has not promulgated or applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble to General Assembly resolution 67/4. [28 May 2013] The position of the Government of Burundi has always been to oppose this embargo. [26 April 2013] The Royal Government of Cambodia reiterates its full support for the unconditional lifting of the sanctions that have been imposed unjustly by the United States of America against the Republic of Cuba. The continuation over four decades of the illegal embargo, which is in flagrant violation of international law and human rights, has caused enormous suffering and massive economic losses to the innocent people of Cuba. Therefore, the Royal Government of Cambodia, once again, demands an immediate removal of this unjustified embargo. The Royal Government of Cambodia wishes to call for full compliance and effective implementation of resolution 67/4. [23 May 2013] Cameroon is deeply committed to respecting the principles of the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of trade, which are enshrined in many international legal instruments. Pursuant to the provisions of General Assembly resolution 67/4 and of previous resolutions on the subject, and in accordance with the above-mentioned principles, Cameroon has never adopted laws or regulations intended to strengthen or expand the embargo against Cuba. Cameroon has always voted in favour of lifting the embargo and it maintains excellent relations of friendship and cooperation with Cuba. [13 May 2013] The Republic of Cape Verde, in accordance with the principles enshrined in the national constitution and in conformity with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, which promotes solidarity, cooperation and friendly relations among countries and nations, has never promulgated or applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of General Assembly resolution 67/4. [26 June 2013] True to its commitments and respect for international law, and in accordance with its fundamental legislation, which stipulates that the nation's concern must be to promote good-neighbourly relations with other States, the Central African Republic believes that peaceful coexistence is the foundation of international relations, underlying all other types of exchanges. Accordingly, it considers that the embargo against Cuba, which has lasted for more than 50 years, is contrary to the rules of international law and international humanitarian law. This embargo must be lifted to allow free circulation of persons and goods in the subregion. The Government of the Central African Republic will continue to stand behind the Cuban people until the embargo has been completely lifted. The economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba commenced in 1959 and has continued to this day. This embargo contravenes international law and principles, particularly those regarding the equality of States, non-interference in internal matters and the freedom of trade and navigation. That is why Chile supported resolution 67/4 and the previous resolutions on the same matter. We observe that the embargo has been transformed into a strict system of unilateral measures which has continued over time. In itself the embargo, as a unilateral measure, is a contradiction of the multilateralism, the openness and the dialogue promoted by the United Nations. The unilateral measures applied under the embargo imposed on Cuba are affecting many companies that are conducting business with Cuba in accordance with international law, including the norms established by the rules-based system of the World Trade Organization (WTO). We recall that at the CELAC summit held in Santiago on 28 January 2013, the member States issued a special communiqué on the need to put an end to the economic, trade and financial embargo imposed by the United States on Cuba, in which they reiterated their strongest condemnation of the application of laws and measures contrary to international law, including its extraterritorial effect. [Original: Chinese] [29 April 2013] For 21 consecutive years, the United Nations General Assembly has adopted, by an overwhelming majority, a resolution on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba, urging all countries, in compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international law, to repeal or invalidate any laws and measures that have extraterritorial effects affecting the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate rights and interests of entities and persons under their jurisdiction and the freedom of trade and navigation. Regrettably, however, over the years those resolutions have not been implemented effectively and the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed by the United States against Cuba has not been lifted. This is not only a serious violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, but also a source of enormous economic and financial losses for Cuba. It is an impediment to efforts by the Cuban people to eradicate poverty, promote their economic and social development and attain the Millennium Development Goals; it impairs the rights of the Cuban people to survival and development; and it adversely affects normal economic, commercial and financial relations between Cuba and other countries. At a time when the international community is severely challenged by a range of crises in the domains of finance, food and energy, together with the problems of climate change, the embargo and sanctions against Cuba are more unreasonable than ever before. China has always maintained that the international community should base the development of mutual relations on the purposes and principles enunciated in the Charter of the United Nations, should respect the right of all countries independently to choose their social system and path of development and should oppose the unilateral imposition on countries of military, political, economic or other sanctions. For its own part, China has always strictly observed and implemented the relevant General Assembly resolutions. Currently, China and Cuba are maintaining normal economic and trade relations and conducting personnel exchanges and the mutually beneficial and friendly cooperation in various areas continues to grow. This approach is both consistent with the aspirations of the two peoples and conducive to Cuba's economic and social development. In today's world, dialogue, communication and harmonious coexistence have become key elements of international relations and there is an irreversible trend towards communication and cooperation on an equal footing between all countries. When differences arise between countries, equal dialogue and friendly consultation are the best means of reaching a settlement. China hopes that the United States, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, will put an end as soon as possible to its blockade against Cuba and it also hopes that relations between the two countries will continue to improve, thus promoting stability and development in the entire Latin American and Caribbean region. [6 May 2013] The Government of the Republic of Colombia, in line with the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, reiterates that it has neither enacted nor applied any unilateral laws or measures against Cuba or any other Member State, in keeping with its policy of respect for international law and commitment to the principles of political independence, self-determination of peoples and non-intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations. Consequently, Colombia promotes the independent development of the internal policies of every nation and believes that any measure that undermines economic and commercial development and the well-being of the population should cease. Colombia believes that Member States must make progress in building cooperative and friendly relations on the basis of multilateralism and respect for the principle of sovereign equality and other provisions enshrined in Chapter I of the Charter of the United Nations. [9 April 2013] The Government of the Union of the Comoros reaffirms its obligation under the Charter of the United Nations and thus has not promulgated or applied any laws or regulations with extraterritorial effects which affect the sovereignty of other States. The Republic of the Congo maintains the position that it has always held. It considers the unilateral embargo intolerable and contrary to the Charter of the United Nations and to the principles of international cooperation. The Republic of the Congo therefore considers that the embargo must be lifted. Costa Rica, committed to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, has supported United Nations General Assembly resolution 67/4 and older versions concerning the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the Government of the United States of America, in particular through the Helms-Burton Act, against Cuba. Costa Rica deems this embargo to be a real obstacle to international trade This position has been part of the foreign policy of Costa Rica, which advocates the need to eliminate the unilateral and extraterritorial application of national measures by a State through the imposition of its own laws and legal system on third countries. Costa Rica is firmly convinced that differences between countries must be addressed only through dialogue and multilateral mechanisms, and it reiterates its total rejection of unilateral measures applied by any Member State of the United Nations against another. Costa Rica has reiterated on various occasions that any political, economic or military sanctions imposed on States should result from the decisions or recommendations of the Security Council or the General Assembly alone. At the national level, Costa Rica has not taken any actions under General Assembly resolution 67/4, since there are no actions to implement. However, at the international level, it has consistently stressed the need to lift the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba because it believes that, after so many decades, the Cuban people are the ones most severely affected. Costa Rica has defended the right of peoples to self-determination and deplores any measure that negatively affects the civilian population. Nevertheless, it recognizes the need for the Cuban authorities to make progress towards compliance with democratic standards and full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica and Cuba held a bilateral meeting in January 2013, with the aim of strengthening relations between the two countries, especially in such areas as training, science and technology, culture, ecotourism, education, environment, best practices and health. At the regional level as well, the two countries are in constant communication as called for by their membership in the Troika of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), which is presided by Cuba in 2013. The Ivorian Government has never adopted any economic or trade measures affecting the freedom of international trade. Faithful to its policy of openness and dialogue aimed at resolving disputes between individuals and between States, it has voted in favour of all previous resolutions on this question. Côte d'Ivoire will continue, within this framework, to work towards full implementation of the resolutions on the embargo, which has a continuing impact on Cuba and the Cuban people. The Republic of Croatia, guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, fully implements resolution 67/4 and has never promulgated or applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of the said resolution. [8 July 2013] The economic, commercial and financial embargo of the United States Government, in place since the beginning of the Cuban Revolution, remains, more than 50 years later and despite calls from the international community, at the core of United States policy against the small Caribbean island in its desire to crush the Revolution and restore its hegemony over Cuba. This is clearly reflected in the systematic tightening of the policy of economic strangulation; the strengthening of the existing laws and regulations that govern this policy; and the addition of new ones. Because of its stated purpose and the political, legal and administrative framework on which it is based, the embargo constitutes an act of genocide under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 1948 and an act of economic war in accordance with the Declaration concerning the laws of naval war, adopted by the Naval Conference of London in 1909. The embargo against Cuba is the most unjust, severe and long-lived system of unilateral sanctions ever applied to a country. As a result of the strict and aggressive application of the laws and regulations that epitomize the embargo, Cuba remains unable to freely export and import goods and services to or from the United States and cannot use the United States dollar in its international financial transactions or hold accounts in that currency with third-country banks. It is also denied access to loans from banks in the United States, their subsidiaries in third countries and international institutions such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank. One of the most prominent features of the embargo during the reporting period has been interference with Cuba's international financial transactions. Not only is the embargo the main barrier to the country's economic and social development; it is also the chief obstacle to the further expansion of Cuba's trade links with the world and has drastically curbed the international cooperation that it offers and receives. The economic damage to the Cuban people as a result of the United States economic, commercial and financial embargo as at April 2013, taking into account the depreciation of the dollar against the price of gold on the international market, amounted to $1,157,327,000,000. The economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba by the United States is illegal and immoral; it must end. Chapter 1 Continuation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba The repeated calls by the international community, including the growing number of opponents to this policy within the United States, for the full lifting of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba are still being ignored by the United States Government; it has decided to step up its efforts to strangle the island's economy, particularly through financial and monetary measures and measures with extraterritorial effects. President Barack Obama's decision, on 10 September 2012, to extend the Trading with the Enemy Act again shows the determination of the United States Government to preserve one of the key elements of the legal framework that underpins the embargo against Cuba. In addition, the sole purpose of Cuba's inclusion, once again, in the spurious list of State sponsors of terrorism is to justify the aggressive interference with its financial transactions and the intensification of the embargo. This step is also an attempt to serve the interests of an ever smaller anti-Cuban faction in the United States, which is seeking to prop up a policy that has no ethical or legal basis and is rejected by the vast majority of the United States population and of the Cuban immigrants living in the United States. Cuban territory has never been and will never be used to shelter terrorists or to organize, finance or carry out acts of terrorism against any other country in the world, including the United States. By contrast, Cuba has suffered the consequences of terrorist acts organized, financed and executed from the territory of the United States for decades with a human toll of 3,478 dead and 2,099 injured. The Cuban Government reiterates its position that the United States Government has no moral authority whatever to judge Cuba. 1.1 Main measures adopted by the United States Government and proposals that demonstrate the continuation of the embargo and intentions to intensify it Many and varied examples confirm the continuation of the embargo. According to an editorial published on 3 March 2013 by the Bloomberg business and financial agency, from 2000 to 2006, the United States Government opened 11,000 investigations into alleged violations of the sanctions regime against Cuba; the same report indicates that 7,000 investigations were opened by all other countries combined. Yet, as the United States authorities themselves admit, Cuba poses no threat to the national security of that country. These irrational attacks on Cuba may also be seen from the following examples: On 9 May 2013, the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) fined the American Steamship Owners Mutual Protection and Indemnity Association Inc., $348,000 for violations of the Cuban Assets Control Regulations and of sanctions regimes against other countries. OFAC alleged that the company had processed three claims involving Cuba for a total of $40,584. In April 2013, the British non-governmental organization (NGO) Cuba Solidarity Campaign (CSC) decided to purchase 100 copies of the book by Salim Lamrani, The Economic War against Cuba: A Historical and Legal Perspective on the U.S. Blockade, published in March 2013 by Monthly Review Press, a New York-based publishing house. However, the transaction between the bank of the NGO, the Co-operative, and the Chase Bank account of the publisher, Monthly Review Press, could not be carried out because OFAC seized the funds and demanded that CSC describe its relationship with Cuba. Rob Miller, director of CSC, expressed his amazement: "[...] extraterritorial blockade legislation [on the Cuba sanctions regime] is being used here to stop the sales [in the United Kingdom] of a book that itself exposes the breadth of the blockade against Cuba [...].Once again the ludicrousness of the US blockade is exposed in this case in trying to stop UK readers enjoying an excellent book published by a US publishing house". On 14 April 2013, the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board, which operates under the United States Patent and Trademark Office, rejected the request of the Cuban company Cubatabaco to cancel the General Cigar Company's registration of the Cohiba trademark. The decision was based entirely on the arguments of the United States courts, which confirmed that the Cuban Assets Control Regulations prevent recognition of the prestigious Cuban trademark. On 5 March 2013, OFAC fined the American company Eagle Global Logistics of Houston, Texas, now part of the British multinational CEVA Logistics, $139,000 for allowing its subsidiaries in other countries to provide freight services to and from Cuba. On 22 February 2013, OFAC fined the American subsidiary of the Chinese company, Tung Tai Group, based in San Jose, California, $43,875 for entering into contracts for the purchase and sale of Cuban scrap metal. On 25 July 2012, OFAC fined a United States citizen, Zachary Sanders, $6,500 for travelling to Cuba in 1998 without a licence from the United States Department of the Treasury. On 10 July 2012, OFAC announced that it had fined the Great Western Malting Company $1,347,750 for facilitating the sale of non-United States barley malt to Cuba by a foreign subsidiary between August 2006 and March 2009. On 29 June 2012, Congresswoman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (Republican-Florida) introduced bill H.R. 6067, the Western Hemisphere Security Cooperation Act, which, inter alia, would amend the Helms-Burton Act to prevent foreign investment in the Cuban oil industry. It would also authorize the President to impose sanctions on any country in the Western Hemisphere that engages in military cooperation with a State sponsor of terrorism. On 26 June 2012, the same Congresswoman introduced bill H.R. 6018, the "Foreign Relations Authorization Act", which would prohibit the granting of export licences for the transfer to Cuba and other countries of any commercial satellite or related component or technology on the Commerce Control List. 1.2 Extraterritorial application of the embargo The strengthening of the extraterritorial nature of the embargo has undoubtedly been the hallmark of President Obama's Administration; it has broadened the scope of the Torricelli and Helms-Burton Acts, which violate the norms enshrined in international public and private law while undermining the sovereignty of third countries and the rights of natural and legal persons not subject to United States law. Owing to its extraterritorial nature, the embargo neither has nor recognizes borders. The mechanisms in place to implement the policy contravene the principles that govern international economic, trade, monetary and financial relations, as well as numerous resolutions of the United Nations and other international organizations. They also violate the provisions of regional integration organizations and the laws of third countries, including those adopted after the Helms-Burton Act was enacted in 1996. Merchant vessels from third countries that enter Cuban ports are still affected by the extraterritoriality of the embargo. The interests of third-country companies that have any affiliation with American companies are similarly damaged, as are those of banking institutions that carry out financial transactions with Cuba, regardless of the currency used. The following continue to be held hostage by the extraterritoriality of the embargo in third countries: :: Companies that sell products originating in Cuba or containing any components of Cuban origin :: Companies that seek to sell goods or services to Cuba if more than 10 per cent of their technology consists of United States components, even if their owners are nationals of the exporting countries :: Banks that, in the exercise of their rights, seek to open dollar-denominated accounts for Cuban legal or natural persons or conduct financial transactions in dollars with Cuban entities or individuals :: Entrepreneurs who invest in or conduct business with Cuba There are countless recent examples of Cuban commercial transactions with third-country companies that are not under United States jurisdiction being halted or hindered by bans, threats and blackmail from Washington, as the following examples show: From 22 to 26 May 2013, the fourth General Assembly of the Latin American Council of Churches was held in Havana after being postponed for three months because the money to pay for the event ($101,000) had been frozen by the United States Department of the Treasury under the embargo laws. As a gesture of solidarity, European churches provided the necessary financing pending a decision on the Council's funds. On 16 April 2013, Evelyne Broennimann, spokeswoman for the Swiss bank Zürcher Kantonalbank, told Agence France-Presse that, starting on 1 May, all transactions with Cuba would be suspended as the bank must attest to its banking partners in the United States that its activities are in line with OFAC rules. OFAC can take action against banks, including, for example, by freezing their holdings. On 12 December 2012, OFAC announced that it had fined the Japanese Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ $8,571,634 for having processed financial transactions involving a group of countries, including Cuba, on the grounds that it had violated the economic sanctions imposed by the United States. On 11 October 2012, the Embassy of Cuba in Namibia received a letter from the company Aon Namibia, formerly Glenrand MIB, stating that the insurance contract for the embassy cars had been cancelled and that the annual premium had been withheld, in accordance with the regulations of the embargo, as a result of the acquisition of Glenrand MIB by the American company Aon. On 19 June 2012, the Botswana branch of the multinational insurance company Aon informed the Cuban Consulate in that country that, owing to "internal regulations", it could not continue to provide its services. When announcing the move, the Aon chief executive for personal accounts said that the decision had been taken by the parent company because of the embargo regulations. The Institute of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Surgery has been unable to repair physical therapy equipment made by the Schiller company because a Swiss bank feared potential reprisals if it accepted transfers from Cuba. For similar reasons, the Cuban Cardiology Society has been unable to pay its annual membership fee to the World Heart Foundation. For the past two years, the Cuban Book Institute has been unable to pay its membership fees to the Regional Centre for the Promotion of Books in Latin America and the Caribbean, which operates under the aegis of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, because banks refuse to accept transfers from Cuba. The main reason invoked is the United States sanctions regime. The Cuban Book Institute has also been unable to pay its dues to the International Standard Book Number System Agency. The Institute for Scientific and Technological Information cannot make purchases from the scientific publications company Swets as the firm claims that it would be subject to United States economic sanctions if it maintained normal working relations with the Cuban agency. 1.3 Impacts of the embargo on international cooperation, especially from multilateral organizations The international cooperation that the Cuban people offers and receives is not immune from the consequences of the embargo policy against Cuba. Many cooperation projects have been hampered by the aggressiveness of the United States authorities. The anti-Cuba policy is even seeking to cripple several activities undertaken as part of the South-South cooperation schemes implemented by Cuban specialists in various countries in sensitive areas, such as public health. In addition, the specialized agencies, funds and programmes and other United Nations system entities face serious obstacles when carrying out assistance programmes in the country in order to support national development priorities and policies and facilitate achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. In an unprecedented turn of events in the work of the office of the World Health Organization/Pan American Health Organization in Cuba, a Canadian bank withheld funds earmarked for the purchase of influenza vaccine to be used in the immunization programme for older persons because there was no OFAC licence. The decision by Zürcher Kantonalbank to cut all business relations with Cuba had an impact on the rights of Swiss citizens, who, for more than 20 years, have supported medical infrastructure and staff training projects in the areas of cancer treatment, paediatrics, palliative medicine, psychotherapy and prevention of HIV/AIDS in various parts of Cuba through the NGO MediCuba-Suisse, donating some SwF 300,000 per year. In addition, several Cuban specialists were unable to attend a workshop on quality standards for fresh fruit and vegetables, held prior to the seventeenth session of the Codex Alimentarius Commission on Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) in September 2012, because it was financed by the United States Department of Agriculture. Cuba was the only country in the region to be excluded from that regional exchange on good practices in that area. The South African company Mohlaleng Health was unable to transfer $148,500 to Cuba as payment of a 2012 invoice for 2,400 bottles of Vidatox (produced by the Cuban company Labiofam), fearing that the United States authorities would freeze the funds. The Cuban company Labiofam was subject to other sanctions under the embargo when a United States bank, during a routine transfer, appropriated funds for the construction of a biolarvicides plant to help eradicate malaria in the United Republic of Tanzania. The action was extraterritorial in nature since this was a project of the Tanzanian Government; the Cuban company was simply managing the funds used to build the plant. The Institute of Basic Research in Tropical Agriculture has been unable to start work on the project "Agrobiodiversity Conservation and Man and the Biosphere Reserves in Cuba: Bridging Managed and Natural Landscapes to achieve the Millennium Development Goals" owing to account-related delays caused by the embargo. The project, with a budget of $1.368 million, is being funded by the Global Environment Facility (based in Washington D.C.) and implemented by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the agency, Bioversity International. In addition, owing to the need to transfer funds in euros, approximately 8 per cent of the cooperation project's budget -- the equivalent of $109,456 -- is being lost. In 2007, the trinational Caribbean Biological Corridor (CBC) project, in which Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Haiti are involved, was established with the primary objective of providing assistance to Haiti. The project is funded by UNEP and the European Union and has a coordination office in the Dominican Republic. Owing to the restrictions imposed by the embargo, a Mitsubishi vehicle could not be purchased for the focal point of the trinational project in Cuba and Geographic Information System platforms patented in the United States could not be used, even by Cuban technicians working in the Dominican Republic. The unreasonableness of that policy is also shown by the fact that a United States bank froze the salary of one of the Cuban technicians in the trinational office, who was paid by UNEP, for one month. Cuban Institute of Oncology and Radiobiology specialists in charge of the Institute's tumour bank were prevented from attending a workshop on the LabWare LIMS system, held in Colombia for the Latin American and Caribbean Alliance under the auspices of the Tumour Bank Network during the first week of June 2013, under the pretext that the American company LabWare, sponsor of the event, could not do business with Cuba under the embargo. Chapter 2 Effects of the embargo on socially sensitive sectors 2.1 Impact on health and food Public health Between May 2012 and April 2013, according to extremely conservative estimates, the embargo had a monetary impact of approximately $39 million on public health in Cuba owing to the need to procure drugs, reagents, spare parts for medical diagnosis and treatment equipment, instruments and other supplies from distant markets and often through intermediaries, the combined effect of which increases costs in this sector. In this sector, the consequences of the embargo have a negative multiplier effect as they affect the cost of basic everyday products and make it difficult to purchase them; they also have an impact on basic social services, and therefore on the living conditions of the population. The following are some of the adverse effects on this sector: The company Servicios Médicos Cubanos S.A. was unable to realize its full potential for providing various forms of commercial health services. The restrictions imposed by the embargo caused a loss of approximately $9.6 million in earnings. The company Medicuba S.A. was significantly affected by an increase in budgetary costs and outlays in hard currency for the purchase of drugs, medical supplies, reagents for laboratory tests, disposable supplies and equipment and supplies used in stomatology, as well as other equipment and technologies, from distant markets. The additional expenditure was $367,800 in price increases and $11.3046 million in operational costs. Owing to the embargo, there are major impediments to the training of Cuban medical professionals in modern medical care techniques. At present, they are not being adequately trained in Philips brand positron emission tomography (PET) equipment, which is essential in diagnosing cancer. Most medical imaging equipment is controlled by or incorporates computers based on the 64-bit Windows XP operating system, which must be activated with Microsoft within 30 days of installation. Activation may be performed automatically online by connecting the computer directly to the Microsoft servers or manually by calling any Microsoft office worldwide. Neither of these two options is available to Cuba because there is no Microsoft office on the island and because, since automatic activation originates in Cuba, it is rejected by the company's server. The National Centre for Medical Genetics has been unable to purchase a genetic analyzer because they are produced exclusively by the United States companies such as Applied Biosystems, a subsidiary of Life Technologies. This equipment makes it possible to read DNA sequencing bases and is an essential tool for the study of genetic disorders such as hereditary breast cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. The Gastroenterology Institute has been unable to purchase bipolar radiofrequency equipment, used for the ablation of liver tumours, because it is produced in the United States and marketed by various companies in different geographic regions, such as Olympus Latin America Inc. The William Soler Hospital Paediatric Cardiology Centre is finding it extremely difficult to purchase nitrous oxide, a gas manufactured by companies in the United States and Europe. Because it cannot be obtained from the United States, it must be purchased from more distant sources, and therefore at a higher cost since it is a substance that requires special handling during transport. Nitrous oxide is used for patients with acute pulmonary hypertension or severe pulmonary distress. Its use is also necessary in treatment centres for heart and lung transplant patients and in cases of persistent foetal circulation among newborns and infants. The Institute for Nutrition and Food Hygiene is finding it difficult to detect aflatoxins (carcinogenic toxins contained in food contaminated by mould); testing was halted over a year ago because the only sources of B2, G1 and G2 aflatoxin testing products are in the United States. The Nephrology Institute is having problems owing to the unavailability of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) tissue typing kits from the United States company One Lambda, which does not allow them to be sold in Cuba. The technique makes it possible to determine the degree of immunological compatibility between receivers and donors in the National Kidney Transplant Programme so that compatible recipients can be selected. Some 1,500 patients are on the list of transplant recipients and thus require immunological typing. Cubans with HIV/AIDS cannot receive combination antiretroviral therapy, including the Gilead company's Tenofovir, nor can they obtain the antiviral drugs Kaletra, Nelfinavir, Ritonavir and Lopinavir-Ritonavir (Lopi-Rito) 80/20 mg for children, because the United States companies that manufacture them either do not respond to requests from Cuban companies or claim that they cannot trade with Cuba. Food This is, by its very nature, one of the most sensitive sectors affected by the embargo. Although agricultural products and food can be imported from the United States, normal trade relations between the two countries in this area are still prohibited. Purchases continue to be strictly regulated as part of a complex licensing mechanism that applies to travel by United States business representatives, the signing of contracts, transport and payments for transactions. In addition, OFAC reserves the right to cancel these licences without warning or explanation. Owing to the "country risk" concept, the Empresa Cubana Importadora de Alimentos (ALIMPORT) company has lost approximately $45 million because it has no direct access to funds from United States banks. In addition, owing to pressure on the international banking and credit system from the United States Government, third-party creditors raise annual financing costs from the normal 5 to 6 per cent to between 8 and 10 per cent. ALIMPORT has additional losses estimated at $20 million because it cannot use United States dollars in its transactions. Cuban banks are obliged to purchase repayment currencies; this results in significant losses owing to currency exchange risks and the high volatility of financial markets. Another $10 million is lost because transfers originating in Cuba require the involvement of several banks in order to reach the recipient. Because Cuban products cannot be exported to the United States market and restrictions prevent United States vessels from transporting cargo from Cuba to other destinations, ships sailing from the United States to Cuba return to United States ports without cargo; this raises the freight charges. In 2012, the additional cost was $28 million. Similarly, the exports of the Cuban company Caribex, especially lobster tails and sea prawns, could have been marketed in the United States. As a result of the embargo, such exports are subject to high tariffs on other markets (whereas they are tariff-free on the United States market), high transportation costs owing to the risks of long crossings for goods, and onerous exchange rates owing to the ban on use of the United States dollar in transactions. In addition, the fact that inputs for the Cuban food industry, such as, inter alia, packaging products and preservatives, fruit pulp and sweeteners, must be imported from distant markets has led to lost income of over US $3.4 million. 2.2 Education, culture and sports Ensuring that all Cubans enjoy the right to an education, culture and sports has been a priority of the Cuban Government since the Revolution. However, the embargo imposed against the country creates daily shortages that affect the development of these sectors. As a result of the implementation of this policy, Cuba still has no access to the United States market for the purchase of school supplies and basic materials and the exchange of scientific, cultural and sports-related information. Losses resulting from the need to import school supplies from distant suppliers have reduced Cuban schools' access to teaching materials that are essential to preschool, primary school and special education. The $816,000 in added costs, over and above the normal cost of purchasing school supplies, is the equivalent of 1,723 natural science teaching modules. As a result of these added costs, only 100 such modules could be imported. Of particular importance during the reporting period were the measures taken to prevent or restrict normal academic exchanges, travel by students and teachers, the flow of scientific information through various channels, proper dissemination of and remuneration for results achieved in the academic world and the acquisition of materials, media and instruments for teaching, research and scientific activity in general. United States schools and universities that wish to launch cooperation programmes may not be granted permits and are closely regulated. As a result, many opportunities are lost and potential cooperation activities between teachers and students from the two countries are hindered. The University of Holguín was unable to organize academic exchanges with the International Centre for Higher Education in Granada, Spain (CEGRI), a programme sponsored by the University of Alcalá (Madrid), because its students come from various countries in Europe and Asia and from the United States. The practice is for CEGRI to make the payments to the universities to which its students are sent. The exchange was cancelled when it was learned that the receiving university was Cuban. The University of Havana's computer equipment cannot be replaced because of the ban on the import of computers made by the world's major manufacturers, such as Hewlett Packard, Apple (Macintosh) and even companies associated with Japanese manufacturers, such as Toshiba and Sony (Vaio). This restriction is a consequence of the fact that the market is almost entirely dominated by processors produced by a United States company, Intel. Cuba is forced to purchase the equipment from third countries and to pay up to 30 per cent more than the original price. The implementation of five cooperation projects at the University of Guantánamo is being seriously compromised by restrictions on the import of laboratory supplies. These projects include: :: The "Local coastal management capacity-building in southern Cuba" project, implemented in cooperation with Canadian institutions. Delivery of a global positioning system (GPS) device was delayed because the Canadian counterpart was unable to purchase it in the United States once the equipment's end-user was known :: The "Genetic code improvement" project, implemented in cooperation with Belgian institutions; there were delays in the import of laboratory instruments because the contracted equipment contained components manufactured in the United States. The instruments had to be purchased on more distant markets at higher prices Members of two research teams in the University of Havana's Department of Animal and Human Biology (Invertebrates and Avian Ecology) were unable to receive financing from the Conservation Leadership Programme, which provides funding to young people from developing countries who are involved in natural resource protection and management in their countries, because the United States organizations Wildlife Conservation Society and Conservation International are among the Programme's donors. Other young Cubans have been accepted by the Programme in the past, when it was sponsored by the British NGOs British Petroleum, BirdLife International and Fauna & Flora International. The embargo is impeding or preventing direct, normal relations with international sports institutions and the participation of athletes in major sporting events in the United States and Cuba. Its extraterritorial nature also hinders access to external financing and the purchase of athletic equipment. The primary impacts on sports in Cuba include additional expenses in the amount of $1,070,000 for the import of equipment for sports such as, inter alia, baseball, athletics, softball, archery, platform diving, swimming, tennis, Basque pelota, sailing and polo. Cuba's National Baseball League is still waiting to receive the $2.3 million in prize money from the second and third World Baseball Classics (2009 and 2013); the funds cannot be transferred to Cuba because of the restrictions imposed by the embargo. On 26 June 2012, OFAC informed the travel agency Insight Cuba, which, since 2011, had been sponsoring the participation of Cuban runners in the Marabana Marathon, that the event did not qualify for the People-to-People Program; it prevented 300 United States athletes from competing in the popular sporting event. The meeting of the Central Board of the International Basketball Federation, scheduled to be held in Havana from 7 to 10 November 2012, had to be cancelled because the United States authorities refused to grant travel permits to Board members from the United States and Puerto Rico. The embargo is preventing the adequate promotion, dissemination and sale of Cuba's cultural talent, reducing prices for Cuban cultural products to almost nothing and limiting the international public's enjoyment of Cuban music. One of the primary reasons is that the market is controlled by the large transnational art and music corporations, most of which are either located in the United States or have a significant presence there. These large corporations dominate the circles for the international promotion and exhibition of artists. The impact of the embargo and the inability to interact normally with United States artistic circles cost Cuban institutions $12.1 million. In another example of the extraterritorial nature of the embargo, the Internet payment company PayPal restricted the account of a Spanish platform for the funding of Cuban cultural projects on 21 August 2012, claiming a violation of the OFAC regulations on Cuba. The Cuban Music Institute, through its subsidiaries, implemented 51 projects involving 365 musicians and technicians in the United States during the reporting period. However, the participants received only a daily subsistence allowance and were prohibited from marketing their performances. The Cuban Institute of Cinematographic Art and Industry has no direct access to the technology developed by the United States company Dolby owing to the restrictions imposed by the embargo. Because soundtracks must be added to Cuban films through the uncredited use of that technology, it is virtually impossible to market them internationally. This situation forces Cuban professionals to work with foreign co-producers in order to obtain the necessary permits. The wholesale digital music distribution service of the Cuban company Artex S.A., Soy Cubano, has no direct access to United States wholesale distributors, which have strong negotiating power on the world market. It has therefore been necessary to hire intermediaries with a consequent loss in profit margin. RTV Comercial, a company that exports Cuban radio and television programmes, is unable to sell its audiovisual products on the United States market or on other markets in the region owing to the influence of capital from the United States. As a result, Cuban products are priced far below others of their kind. Cuban programming costs $200 to $300 per hour, below the average for similar audiovisual products, which are sold on the international market for approximately $600 per hour. Chapter 3 Impact of the embargo on the external sector of the economy 3.1 Impact on foreign trade The high impact of foreign trade on access to advanced technology, the mobilization of foreign capital, lending, foreign investment promotion and international cooperation is a result of Cuba's insularity and of the state of its development. For this reason, the export sector of Cuba's economy is one of the main targets of the embargo against the country. During the reporting period, the impact of the embargo on foreign trade amounted to $3.92172579 billion, an increase of 10 per cent over the previous year. The highest cost is in income not earned for the export of goods and services, which accounts for 78 per cent of all losses. The cost of financing for so-called "country risk" rose by 76 per cent from the previous reporting year as a result of pressure on third countries from the United States authorities in order to prevent or hinder the provision of funds to Cuba. Freight and insurance expenditure increased by 24 per cent owing to the need to trade with distant markets. Losses in the tourism, energy, mining, agriculture and industry sectors remain significant. In light of the demand for such products on the United States market, the Cuban company Tabacuba could have made approximately $121.5 billion in that country from the sale of premium tobacco alone. Another example of the impact on Cuba's foreign trade is the joint venture Havana Club International, which lost approximately $73 billion because it was prohibited from selling its rum on the United States market. This estimate is based on the position of the company's rum on the international market, where sales to the United States account for almost 42 per cent of all sales of premium brands. 3.2 Impact on foreign investment In the last few years, Cuba's foreign investment has focused on projects of national interest with significant economic and social impact. The embargo imposed by the Government of the United States continues to hinder foreign investment in Cuba. The consequences of this policy include: :: Lack of access to the advanced technologies of United States companies :: Lack of access to United States markets for exports from Cuban companies :: Lack of access to funding from United States banks for the development of foreign direct investment projects in Cuba :: More expensive financial transactions owing to the need to use currencies other than the United States dollar; this increases costs and delays the investment process :: Increased freight and maritime transport costs :: Application of extraterritorial sanctions and pressure on foreign businesses, which hampers the establishment of joint ventures in Cuba In the oil sector, the embargo has resulted in more expensive contracts with drilling rig owners as no more than 10 per cent of the components of the technology used in the rigs can originate in the United States. This means that foreign operators require additional financial outlays, making the use of oil rigs in Cuban waters even more expensive. 3.3 Impact on the financial and banking sector As has been indicated, the United States Government's increased hostility to, persecution of and attacks on Cuba's banking and financial sector has worsened and was clearly the hallmark of this criminal policy during the current reporting period. Harassment of foreign financial and banking institutions aimed at restricting funds transfers to and from Cuban banks has increased, making it difficult for national banks to function properly and requiring them to incur additional financial costs. There is a growing tendency for foreign financial and banking institutions to limit their transactions with Cuba. Although it is difficult to measure the resulting impact, the main factors affecting the performance of Cuba's banking institutions can be identified. The general effects on the Cuban banking and financial system were the following: :: On 31 March 2013, Reuters ceased to provide banking and financial information to Cuban banks. This situation is causing many problems as it makes it difficult to receive financial news and market data (information on exchange and interest rates and the prices of raw materials) to be used for consultation on and follow-up to financial transactions involving domestic economic investments. :: The elimination of these services has also raised the cost of treasury operations as they must all be handled by telephone, making them more expensive and less secure. :: Currency transactions are at greater risk owing to exchange rate fluctuations since currencies other than the United States dollar must be used. :: Few foreign banks will conduct transactions with Cuba because their funds transfers and their involvement as an advising or negotiating bank for credit card transactions through Cuban banks are sometimes rejected. :: Access to the banking services of some foreign banks is restricted, raising the cost of transactions as they must be processed through third-country banks. :: Transactions from Latin American natural and legal persons cannot be received despite the significant number of Cuban communities in the region and the many families of Latin American students studying in Cuba who are obliged to send their family support payments through non-banking channels. :: Cuban companies cannot find foreign banks that correspond directly with Cuban banks, which would allow them to receive direct payment for their exports. :: Transfers received from individuals were a challenge owing to limitations on the banking services available. Increasingly, foreign banks are refusing to act as intermediaries in transactions with recipients in Cuba, a matter which affects both individual and corporate customers of Cuban banks. :: Bankers Almanac informed several Cuban banks that it would not renew their subscriptions to reference services beyond January 2013 as a result of its merger with a United States firm and of restrictions imposed by the United States Department of the Treasury. Consequently, it will be impossible to maintain work procedures which depend on consulting specific information required for payments or to provide updates to shareholders, correspondent banks and other banks; these steps are important in order to ensure that transactions are not sent through high-risk institutions as this could lead to the freezing of funds. Some of these impacts can be seen in the following examples: In 2012, a European banking institution notified a Cuban bank that its company policy prevented it from executing a payment order that it had received. It later informed the Cuban bank that it would no longer process transactions or transfer funds; only current transactions would be carried out. At the end of that year, there was no alternative but to close the current account with that bank in view of the restrictions on its use. Also in 2012, a Cuban bank had to restructure a transaction with a foreign bank. Since it is impossible to maintain accounts in United States dollars for Cuban clients' transactions conducted through the foreign banks involved in a specific loan, the debentures and reserve account initially denominated in United States dollars had to be converted into euros. Moreover, in this case the foreign exchange operation could only be carried out indirectly through a transaction using an account at another Cuban bank. The resulting cost is calculated at $667,268.76. In 2010, Cuba was notified that, as from March 2012, its banking system could no longer use the SWIFT NET 7.0 version of SWIFT Alliance Access/Entry (SAA), a product supplied by the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) for the management of inter-bank messaging through that network, because it contained technologies and components of United States origin. Previously, the annual costs associated with the use of SAA had been $141,722.50. In 2012, Gari Gold, the new product adopted to enable connection to SWIFT, remained in use, its installation payments were completed and the annual maintenance payment was made. This involved an additional loss of approximately $900,000. From 2013 on, the cost of maintaining the alternative system will increase by over $127,000. In mid-October 2012, a European banking institution informed a Cuban bank that, under the policy of the financial group to which it belonged, the Cuban bank's account would be closed on the 30th day of that month. Other Cuban banking entities with accounts at that bank, used primarily for the payment of bills via SWIFT, received a similar notice; as a result, the accounts were closed and the payments must be made through another European bank. In December 2012, OFAC fined the London-based Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) $375 million for conducting transactions with various countries, including Cuba. The bank ended its relations with Havin Bank, with which various Cuban entities in the United Kingdom work. In 2013, a Latin American bank rejected a payment in euros made through a European bank, explaining that it did not handle transactions with Cuba, the recipient of the transaction was not its client and the sum in question was large. The transaction was carried out through another bank in the region, which agreed to renew its relations with the Cuban bank via SWIFT from that point forward. This situation delayed the issuance of a new credit card. In order to purchase banknote-sorting machines for its Issuance and Securities Division, the Central Bank of Cuba contacted the English company De La Rue, which expressed interest in the project, sent its sales director to Cuba and developed a technical proposal. However, the company later announced that it could not sell the requested equipment since, as the manufacturing plant was located in the United States, the transaction could not be completed. Consequently, a German company had to be contacted in order to obtain the equipment; this entailed increases in the prices and transport costs. 3.4 Section 211 of the 1999 United States Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act and further patent- and trademark-related violations Theft of Cuban patents and trademarks persists as a result of implementation of Section 211 of the 1999 United States Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act and of other trademark violations, despite the ruling of the World Trade Organization's Dispute Settlement Body and the opposition to this policy of usurpation. The theft of the Havana Club trademark by the Bacardi company is now complete. On 30 November 2012, OFAC informed the United States Patent and Trademark Office that there was no need for it to issue a licence cancelling the registration of the Cuban company Cubaexport's Havana Club trademark. When the Office finally issues its ruling, Cuba will be dispossessed of the prestigious Havana Club trademark in the United States in a gross and flagrant violation of international laws and of the obligations of the United States under the relevant international agreements and laws. On 14 March 2013, in another serious case of trademark theft, the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board of the United States Patent and Trademark Office rejected the Cuban company Cubatabaco's petition to cancel the registration of the Cohiba trademark by the company General Cigar, property of the Swedish company Swedish Match. The decision was based entirely on the rulings of United States courts, which had confirmed that the Cuban Assets Control Regulations prevented recognition of the prestigious Cuban brand. Some plaintiffs in the United States are still planning to appropriate Cuban trademarks and patents as a form of compensation on the basis of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act, adopted in 2002 and extended until 2014. Chapter 4 Effects of the embargo on other sectors of the Cuban economy As noted in Cuba's previous reports to the Secretary-General, the legislation on which the embargo is based affects all aspects of the country's economy. In addition to lost income, the added expenses associated with the prohibition of banking transactions and the additional freight and insurance costs for Cuban institutions, Cuba's economy incurs further costs as a result of unsold inventories and restrictions on access to advanced technology. The following is a list of the impacts for each sector: The construction sector lost approximately $11.5 million through lack of access to the construction technologies that are the most efficient and lightweight and require the fewest raw materials and energy components. Such access would save the Government housing construction sector at least 6 per cent in convertible currency. The Comimport import company, which imports products for which there is a great public need, lost $63.3 million because its import process must cope with the problems caused by this political genocide. Cuba's tourism industry, which is essential to the country's economy, continued to suffer severe losses in the areas of services, operations and logistics, which are vital to its expansion. The impact on the sector is estimated at $1.96018 billion, primarily in lost income from the prohibition on access to Cuban tourism by United States citizens. In another example, Cuban hotels can only use the Amadeus system to market Cuban tourism. This is one of the four primary international global distribution systems; the other three -- Sabre, Galileo and Worldspan -- are owned by companies in the United States. Numerous intermediary service providers prefer not to deal with Cuban tourism companies because they are afraid that they will be fined and that their sales in the United States will be affected. Cuban tourism enterprises are also unable to advertise their services via the best online search engines, such as those offered by Google, Yahoo and Microsoft, because these are United States companies. Cuba's industrial sector lost $197.2 million owing to the embargo's restrictions on light industry and the steel and chemical industries. The Grupo Industrial de la Siderurgia (ACINOX), which produces corrugated rods for buildings, electrodes for welding, electric and telephone wires and conductors, refractory materials and water pumping equipment, among other products, recorded losses of $38.3 million, primarily because the raw materials that it uses must be purchased on distant markets. With that money, the Eleka cable manufacturer's wire-drawing department could have purchased the raw materials for seven and a half months' production of electrical and telephone conductors. This would have given the company's workers greater job security and made a greater contribution to the country's communications sector and electrical services. In addition to ACINOX, the industrial groups Bienes de Capital, Bienes de Consumo, the Grupo Industrial Refrigeración y Calderas and other Cuban companies are facing technological constraints because they are unable to use programs, including VMware, that they need in order to virtualize servers in computer networks. Cuban economic and scientific entities are also unable to use the website sourceforge.net, a centralized location for open-source software development which acts as a source code repository for program downloads. In the communications sector, losses resulting from the inability to purchase equipment and other components of United States origin and to gain access to the United States market are valued at $44.2 million. The ban on transactions through United States banks has also had a negative impact. In addition, Cuba must allocate considerable resources to the defence of its radio spectrum. Anti-Cuban broadcasts originating in the United States, transmitted over 30 radio and television frequencies, totalled 2,400 hours per week. The attacks on Cuba in this area violate, inter alia, the international standards regulating radio spectrum use established in the International Telecommunication Convention, to which the Government of the United States is a party. Heavy losses to the energy and mining sector are reported. The ban on exporting any product containing Cuban nickel to the United States has compelled the development of more costly distribution channels and other mitigation measures to enable trade in Cuban nickel and cobalt products. The impact on these exports is estimated at $51.7 million. Cuba's petroleum and gas industry is the target of measures designed by the United States Government to impede its development, its access to advanced technologies and oil products, and the funding needed for its growth in an attempt to cripple the industry and to hinder modernization, the introduction of technological upgrades, access to spare parts and participation in the innovation process. The fact that United States companies and subsidiaries are prohibited from providing oil or related products to Cuba places additional pressure on Cuban industry. The mergers, purchases and acquisitions that normally take place between international companies in this field often lead suppliers to withdraw from the Cuban market. The embargo has affected all areas of the transport sector (land, air and sea transport; port and airport services; and road and highway construction and maintenance). The impact is estimated at $469.3 million. Cuba's civil aviation sector alone reports losses of $274.2 million, primarily in income not earned because Cuban airlines are prohibited from operating on the United States market, services cannot be provided to United States travellers visiting Cuba, and advanced technology, equipment and related products cannot be purchased. In the case of the National Institute of Water Resources, the import company Cubahidráulico lost $2.2 million owing to the need to import products from distant markets. The effect of the embargo on the insurance industry is significant, especially with regard to the purchase of reinsurance protection for Cuban portfolio insurance through Esicuba S.A. Cuba's sugar industry must still deal with the lack of access to the United States market for its sugar exports since Cuba's entire sugar quota has been cancelled. Cubazucar, which is responsible for marketing Cuban sugar, lost estimated earnings of $22 million. Chapter 5 Opposition to the genocidal policy of the embargo against Cuba 5.1 Internal opposition in the United States Numerous public figures and organizations in the United States are increasingly calling for a lifting of the embargo against Cuba, as may be seen from the following examples: On 24 April 2013, Representative Kathy Castor (Democrat-Florida) sent President Obama a letter urging the Administration to change its policies on Cuba, remove Cuba from the list of State sponsors of terrorism and establish conditions for the normalization of bilateral relations between the two countries. On 6 April 2013, the Alliance of Baptists, a religious organization based in Greenville, South Carolina, issued a statement calling for the lifting of the embargo against Cuba and the removal of the island from the list of State sponsors of terrorism. The petition was published online at http://www.lawg.org/. On 25 March 2013, the office of Representative Sam Farr (Democrat-California) circulated in the House of Representatives a letter to President Obama in order to gather its members' support for freedom of travel to Cuba. The letter urged the President to authorize general licences for travel to Cuba by United States citizens. On 22 March 2013, during a conference on the theme "Rapprochement with Cuba: Good for Tampa, Good for Florida, Good for America", organized in Tampa by the Alliance for Responsible Cuba Policy Foundation, Representative Kathy Castor (Democrat-Florida) said that the United States travel and trade restrictions on Cuba made no sense. She also stressed that there was no proof that Cuba was a State sponsor of terrorism. On 27 February 2013, Democratic Representative for New York Charles Rangel introduced three bills aimed at changing policy on Cuba: H.R. 871: "Export Freedom to Cuba Act of 2013"; H.R. 872: "Free Trade With Cuba Act"; and H.R. 873: "Promoting American Agricultural and Medical Exports to Cuba Act of 2013". Those bills proposed, inter alia, authorizing travel to Cuba by United States citizens, revoking the embargo acts, removing Cuba from the list of State sponsors of terrorism and authorizing direct transfers between the banking institutions of the two countries. On 24 February 2013, during an interview on the Cable News Network (CNN) programme State of the Union, Senator Patrick Leahy (Democrat-Vermont) said that matters of interest to both countries, including the embargo and freedom of travel, should be resolved. On 21 February 2013, during an interview on the CNN programme Starting Point, Representative James McGovern (Democrat-Massachusetts) urged his Government to enter formal and direct talks with Cuba on a range of issues, including restrictions on travel and the economic embargo. On 20 February 2013, the Cuba Study Group published a document entitled "Restoring Executive Authority Over United States Policy Toward Cuba", in which it called the Helms-Burton Act a "failed, outdated and counterproductive policy". It proposed repealing the Act and all related statutory provisions and recommended steps that would substantially modify the embargo. On 24 January 2013, Peter Kornbluh, director of the National Security Archive's Cuba Documentation Project, published an article in the magazine The Nation with recommendations for President Obama. These included lifting the embargo and expanding the categories of United States citizens authorized to visit Cuba under a general licence. On 17 January 2013, the academic Ted Piccone of the Brookings Institution published a memorandum addressed to President Obama with recommendations for changes to the policy on Cuba, including lifting the embargo. On 16 January 2013, The Washington Post published in its Opinions column a comment by Jake Colvin, Vice President of the National Foreign Trade Council, who said that former Senator Chuck Hagel's statement that the embargo against Cuba should be lifted was "shared by a majority of Americans, who recognize the failure of the U.S. embargo to change policy in Cuba". On 9 January 2013, the religious organization Church World Service, through its President, the Reverend John L. McCullough, urged President Obama's Government to continue to facilitate travel to Cuba by religious organizations, end the travel ban for United States citizens and adopt policies and actions that would reduce tension between the Governments of the two countries. On 25 October 2012, The Tampa Bay Times published an editorial criticizing Senator Marco Rubio for supporting limitations on "people-to-people" contacts and urged the United States Government to end the embargo, ignore the doubting extremists in Miami, eliminate all obstacles to travel and curb the inordinate power of OFAC. On 18 October 2012, the daily newspaper The Los Angeles Times published an editorial in which it called on the United States Government to eliminate "outdated Cold War rules", such as the "archaic" embargo against Cuba. On 6 September 2012, the Associated Press and Deutsche Presse-Agentur agencies reported that, at the annual meeting of the Andean Development Corporation, former President James Carter had spoken in favour of normalizing bilateral relations between Cuba and the United States and lifting the embargo because it was harming the Cuban people and undermining the credibility of the United States. On 5 September 2012, the Reverend Joan Brown Campbell sent President Obama a letter calling for the lifting of the "blockade" and the release of the five Cubans who were being unjustly held in United States prisons for combating the United States terrorism against Cuba. On 31 August 2012, members of the Executive Committees of the organizations Cuban Americans for Engagement and Foundation for the Normalization of United States-Cuba Relations sent a letter to the Republican and Democratic National Committees, urging them not to view the Cuban community as a monolithic voting block in favour of the embargo since the majority of that community favoured the normalization of relations between the two nations. They reiterated their support for the Government's steps that had facilitated family reunification, travel and the sending of remittances and expressed the hope that the United States Government would permit its citizens to visit Cuba as well. On 10 May 2012, participants at an event at the Center for International Policy, based in Washington, D.C., raised the issue of the effects of the embargo on the oil industry and stressed the need for a mechanism for cooperation between Cuba and the United States that would allow for effective collaboration between the two parties. 5.2 International opposition International opposition to the inhuman policy against the Cuban people is overwhelming, as can be seen from the countless bodies that have adopted special declarations and communiqués supporting an end to the policy. Particularly noteworthy during the reporting period were the following examples: At the twenty-first ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa from 25 to 27 May 2013, the Heads of State and Government adopted resolution Assembly/AU/Res.1 (XXI), in which they issued a strong appeal for the lifting of the economic and trade embargo against Cuba. On 16 May 2013, the Europe-Third World Centre, the International Association of Democratic Lawyers and the American Association of Jurists had document A/HRC/23/NGO/16 circulated at the twenty-third session of the Human Rights Council. The document contained a joint statement denouncing the economic embargo against Cuba and a request that the Human Rights Council should establish a special procedures mechanism on the unilateral coercive measures. On 1 May 2013, during Cuba's presentation to the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, 22 delegations criticized the United States embargo against Cuba and referred to it as an obstacle to the enjoyment of human rights in that country. In the Declaration adopted at the Fifth Summit of the Heads of State and/or Government of the Association of Caribbean States, held in Pétion-Ville, Haiti, from 23 to 26 April 2013, the participants called for an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba. In the final declaration of the tenth meeting of the Political Council of ALBA-TCP, held in Caracas on 28 February 2013, the "blockade against Cuba by the United States" was condemned. At the third Africa-South America Summit, held in Malabo from 20 to 23 February 2013, the Malabo Declaration was adopted; paragraph 27 of the Declaration called for the implementation of United Nations General Assembly resolution 67/4 entitled "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba". At the first Summit of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, held in Santiago on 27 and 28 January 2013, a special communiqué strongly condemning the embargo against Cuba was adopted. At the first Summit of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and the European Union, held in Santiago on 26 and 27 January 2013, the Santiago Declaration on the new dialogue between CELAC and the European Union was adopted. In paragraph 6 of the document, coercive measures of unilateral character with extraterritorial effect contrary to international law are rejected and the two regional groups' positions on the extraterritorial provisions of the Helms-Burton Act reaffirmed. On the occasion of the Alliance's eighth anniversary, celebrated in Caracas on 15 December 2012, ALBA-TCP issued a statement in which its member countries condemned the criminal economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States against the people of Cuba. At the seventh Summit of the Heads of State and Government of the African, Caribbean and Pacific States, held in Equatorial Guinea on 13 and 14 December 2012, the participants adopted the Sipopo Declaration, in which they also condemned the use of unilateral coercive measures contrary to international law and rejected the Helms-Burton Act. On 26 November 2012, ALBA-TCP issued a communiqué in which it rejected the inclusion of Cuba in the list of State sponsors of terrorism and condemned application of the embargo against Cuba. At the twenty-second Ibero-American Summit of Heads of State and Government, held in Cadiz, Spain, on 16 and 17 November 2012, a special communiqué on the necessity of ending the economic and financial embargo imposed by the Government of the United States of America against Cuba, including the Helms-Burton Act, was issued. The communiqué strongly rejected the application of laws and measures contrary to international law, such as the Helms-Burton Act, and urged the Government of the United States of America to end application of the Act. It also encouraged the Government of the United States of America to comply with the 20 consecutive resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly and to end its economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. On 13 November 2012, in another historic vote, the General Assembly, the international community's most democratic and representative body, unequivocally declared its opposition to the United States embargo with the adoption -- by a vote of 188 in favour, 3 against and 2 abstentions -- of its resolution 67/4 entitled "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba". A total of 19 delegations, including the representatives of 7 organizations, associations and regional and subregional organizations (namely, the Group of 77 and China, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, CELAC, the Caribbean Community, the Group of African States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and MERCOSUR) spoke during the debate on the agenda item. Another 17 delegations explained their positions, opposing the embargo, after the adoption of the resolution. At its thirty-eighth regular meeting, the Latin American Council of the Latin American Economic System, gathered at its ministerial session in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on 18 and 19 October 2012, adopted a declaration on ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. The declaration states that the United States economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba violates international law and is contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the rules of the international trade system and the free flow of navigation. The application of any law or measure that is contrary to international law, such as the Helms-Burton and Torricelli Acts, is strongly condemned and the Government of the United States of America is urged to put an end to their application. During the general debate of the United Nations General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session in September 2012, dignitaries and high-level representatives of 45 Member States explicitly criticized the embargo and called for it to end. At their nineteenth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa from 15 to 19 July 2012, the Heads of State and Government of the African Union adopted resolution Assembly/AU/Res.1 (XIX), in which they expressed their support for the Cuban resolution against the embargo and called for the lifting of that policy. Conclusions In 2009, after assuming leadership of his country, the newly inaugurated President Obama announced a new beginning with Cuba and said he believed that Cuba-United States relations could be moved in a new direction. In fact, however, since those initial statements and the disingenuous rhetoric that followed, the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba by the Government of the United States against Cuba and especially its extraterritorial dimension, has worsened steadily despite international community's outright rejection of that policy. During this period, the policy of economic strangulation of the Cuban people, in place now for over 50 years, has focused on persistent attacks on and blocking of Cuba's international financial transactions. Cuba reiterates that maintaining this policy is a massive, flagrant and systematic violation of the human rights of an entire people and qualifies as an act of genocide under the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 1948. It also violates the constitutional rights of the people of the United States, by infringing on their freedom to travel to Cuba, and violates the sovereign rights of many other States owing to its extraterritorial nature. The embargo against Cuba, based on the flawed goal of bringing an entire people to its knees through starvation, is a violation of international law that is contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and an attack on the right to peace, development and security of a sovereign State. As noted above, the economic damage to the Cuban people since the imposition of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba by the United States, taking into account the depreciation of the dollar against the price of gold on the international market, amounts to $1.157327 trillion. The embargo continues to be an absurd, obsolete, illegal and morally unsustainable policy that has not succeeded and will not succeed in its purpose of crushing the patriotic resolve of the Cuban people to preserve its sovereignty, independence and right to self-determination. The Government of the United States must lift the embargo immediately and unconditionally. Cuba once again thanks the international community for its growing support and requests its assistance in ending this unfair, illegal and inhuman policy. [19 April 2013] It is the consistent position of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to oppose all kinds of sanctions, including economic, commercial and financial embargoes on sovereign States. The unilateral and extraterritorial embargo imposed by the United States against Cuba constitutes an obvious infringement of the sovereignty of Cuba in clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, undermines the freedom of trade and navigation and the most fundamental norms of coexistence and respect among sovereign States and constitutes a human rights violation by denying the people's right to life and right to development, and thus deserves strong denunciation by the United Nations and the international community. The United States blockade policy against Cuba which has persisted for decades has caused Cuba serious losses amounting to hundreds of billions of United States dollars in the economic and social fields and also impacted third countries that have normal economic and trade relations with Cuba, thus remaining the main obstacle to the socioeconomic development of the country and the livelihoods of its peoples. As such, the United States criminal, inhumane and anachronistic blockade policy against Cuba should terminate, without delay, in conformity with the relevant United Nations resolutions and the demands of the international community. The Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea constantly supports the efforts of the Government and people of Cuba to end the United States embargo and will continue to further expand and develop economic and trade relations with Cuba in the future. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo expresses its deep concern at the continued imposition of the economic, commercial and financial embargo by the United States of America against Cuba, despite the many General Assembly resolutions calling for an end to it. The Democratic Republic of the Congo once again aligns itself with the will of the international community, expressed by the adoption of General Assembly resolution 67/4 by 188 Member States, and supports any new resolution calling for the lifting of the embargo. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomes the importance that the Secretary-General continues to attach to this question and supports any initiative designed to encourage Cuba and the United States of America to engage in a constructive and fruitful dialogue that could lead to a complete lifting of the embargo. The Republic of Djibouti wishes to reaffirm its fundamental commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the rules of international law. Further, the Republic of Djibouti has voted in favour of General Assembly resolution 67/4 and thus has not promulgated or applied any laws of the type referred to in the preamble of the above-mentioned resolution and, as such, the necessity of repealing or invalidating any such laws or measures does not arise. [13 April 2013] The Commonwealth of Dominica has neither promulgated nor applied any laws or measures which in any way hinder the freedom of trade and navigation with and to Cuba. The Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica vehemently opposes the extraterritorial enforcement of national legislation that demonstrates disregard for, and undermines, the sovereignty of other States. Dominica views such actions as contrary to the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the customs and principles of sovereign equality, peaceful coexistence and non-interference in the internal affairs of other States. The Government of Dominica embraces Cuba as a member of the United Nations, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA) and a sister nation in the Caribbean Sea. Our strong historic ties and solidarity in a number of areas of cooperation such as education, health and sport have created an enduring friendship between our peoples. Dominica has consistently and unreservedly voted in favour of General Assembly resolution 67/4. Dominica expresses its continued concern at the hardship and human suffering caused by the ongoing unilateral imposition of the embargo against Cuba, despite overwhelming international support for multiple resolutions that have called for an end to this blockade. [21 May 2013] In its international relations, the Government of the Dominican Republic acts in accordance with the norms and principles governing cooperation and trade among nations, underpinned by the Charter of the United Nations and other international legal norms. Consequently, it refrains from enacting and/or applying laws that contravene these norms and principles. The Permanent Mission of Ecuador to the United Nations hereby reports that, in accordance with its standard policy of condemning the decades-long illegal embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba and its people, Ecuador has not promulgated and does not have in force any law or measure that could constitute any form of economic, commercial or financial embargo against Cuba. At the same time, it calls for the immediate and unconditional lifting of all unilateral measures imposed by the United States of America against this Caribbean nation, which are causing it serious economic and social damage and subjecting its people to a large-scale humanitarian crisis. By consistently supporting the resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on this issue, Ecuador has demonstrated its position that the extraterritorial application of unilateral measures against another country, such as the measures contained in the 1992 United States Cuban Democracy Act and the 1996 Helms-Burton Act, is completely unacceptable. The Arab Republic of Egypt has voted in favour of General Assembly resolution 67/4 in line with its consistent position that unilateral sanctions imposed outside the United Nations framework are not a course of action that Egypt can condone. The embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba constitutes a clear violation of the principles of multilateralism and is in breach of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international law, respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and mutual trust. The unjust and unjustifiable embargo causes undue economic and social hardship for the Cuban people. It also has harmful effects on vital sectors of the Cuban economy. This embargo is an anachronism from a bygone era that must be lifted. The embargo has an extended effect on companies and citizens from third countries. These extraterritorial effects violate the sovereign rights of many Member States. Egypt is deeply concerned over the widening of the extraterritorial nature of the embargo, which is an added argument in favour of the prompt elimination of those unjustified sanctions. The Republic of El Salvador, which has always been committed to the principles and purposes enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and fully aware of the need to eliminate the unilateral implementation of economic and trade measures by one State against another that affect the free flow of international trade, reaffirms its support for ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba. El Salvador considers that the embargo is a deplorable action that has seriously affected the progress and development of a sovereign State and shows disrespect for the dignity and sovereignty of the nation. It also notes that national laws with extraterritorial application violate the legitimate interests of entities or persons under the jurisdiction of the Republic of Cuba and the freedom of all forms of trade and navigation, and have greatly obstructed the efforts undertaken by the Cuban people to secure their development and well-being. El Salvador supports the immediate lifting of this embargo, not only in observance of international law, but also because it believes that it represents an act that has inflicted pain and suffering upon the Cuban people. The Republic of El Salvador considers that all the efforts undertaken by the international community to promote peace, cooperation, development and social justice, human rights, political, economic and social integration and unity and solidarity among countries are being seriously challenged by actions such as the embargo against Cuba, which continues to call to mind a chapter of history that we would all wish to bring to a close once and for all. The Republic of El Salvador wishes to express its concern at the ongoing impact of the embargo on the health-care system and food security of the Cuban people, forcing the Cuban State to purchase inputs from distant markets and often through intermediaries, which causes a significant diversion of financial resources that could be used in other areas of development. The Republic of El Salvador, joining the majority of United Nations Member States in their endorsement of General Assembly resolution 67/4, calls for the elimination of these measures against the Republic of Cuba and hereby reports, in accordance with that resolution, that it has never promulgated or applied any laws or measures whose extraterritorial effects would affect the sovereignty of the Cuban State and its citizens. El Salvador once again joins the unceasing cry of the international community, which gains impetus daily in various international and regional forums for discussion, and reiterates its call to end the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and to begin a process of respectful dialogue with that country based on respect for its sovereignty and for the inalienable right of the Cuban people to self-determination. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, in accordance with the principles of its Constitution and its commitment to defend and preserve the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, expresses once again its concern at the continuation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba, which, in its view, is to the detriment of the development of the Cuban people. It is convinced that, in an increasingly globalized world, devastated by the global economic and financial crisis, maintaining the economic, commercial and financial isolation of a State cannot be the appropriate way to resolve disputes. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore invites the international community to reflect deeply on this matter and to increase its efforts to promote a positive dialogue between the parties with a view to the definitive lifting of the embargo. Consequently, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, desirous of a more peaceful world, reiterates its unconditional support for the General Assembly resolutions on the necessity of ending the embargo, which has already lasted more than half a century. The Government of the State of Eritrea has not promulgated or applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in General Assembly resolution 67/4. Eritrea is strongly opposed to the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba, which is inconsistent with the principles of international law. Eritrea joins other States in calling for the immediate repeal or invalidation of such laws or measures, which are having adverse effects on the Cuban people and on Cuban nationals living in other countries. The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia considers that the continued imposition of an economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba adversely affects the living standards of the people of Cuba and reaffirms its adherence to the principle of freedom of trade and navigation in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and international law. The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia therefore reaffirms its support of United Nations resolution 67/4 and calls for an end to the United States economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia believes that constructive dialogue is necessary to foster mutual trust and understanding among the nations of the world. The European Union believes that the United States trade policy towards Cuba is fundamentally a bilateral issue. Notwithstanding, the European Union and its member States have been clearly expressing their opposition to the extraterritorial extension of the United States embargo, such as that contained in the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and the Helms-Burton Act of 1996. In November 1996, the Council of Ministers of the European Union adopted a regulation and a joint action to protect the interests of natural or legal persons resident in the European Union against the extraterritorial effects of the Helms-Burton legislation, which prohibits compliance with that legislation. Moreover, on 18 May 1998, at the European Union/United States summit in London, a package was agreed covering waivers to titles III and IV of the Helms-Burton Act; a commitment by the United States administration to resist future extraterritorial legislation of that kind; and an understanding with respect to disciplines for the strengthening of investment protection. The European Union continues to urge the United States to implement its side of the understanding of 18 May 1998. The Government of Fiji reaffirms its support for resolution 67/4. Fiji reiterates its position that all States should refrain from imposing economic sanctions of the nature referred to in the resolution, in conformity with their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. Fiji has not taken any measures that might impair economic, commercial or financial relations between Cuba and Fiji. On the contrary, Fiji is intent on developing cooperative relations with all countries and in this regard fully supports the call for the lifting of the embargo against Cuba. In November 2012, like most Member States, Gabon voted in favour of the adoption of resolution 67/4 and it continues to support Member States' application of paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of that resolution. The embargo runs counter to the principles of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, which are enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in international law. Gabon remains concerned about the measures aimed at strengthening and extending the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and about the adverse effects of such measures on the Cuban people and on Cuban nationals living in other countries. The Gambia continues to be opposed to the enactment or application of such laws, acts or measures against Cuba that impede the free flow of international trade and navigation. The embargo against Cuba contravenes the fundamental principles of international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States, violating the sovereign equality of States and of the non-intervention and non-interference in the domestic affairs of other Member States. The embargo has no legitimate or moral justification, given the fact that it continues to undermine the essential rights to economic emancipation and to development of the Cuban people -- it must come to an immediate end. As a responsible member of the international community, the Gambia therefore joins other Member States in calling for the immediate repeal or invalidation of such laws, measures or policies that impede the free flow of international trade and navigation as they are contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. It is our fervent desire that the relevant United Nations resolutions echoing collective concerns on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba will be respected and implemented without further delay. [15 May 2013] Georgia reaffirms its support for resolution 67/4 and has not promulgated or applied laws or taken any measures against Cuba that would prohibit or restrict economic, commercial or financial relations between Cuba and Georgia. [6 June 2013] For the past 50 years, Ghana has never supported the imposition of the economic, commercial and financial embargo by the United States of America against Cuba and has therefore not promulgated or applied any laws, whose extraterritorial effects could adversely affect Cuba. Ghana is convinced that the unilateral embargo by the United States against Cuba does not conform to the obligations that Member States have assumed under the Charter of the United Nations or international law. Ghana strongly believes that the indefensible embargo is morally unacceptable as it denies a sovereign State and a member of the international community the benefits derived from international trade and is therefore against the embargo and any law that violates two cardinal principles of international law. These principles are the non-interference in the internal affairs of States by others and the right of all nations to determine their own paths of social development. Ghana remains committed to these principles and has always supported the General Assembly resolutions which, among other things, call for an end to the embargo. Ghana wishes to appeal to the United States of America to heed the clarion call made at the General Assembly over the years, for the lifting of the embargo, urges her to reconsider her stance against Cuba and to treat the latter as an independent State which has the right to choose its own path of development. Recent developments have shown that it is important to invoke our collective moral authority in a renewed call to all nations to reflect a spirit of cooperation, multilateralism, and interdependence, as well as diversity in our cultural and ideological foundations, in all our international dealings, without exception. The people of Cuba, who have suffered for well over five decades in their quest for freedom, deserve to benefit from their hard work and commitment to social justice. The time has come for the international community to lend its support to that cause. Ghana would like to urge Member States of the United Nations to desist from any policy which depicts or promotes unilateralism in utter disregard of the Charter of the United Nations, its core values and fundamental principles as well as the aspirations and values of another Member State. Cuba, has over the years, played host to thousands of students from Africa, who have studied in that country and upon completion of their courses in various professions, contributed and continue to contribute to the development of their respective nations. For these reasons, Ghana wishes to call for an end to the anachronistic economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on Cuba and hopes that Cuba will be allowed to enjoy its share of the benefits of international trade. Grenada views the continued imposition of the economic commercial and financial embargo against Cuba by the United States of America as a violation of the norms and values that govern the peaceful coexistence of States which contradicts the purpose and principles of the United Nations as expressed in Article 1 of the Charter. Moreover, Grenada is convinced that the political independence of States is a matter of sovereignty and proposes that the Cuban people should be entrusted with the task of demanding change if it is their political will to do so. Grenada argues that the actions constituting the embargo are tantamount to a violation of the sovereign right of the Cuban people to exert control over the fate of their country, while negatively impacting the progress of human development and well-being; the latter identified as preconditions to the establishment of peaceful and friendly relations between nations according to Article 55 of the Charter. Consequently, the Government of Grenada neither promulgates, applies, nor condones laws or measures that would encroach on or undermine the sovereign rights of any State, nor any unilateral application of economic and trade measures that would restrict a State's capacity-building ability. In the midst of serious economic and social challenges, as a result of the embargo, Cuba has extended and continues to extend a hand of friendship and solidarity to fellow developing countries around the world. Although limited in its possibilities, the spirit of cooperation and brotherhood demonstrated by the Cubans is essential to world peace and stability. Against this backdrop, Grenada joins with the rest of the General Assembly in its call for the removal of the measures imposed on the Government and people of Cuba by the United States of America through its economic, financial and commercial embargo. As an advocate for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, Grenada recognizes the sovereign equality of States, and therefore supports General Assembly resolution 67/4 calling for an immediate end to the embargo against Cuba. Grenada argues that the right of one State to determine its economic and commercial partners need not exclude the right of a second State to political independence and self-determination. The Republic of Guatemala, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 67/4, wishes to report that the State of Guatemala has neither promulgated nor applied laws or any type of measure that run counter to the principles and purposes enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, or to the freedom of international trade and navigation. Therefore, Guatemala is able to state that there are no legal or regulatory hindrances to free transit or trade between Guatemala and Cuba. Guatemala therefore rejects any unilateral measure that contravenes the principles of free trade and international law and urges those countries that have and continue to apply such domestic legislation to take the necessary steps to repeal or invalidate it. [22 May 2013] The Government of the Republic of Guinea remains concerned about the continuation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo that has been imposed against the Cuban people for decades. Faithful to its international commitments, Guinea solemnly reaffirms its belief in the principles of equality, the sovereignty of States and non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States and calls for the immediate and unconditional lifting of this unjust embargo, which has caused the Cuban people such suffering. Consequently, the Republic of Guinea will vote in favour of any resolution that reaffirms the necessity of ending this embargo. Guinea-Bissau reaffirms that discriminatory trade practices and the extraterritorial application of national laws are contrary to the need to promote dialogue and to uphold the principles and objectives set forth in the Charter of the United Nations. The Government of Guinea-Bissau has neither adopted any legislation against Cuba nor taken any domestic measures to implement sanctions, which are unilateral and contrary to the norms of international law on freedom of trade and navigation. Our country also regrets that this embargo, which has been in place for more than 53 years, is still causing severe economic, financial, health and other forms of harm to the Cuban people. Despite the successive resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in recent years, in which a vast majority of Member States have voted in favour of lifting the embargo, there have been no signs of flexibility on the part of the United States of America in its continued policy regarding the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. The Republic of Guinea-Bissau recognizes the importance that the Secretary-General of the United Nations attaches to the issue and calls for strict compliance with the resolution. It also calls on the international community to continue its efforts to ensure that the United States and Cuba engage in constructive dialogue in order to establish relations between the two States. The Government of Guyana has consistently demonstrated its unwavering respect for and adherence to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including those stated in General Assembly resolution 67/4. To this end, Guyana has not enacted any legislation or adopted any policies or practices, the extraterritorial effects of which affect the sovereignty of other States. Guyana has also, as a matter of principle, maintained a consistent position of firm opposition to the economic, financial and commercial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba and reiterates the call for an end to this policy. Guyana encourages the process of dialogue between the United States of America and Cuba. The Government of Guyana is in full compliance with and remains fully supportive of General Assembly resolution 67/4. [10 June 2013] The Republic of Haiti, desiring to respect the conditions set out in General Assembly resolution 67/4, makes every effort to refrain from promulgating or applying laws and regulations with extraterritorial effects that affect the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction and the freedom of trade and navigation. Furthermore, the Government of Haiti maintains excellent relations of friendship, exchange and cooperation with the Government of Cuba. [16 May 2013] The Holy See has never drawn up or applied economic, commercial or financial laws or measures against Cuba. In fulfilment of its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and international law, the Government of Honduras has not promulgated or applied any unilateral economic and commercial laws or measures against other States that might affect the free flow of international trade. [11 May 2013] India has not promulgated or applied any laws of the type referred to in the preamble of the above-mentioned resolution and, as such, the necessity of repealing or invalidating any such laws or measures does not arise. India has consistently opposed any unilateral measure by countries that impinge on the sovereignty of another country. These include any attempts to extend the application of a country's laws extraterritorially to other sovereign nations. India recalls the final documents adopted by the sixteenth Summit Conference of Heads of State or Government of the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012 on this subject, as well as other high-level decisions of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and urges the international community to adopt all necessary measures to protect the sovereign rights of all countries. [11 June 2013] The economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba has caused hardship for the people of Cuba. The continued imposition of an economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba violates the principles of the sovereign equality of States and of non-intervention and non-interference in each other's domestic affairs, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States. Indonesia urges States that have applied laws and measures of an extraterritorial nature that affect the sovereignty of other States, the lawful interests of their subjects or of other persons under their jurisdiction, and freedom of trade and navigation to renounce such action. Indonesia continues to support this resolution and calls for the immediate cessation of such an embargo. [13 June 2013] The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran expresses its serious disappointment at the continued promulgation of the economic, commercial and financial sanctions against Cuba, despite the annual adoption of the General Assembly resolution calling for the lifting of, and an end to, the embargo against Cuba by the Government of the United States. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran reiterates its strong belief that the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba runs counter to the principles of international law governing relations among States and contradicts the letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, which calls for promoting solidarity, cooperation and friendly relations among nations. Such measures continue to adversely affect the living conditions and human rights of the Cuban people and will hamper the efforts of the Cuban Government to achieve the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. In that context, the embargo continues to constrain the efforts of the Cuban Government and people to eradicate poverty and hunger and to promote health and education, which are indispensable means for the achievement of economic and social development. The economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on Cuba, which has lasted for decades, serves no purpose other than that of inflicting tremendous hardship and suffering on the people of Cuba, especially women and children. The embargo has seriously jeopardized the legitimate rights and interests of Cuba and other States, as well as freedom of trade and navigation, and therefore has to be immediately lifted, as requested by the General Assembly in all relevant resolutions. Differences and problems among countries should be resolved through peaceful means and dialogue, on the basis of equality and mutual respect for the sovereignty of Member States. The adoption of the General Assembly resolutions, with such a wide range of support and for so many years, clearly indicates the strong objection of the international community to unilateral economic coercive measures in general and the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba in particular. It is also a sign of increasing sympathy with the struggle of the Cuban Government and people to put an end to this unlawful and inhumane embargo. Furthermore, as the international community faces major challenges, such as the consequences of the global financial and economic crisis and food crises and thus increased poverty, unemployment and malnutrition, the imposition of the embargo seems more unjustifiable than ever and deserves stronger objections at the international level. The Islamic Republic of Iran recalls the final document of the Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Tehran from 26 to 31 August 2012, where the Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement reiterated their call to the Government of the United States of America to put an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba which, in addition to being unilateral and contrary to the United Nations Charter and international law, and to the principle of neighbourliness, is causing huge material losses and economic damage to the people of Cuba. They once again urged strict compliance with General Assembly resolutions 47/19, 48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10, 53/4, 54/21, 55/20, 56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12, 61/11, 62/3, 63/7, 64/6 65/6, 66/6 and 67/4. Furthermore, the Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement expressed their deep concern over the widening of the extraterritorial nature of the embargo against Cuba and rejected the reinforcement of the measures adopted by the Government of the United States aimed at tightening the embargo, as well as all other recent measures carried out by the Government of the United States against the people of Cuba. They reiterated that those measures constitute a violation of Cuba's sovereignty and a massive violation of the human rights of its people. The Islamic Republic of Iran remains opposed to the application of unilateral economic and trade measures by the United States of America against other countries that block the flow of people, trade and finance, as well as to the extraterritorial application and effects of such national legislations on the sovereignty of other States. The sanctions are contrary to the principles of international law, the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States and peaceful coexistence among States. The Islamic Republic of Iran, which has been experiencing economic coercive measures, shares the concern of the Cuban Government and people and therefore emphasizes the urgent need to put an end to such measures and the full implementation of the content of General Assembly resolution 67/4. [27 May 2013] The Government of Jamaica remains opposed to the unilateral application of economic and trade measures by one State against another that would obstruct the freedom of commercial activity, trade and economic cooperation. To this end, and in keeping with its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and international law, the Government of Jamaica has not promulgated any law, legislation or measures that would infringe on the sovereignty of a State or its lawful national interests. In support of this position, the House of Representatives of Jamaica has, since 2009, approved the resolutions supporting the removal of the embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba, noting that it affects the free flow of trade not only in the region, but in the hemisphere. Jamaica continues to strongly oppose the unilateral and coercive economic, commercial and financial embargo against the Republic of Cuba and the application of laws and measures aimed at extending the reach of the embargo to include third countries. The embargo against Cuba is severely and unjustifiably damaging to the well-being of the Cuban people. Consequently, the Government of Jamaica reiterates its support for General Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and urges all States that continue to apply such laws and measures to take the necessary steps to repeal or invalidate them as soon as possible. [17 April 2013] The Government of Japan has not promulgated or applied laws or measures of the kind that are referred to in paragraph 2 of resolution 67/4. The Government of Japan believes that the economic policy of the United States towards Cuba should be considered primarily as a bilateral issue. However, Japan shares the concern, arising from the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act of 1996 (known as the Helms-Burton Act) and the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992, that, if the application of such legislation causes undue hardship in relation to the economic activities of the enterprises or nationals of a third party, the legislation is likely to run counter to international law regarding the extraterritorial application of domestic laws. The Government of Japan has been closely following the situation in relation to the above-mentioned legislation and the surrounding circumstances and its concern remains unchanged. Having considered the matter with the utmost care, Japan voted in favour of resolution 67/4. In its foreign policy, Kazakhstan is guided by the principles of international law and stands for the rights of nations to develop according to their own way of development. Kazakhstan strongly condemns any unilateral acts which affect the sovereignty of another State. Kazakhstan has never accepted any national regulations that infringe, impede or retard the development of foreign countries, including in their economic, commercial and financial spheres. In this regard, Kazakhstan, like the overwhelming majority of the international community, calls for lifting the embargo against Cuba and the cessation of all acts which are contrary to the principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. Kenya shares the views of the international community in its continued opposition to the sanctions and embargo against Cuba. Kenya has never unilaterally promulgated or applied laws or measures of any kind that have extraterritorial effects affecting the sovereignty of other States. Kenya will continue to oppose the blockade against Cuba that has negatively affected the citizens of Cuba and in line with the position of the African Union calls for the immediate lifting of the long-standing and unjustifiable economic and trade embargo imposed on Cuba, so as to allow that country to enjoy all the legitimate prospects for its sustained development. The resolution contains moral and humanitarian considerations which, when adopted, will positively contribute to improving the general welfare and well-being of the people of Cuba. [8 April 2013] The State of Kuwait supports the implementation of the aforementioned resolution with an emphasis on the need to comply with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the sovereign equality of States and non-interference in their internal affairs, as well as the freedom of international trade and navigation. Furthermore, the State of Kuwait has always voted in favour of the resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly calling for the lifting of the United States embargo imposed on Cuba. 21 May 2013] In accordance with the fundamental principles of international law, including the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Kyrgyz Republic has not promulgated or applied any laws or measures with extraterritorial effects that affect the sovereignty of other States. [14 May 2013] It is unfortunate that the embargo imposed by the United States of America over the past years against Cuba, an independent and sovereign country, continues to be in effect. Such an embargo, with its extraterritorial implications, has not only hindered the progress of Cuba in its socioeconomic development and caused untold suffering to its people, but has also violated the principles of international law and those of the sovereign equality of States, as well as of freedom of international trade and navigation. As far as the Lao People's Democratic Republic is concerned, in adhering to and complying with all the principles and purposes enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and international laws, it has neither promulgated nor introduced any laws or measures of the kind referred to in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of the above resolution. The Government of Lebanon fully complies with General Assembly resolution 67/4 concerning the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. This is a standing position of Lebanon, based on the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and international law, stressing the need to respect the sovereignty of States. The Kingdom of Lesotho recalls that, despite the adoption of resolutions for more than two decades by the United Nations General Assembly on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo that has been imposed by the United States of America against Cuba, the embargo persists. The Kingdom of Lesotho once again expresses its deep concern at the continuation of that unilateral and extraterritorial measure, which is in contravention of the principles of the multilateral trading system, international law, the Charter of the United Nations and in particular, the principles of the sovereign equality of States and non-intervention in internal affairs. The Kingdom of Lesotho is deeply concerned about the harmful effects that the economic, commercial and financial embargo has on the people of Cuba. During the reporting period, the Kingdom of Lesotho has not promulgated or applied laws or measures against Cuba that would prohibit economic, commercial or financial relations between the Kingdom of Lesotho and the Republic of Cuba. Lesotho's vote in favour of the adoption of relevant General Assembly resolutions on the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on the Republic of Cuba is a clear reflection of its commitment to eliminating this kind of unilateral measure and of its commitment to the Charter of the United Nations, international law and multilateralism. [17 May 2013] Liberia has consistently expressed its concern at the continuation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo unilaterally imposed upon Cuba for a protracted period of time, which violates the basic norms of international law and good friendly relations, including international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and principles and norms that govern the peaceful coexistence of States. Respecting its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and international law, the Government of Liberia has neither promulgated nor applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of resolution 67/4. The Government of Liberia maintains its support for actions by the United Nations aimed at lifting the trade restrictions on Cuba and reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. [18 April 2013] The Government of the Principality of Liechtenstein has not promulgated or applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble to resolution 67/4. The Government of the Principality of Liechtenstein is furthermore of the view that legislation, the implementation of which entails measures or regulations having extraterritorial effects, is inconsistent with generally recognized principles of international law. The Government of the Republic of Malawi does not have any sanctions or embargo against the Government of Cuba. The Government of Malawi continues to enjoy excellent bilateral relations with the Government of Cuba through a joint permanent commission of cooperation and in other multilateral forums such as the Non-Aligned Movement. The Government of Malawi further wishes to reiterate its denunciation of the unilateral promulgation and application of repressive laws and regulations such as the Helms-Burton Act of 1996, which goes against the Charter of the United Nations which affirms the freedom of trade among nations. In this regard, the Government of Malawi joins the rest of the international community in calling for the lifting of the sanctions imposed on the Government of Cuba. These sanctions only serve to perpetuate the suffering of the ordinary people of Cuba. The Government of Malaysia voted in favour of General Assembly resolution 67/4. The Government of Malaysia opposes all forms of unilateral economic, commercial and financial sanctions and embargoes that run against the norms of international law, which contradict the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the rules-based multilateral trading system. Such unilateral economic measures may not only restrict free and unfettered business across borders, but also hamper social development such as the employment opportunities and the living condition of the general population. In this regard, the Government of Malaysia is in full support of the international community's efforts, as contained in General Assembly resolution 67/4 and other relevant resolutions, which call for an end to the unilateral economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on any members of the United Nations. [7 May 2013] The Republic of Maldives does not impose any sanctions against any country without an explicit mandate from the General Assembly or the Security Council of the United Nations, or from those international organizations of which the Maldives is a member. Accordingly, the Republic of Maldives has not imposed any sanctions on Cuba nor has it enacted any laws or regulations that would contravene the provisions of General Assembly resolution 67/4 on which the Republic of Maldives voted in favour. The Government of the Republic of Mali has always voted in favour of the General Assembly resolution concerning the necessity of lifting the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. The Government of the Republic of Mali, which fully supports resolution 67/4, has not promulgated any laws or applied any measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of that resolution. As in the past, Mali maintains its position that the embargo against Cuba should be lifted. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania disagrees with and is opposed to all aspects of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania remains committed to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and, in particular, the principles of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of trade and navigation. Mauritius has not promulgated any law or measure aimed at imposing a unilateral economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. The Republic of Mauritius enjoys excellent bilateral relations with Cuba. With regard to trade relations, although exports to Cuba have been negligible, Mauritius imported goods worth MUR 5.3 million from Cuba in 2012, an increase of 26 per cent as compared to figures for 2010. The Government of Mexico once again states its firm rejection both of the application of unilateral laws or measures imposing an economic embargo against any Member State of the United Nations, and of the use of coercive measures that have no legal basis in the Charter of the United Nations. Mexico stresses that this type of measure has serious humanitarian consequences that are contrary to international law and signify the abandonment of diplomacy and dialogue as the appropriate ways of settling disputes between States. Mexico reaffirms its traditional position of principle that any type of political, economic or military sanctions imposed on States can only result from a decision or recommendation made by the Security Council or the General Assembly. Multilateralism continues to be the best way of settling disputes and ensuring peaceful coexistence between States. Mexico emphasizes once again that it is through the observance of international law and the rules and principles governing coexistence between nations, regardless of imbalances or disparities, and through respectful dialogue, that States are able to overcome their differences and ensure a climate of international peace. The Mexican Government has shared with the international community its firm position against national laws which are designed to have extraterritorial application in third countries because they run counter to international law. In keeping with that position, the Mexican State promulgated the Act on Protection of Trade and Investment against Foreign Norms which Violate International Law, which has been in force since 23 October 1996 and is designed to prohibit acts which affect trade or investment when such acts result from the extraterritorial effects of foreign laws. The Government of Mexico wishes once again to place on record that its bilateral and multilateral relations with other States are based on general principles of international law that govern peaceful and civilized coexistence between sovereign nations in the modern world. The principles enunciated have provided a firm basis and continuity in the relations between Mexico and Cuba. Accordingly, in a gesture of major significance for the relations between the two countries, in 1992 for the first time the Government of Mexico voted in favour of the resolution which the Government of Cuba submitted to the United Nations General Assembly for adoption, with a view to rejecting and ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the Government of the United States against Cuba. Since then, Mexico has affirmed the principles of its foreign policy and has voted in favour of the resolution on this item every year for the past 21 years. Mexico and Cuba maintain unbreakable historical ties, sustained in a climate of renewed trust, consistently respecting the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular peaceful coexistence, respect for the sovereignty and sovereign equality of States, and non-interference in their internal affairs. On this basis, Mexico has encouraged opportunities for cooperation and respectful dialogue through bilateral talks and in the competent regional and international forums and mechanisms. Mexico and Cuba have signed Economic Complementarity Agreement No. 51 under the Montevideo Treaty of 1980, which will remain in effect indefinitely. During the presidential visit to Cuba, a general negotiation framework for the expansion and strengthening of that Agreement was signed, whereby both countries hoped to achieve better integration by adding new customs preferences and strengthening existing preferences. On 30 May 2001, Mexico and Cuba signed an Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement, unanimously adopted by the Mexican Senate on 11 September 2001. The Agreement came into force on 3 May 2002. In the budgetary and financial spheres, the Government of Mexico has not promulgated or applied laws or unilateral measures relating to an economic or financial embargo against any country, and therefore fully complies with the provisions of United Nations General Assembly resolution 67/4. It maintains relations with Cuba in accordance with the interests of the two countries. In September 2011, the Government of Mexico informed the Cuban Government of the interest of PEMEX in the exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons in Cuba. During the presidential visit, the representatives of PEMEX Exploración y Producción and Unión Cuba Petróleo signed a non-binding letter of intent enabling PEMEX to assess the possibilities of participating and investing in the exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons in Cuba, in the blocks contiguous with Mexico's exclusive economic zone, while fully respecting the sovereignty of both countries. During the official visit to Cuba on 11 and 12 April 2012, the then President of Mexico reiterated that Mexico condemned and would continue to condemn the unjustified economic embargo imposed against the island for half a century. The Government of Mexico has also consistently opposed Cuba's economic, political and diplomatic isolation. It has therefore firmly supported Cuba's inclusion in all regional integration machinery in order to promote economic and commercial exchange, cooperation and development. During the aforementioned presidential visit to Havana, the importance of the active participation of Cuba in the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) was underlined. At the meeting between Presidents Enrique Peña Nieto and Raúl Castro Ruz, held in the context of the CELAC Summit in Santiago, Chile, in January 2013, they agreed to strengthen and revitalize the bilateral relationship between the two countries. Other steps towards closer ties included the visit of the Director-General de Bancomext last March; in April, during the working visit of the Undersecretary for Latin America and the Caribbean, the status of the main issues in the bilateral relationship was reviewed and new paths of collaboration outlined. In the light of the foregoing, the Government of Mexico reiterates its firm commitment to contribute actively and decisively to the effectiveness of international law under this agenda item of the General Assembly. The Government of Mongolia has neither promulgated nor applied any laws and measures of the kind referred to in the preamble to General Assembly resolution 67/4. Mongolia has consistently supported the aforementioned resolution. The Government of Montenegro reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and has neither promulgated nor applied laws or measures of the kind referred to in resolution 67/4. The Government of Montenegro is ready to further develop cooperation with Cuba at both the bilateral and multilateral level. The Kingdom of Morocco reiterates its firm attachment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the cardinal principles of International law. The Kingdom of Morocco has always encouraged the development of friendly relations between United Nations Member States. The Republic of Mozambique has never promulgated, applied or contributed to the application of any of the laws or regulations mentioned in the said resolution. It was in this context that the Republic of Mozambique voted in favour of the aforementioned resolution and it reiterates its unconditional support for its provisions, appealing to the United Nations to ensure that all Member States take the resolution into consideration. As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, Myanmar has steadfastly adhered to the principled position of the Movement in strongly opposing the use of unilateral trade and economic sanctions imposed on developing countries for political purpose. They are counterproductive and undermine human rights, particularly the right of peoples to development. As a country confronted with similar unilateral sanctions for the past decades, Myanmar fully understands the extent of the hardship and suffering caused by the unilateral sanctions, as they usually affect the people directly, especially vulnerable groups such as women and children. As such, we have a sympathetic view that the embargo imposed on Cuba has caused huge economic damage and hardship to the country and its people, preventing the country from fully developing its economic potential. In light of the positive changes taking place in Myanmar, most of the unilateral sanctions imposed on the country have been gradually eased or lifted by the European Union and the United States since 2012. This has paved the way for better opportunities for promoting trade, investment and employment for the country, bringing benefits to its people. Likewise, the decades-long embargo imposed on Cuba should also be lifted soonest to ease the economic hardship and sufferings to its people. Myanmar, on its part, has not promulgated any laws or regulations of the kind which could hamper freedom of trade or international navigation. The Government of the Republic of Namibia upholds the principle of peaceful coexistence among nations, respects the sovereign equality of States and believes in fair and open trade among nations. The embargo imposed on Cuba and its people by the United States is contrary to the fundamental principles of international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the regulations of the World Trade Organization. Namibia remains concerned about the promulgation and application of all laws and measures constituting an economic, commercial or financial embargo against Cuba, especially the extraterritorial nature of such laws and measures. Since the attainment of its independence, Namibia has taken steps to strengthen trade relations with Cuba. In 1991, the two countries established a permanent joint commission on economic, scientific, trade, educational and cultural cooperation. Since its inception, the commission has met biannually. The two countries decided to maximize the use of the Missions and also to take advantage of high-level visits instead of hosting joint commissions. In this way, the first Namibia-Cuba consultative meeting on wide-ranging issues of bilateral concern to the two countries was held in Havana on 25 June 2012. The following official visits between Cuba and Namibia by senior officials and others were undertaken during 2012: :: National Housing Enterprise to attend the FECONS Fair for the construction industry and conclude discussions with the Unión de Empresas Constructoras Caribe in Cuba. :: Ministry of Youth, National Service, Sport and Culture for a training programme for Namibian amateur boxers. :: President of the National Assembly of People's Power, Ricardo Alarcón de Quesada, paid an official visit to Namibia. :: The Director-General of NBC visited Cuba to finalize a film project on the history of Namibia. :: The Cuban journalist, Hedelberto López Blanch, visited Namibia to report on a meeting of the South West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO). :: Two long-serving locally recruited staff members of the Namibian Embassy in Cuba and their spouses visited Namibia. :: A representative from the Cuban Ministry of Public Health visited Namibia to negotiate draft agreements. :: A group of eight young Namibian boxers arrived in Cuba for training in preparation for the Southern African Development Community zone 6 youth games in Zambia. :: The Hon. Richard Kamwi, Minister of Health and Social Services, paid an official visit to Cuba to discuss and finalize outstanding agreements. :: Officials from the Ministry of Youth, National Service, Sports and Culture visited Cuba to benchmark the Ministry's activities and programmes in the areas of sports, youth, culture and arts development with their Cuban counterparts. :: At the invitation of the Cuban Ministry of Foreign Trade and Investment and the Havana International Trade Fair Organizing Committee, a Namibian delegation from the Ministry of Trade and Industry attended Havana International Trade Fair. Bilateral agreements signed in 2012: :: On 15 June 2012, a protocol agreement was signed between the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Cuba and the Ministry of Defence of Namibia. :: On 4 July 2012, an agreement on scientific and technological cooperation and the facilitation of animal donations to Cuba from Namibia was signed between Hon. Netumbo Nandi-Ndaitwah, Minister of Environment and Tourism, and Major General (R) Miquel Luis Abud Soto, Director of the National Zoo Park of Cuba, in Windhoek. :: In October 2012, Alfred Ilukena, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education, concluded and signed an agreement on collaboration on technical assistance for academic and professional activities between the Namibian Ministry of Education and the University of Pedagogical Science of the Cuban Ministry of Education. :: In October 2012, a specific agreement for Cuban medical services to be provided to Namibia was signed between the Cuban Ministry of Public Health and the Namibian Ministry of Health and Social Services for 112 medical professionals, technologists and engineers. :: In November 2012, during the Havana International Trade Fair, a representative of the Namibian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Vice-President of the Cuban Chamber of Commerce signed an agreement on cooperation between their two organizations. Bilateral relations between Namibia and Cuba continue to be excellent and thus the Government remains committed to the necessity of an immediate end to all sanctions imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. We believe that the measures imposed against Cuba have serious negative implications for the overall development and well-being of the Cuban population. Namibia strongly supports General Assembly resolution 67/4 and calls for an immediate and unconditional lifting of the embargo against the Republic of Cuba, in conformity with obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. Every year, we have always and will continue to make statements of support in the General Assembly calling for the removal of the embargo against the people of Cuba. The Government of Nauru has not promulgated or applied laws or measures against Cuba that would prohibit economic, commercial or financial relations between the Republic of Nauru and the Republic of Cuba. The Government of Nauru is committed to the decisions of General Assembly resolution 67/4 of 13 November 2012. The Government of Nepal has firmly adhered to the provisions of General Assembly resolution 67/4 and has not promulgated or applied any laws or measures contrary to the resolution. The Government of New Zealand reaffirms its position in support of General Assembly resolution 67/4. The Government of New Zealand has consistently supported General Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the trade embargo against Cuba. New Zealand has no trade or economic legislation or measures that restrict or discourage trade or investment to or from Cuba. [22 April 2013] The Government of Reconciliation and National Unity of Nicaragua, in accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the principles of international law, reaffirms once more its steadfast and unwavering respect for the sovereign equality of States, the principle of non-intervention and non-interference in internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, as set forth in various international instruments, and other principles essential to peace and international coexistence. Nicaragua also reiterates the right of every State to choose its own social, political and economic system free from outside interference of any kind. Accordingly, we condemn and reject the implementation of these unilateral extraterritorial coercive measures. Nicaragua once again expresses its unconditional solidarity with the Government and people of Cuba and states that it has not enacted, nor will it enact, any laws affecting the economic, commercial and financial rights of the fraternal people and Government of Cuba and that it has not implemented, nor will it implement, any measures that might impose restrictions on trade with Cuba since this would contravene the purposes of resolution 67/4. Similarly, Nicaraguan law does not acknowledge the validity of coercive extraterritorial measures and thus condemns and rejects the implementation of such measures. Rather, since the adoption of this resolution, the Government of Nicaragua has strengthened and will continue to strengthen its political, economic and commercial relations and its ties of complementarity, solidarity and development cooperation with the people and Government of Cuba at the bilateral level and through the various existing integration, unity and cooperation mechanisms in the Latin American and Caribbean region, in particular the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America-Peoples' Trade Agreement (ALBA-TCP), PetroCaribe and CELAC, of which Cuba is serving as President pro tempore. Nicaragua reiterates its emphatic rejection and condemnation of the continuance and tightening of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba by the United States of America, which not only fails to contribute to the requisite climate of dialogue and cooperation which should prevail in international relations between sovereign States, but also constitutes the principal obstacle to the development of this fraternal country and its attempts to maintain its major economic and social achievements. The response of the fraternal people and Government of Cuba to this cruel and inhumane embargo and the impact thereof has been one of solidarity and internationalism, including the sending of more doctors and educators, more cooperation in solidarity and more fair trade, as a contribution to the full development of all the peoples of the world. Year by year, the people and Government of Cuba have substantially increased their unrestricted assistance to the Nicaraguan people, particularly in the areas of health and education. The Government of Nicaragua reiterates its condemnation of the criminal economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the Government of the United States of America against Cuba and its firm commitment to and full respect for the principles and norms of international law. It once again calls on the Government of the United States of America to comply with the 20 General Assembly resolutions expressing the views of the entire international community, which demands that it end the economic, commercial and financial embargo against the heroic people and Government of the fraternal Republic of Cuba. [14 June 2013] The Government of the Republic of the Niger is deeply committed to respecting the principles of the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, as established in the Charter of the United Nations and in international law, and has not taken any measure that conflicts with the resolution. On the contrary, the Republic of the Niger and the Republic of Cuba have maintained good cooperative relations since the signing of the General Agreement on Cooperation between their two countries in 1994. Since then, the scope of this cooperation and the activities covered by it have evolved and expanded. The two countries regularly hold bilateral consultations, thereby attesting to the political will of their leaders to strengthen the ties of cooperation and solidarity between them for the benefit of their peoples. The Government of the Niger also considers that each country and each people has the legitimate right to establish its own development model freely and with the same opportunities for success in accordance with the principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations. For all the above reasons, the Republic of the Niger continues to support its sister republic, Cuba, in its campaign to secure the lifting of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against it by the United States of America. The Federal Government of Nigeria maintains friendly relations with all States and does not favour unilateral measures to settle political disputes. Consequently, the Federal Government reiterates its support for ending the embargo against Cuba. The Government of Norway reaffirms its position in favour of resolution 67/4. Norway does not promulgate or apply laws and measures referred to in resolution 67/4. Norway does not apply trade or economic legislation against Cuba that restricts or discourages trade or investment to or from Cuba. On the contrary, Norway is in favour of increased cooperation with all parts of Cuban society, including commercial relations. The Government of Oman is not applying any laws and measures of the kind referred to in the preamble to the said resolution, in conformity with its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and international law, which reaffirm the freedom of trade and navigation, and reaffirms as well the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. Pakistan is fully in observance of resolution 67/4. From the beginning of its diplomatic relations with the Government of Cuba, the Government of Panama has expressed its interest in and commitment to maintaining and strengthening the ties of friendship and cooperation between the two countries. In their diplomatic relations to date, Panama and Cuba have signed 22 agreements that remain fully in force, of which 14 are inter-agency agreements on various areas of cooperation, including combating drug trafficking, basic cooperation, cooperation in the cultural and educational fields, lifting of visa requirements for diplomatic passports, political consultation mechanisms, mutual recognition of higher education, air service agreements, a partial trade agreement and an agreement on legal assistance in criminal cases. Panama and Cuba are currently negotiating additional cooperation instruments, including a draft agreement for the promotion and protection of investments, a draft agreement on the avoidance of double taxation on the operation of aircraft, a collaboration and technical assistance agreement between the Panamanian State Radio and Television System and the Cuban Radio and Television Institute, an agreement on the transfer of prisoners, and expansion of the partial trade agreement. Panama has historically condemned the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on Cuba by the United States of America, as demonstrated by its support for General Assembly resolution 67/4; for various previous resolutions adopted by the Assembly; and in other regional and international forums. Panama believes that dialogue and discussion aimed at finding the best solution to the problem for the Cuban people should continue on the basis of the principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. Panama firmly rejects coercive unilateral measures with extraterritorial effect that are contrary to international law and to the commonly accepted rules of free trade established in all of the multilateral trade and integration mechanisms in which it participates. Panama will continue to support all efforts to end the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Panama maintains fruitful trade relations with Cuba in various areas, as shown by the following statistics: :: From January to September 2012, Panamanian exports to Cuba were valued at 1,755,877 balboas. During the same period, Cuban imports to Panama amounted to 776,962 balboas. Colón Free Zone :: In 2012, imports of Cuban origin entering the Colón Free Zone amounted to 2,320,236 balboas. During the same period, re-exports were valued at 254,806,494 balboas. Investment :: Panama and Cuba have a Convention on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed in Panama City on 27 January 1999 and approved through Act No. 5 of 3 May 1999 (Official Gazette No. 23,793 of 11 May 1999). The exchange of notes for the Act's entry into force took place on 24 May and 26 July 1999 and the Act entered into force on 26 July 1999. Tourism :: In 2012, a total of 5,960 Cuban citizens entered Panama through Tocumen International Airport. The Government of Papua New Guinea reaffirms its support for General Assembly resolution 67/4, which advocates the end of the economic embargo against Cuba, which Papua New Guinea has consistently endorsed. Papua New Guinea does not have any restrictive legislative or other measure against Cuba. On the contrary, it encourages the development of constructive and friendly relations between both countries in keeping with the spirit and letter of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Papua New Guinea is therefore not supportive of the extraterritorial application of laws and regulations that infringe on the sovereignty of other Member States. [9 July 2013] The Republic of Paraguay fully complies with General Assembly resolution 67/4 entitled "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba" and has not applied measures or laws of the kind indicated in that resolution. Similarly, Paraguayan legislation does not recognize the extraterritorial application of domestic laws, a practice that infringes on the sovereignty of other States, and considers that the practice undermines the principles of international law. In its foreign policy, Paraguay, as one of the founding States of the United Nations, defends and embraces the constitutional principles that govern its international relations, enshrined in article 143 of the Constitution: national independence, the self-determination of peoples, the juridical equality of States, international solidarity and cooperation, international protection of human rights, freedom of navigation in international waters, non-intervention, and condemnation of all forms of dictatorship, colonialism and imperialism. Paraguay also upholds Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations (on purposes and principles), which call for friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, and the general principles of international law in the belief that the extraterritorial application of domestic laws infringes on the sovereignty of other States, the juridical equality of States and the principle of non-intervention, as well as affecting freedom of international trade and navigation. In the United Nations, Paraguay has consistently supported the relevant General Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and has repeatedly expressed its opposition thereto, as have the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and others that have called for an immediate end to the embargo. Peru remains fully committed to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law, particularly the sovereign equality of States, nonintervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation. Peru considers that the extraterritorial application of domestic laws, as demonstrated by the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba, constitutes a unilateral act contrary to the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the basic principles of the multilateral trading system. Since 1992, when Peru voted in favour of resolution 47/19, submitted by Cuba for adoption by the United Nations General Assembly, the Government has voted in favour of all subsequent resolutions on this matter. Peru has neither promulgated nor applied any laws or regulations that could affect the sovereignty of other States or freedom of trade and navigation. Peru believes that these coercive measures affect Cuba's economic growth and restrict its social and human development. The Government of Peru expresses its profound concern about the adverse effects that the embargo has on the quality of life and well-being of the Cuban people, especially with regard to food supply, health and other essential welfare services, by denying them access to private credit, food, medicine, technology and other supplies needed for Cuba's development. Peru continues to promote trade and economic exchange with Cuba and has consistently opposed the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against it. Bilateral trade, though in its infancy, has increased considerably in recent years, as has the number of air connections between Lima and Havana; this indicates that there will be not only a considerable wave of tourists from South America to Cuba, but also an opportunity to further strengthen the bilateral trade relationship. In conclusion, Peru considers that the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba is inconsistent with the dynamics of regional politics, as illustrated recently by Cuba's return to dialogue and cooperation forums in the Americas, including its current service as President pro tempore of CELAC. The activities of the Philippines in line with resolution 67/4 are as follows: Agreement on cultural and educational cooperation (2001) Since 2003, Cuba has provided university scholarships for financially disadvantaged Filipinos in courses in medicine and hydraulics engineering. The scholarships include free tuition, board, lodging and an allowance of 80 Cuban pesos (US$4.00) per month. There are currently seven Filipino scholars currently in Cuba. Five are studying medicine at the Latin American School of Medicine (ELAM) and two are studying hydraulics engineering. In addition, two Filipino scholars finished their studies in medicine in 2009. Agreement on sports cooperation between the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC) and the Cuban Instituto Nacional de Deportes, Educación Fisica y Recreación (INDER) (2003) Cuban coaches have contributed to the training of young Filipino boxers, including Mansueto "Onyok" Velasco Jr., who won a silver medal at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta. Philippine boxing teams have participated in the Cuban boxing circuit in preparation for major boxing championships. A five-member team trained for the 2008 Beijing Olympics and the 2009 World Championship through the Cuba National Boxing Championship and the Roberto Bolado Memorial Cup (Havana, April to May 2008). Another 10-member Philippine boxing contingent trained in Havana in October 2008 for the 1st International Amateur Boxing Association (AIBA) Youth Boxing Championships in Guadalajara, Mexico (23 October to 2 November 2008). Two Cuban boxing coaches from Cuba Deportes, the Cuban Sports Minister's agency for professional sports training, also trained the Philippine national boxing team from January 2009 to February 2010. The Philippines Secretary of Agriculture, Proceso J. Alcala, led a six-member delegation to Cuba between 16 and 24 September 2012, with one of the results being a draft agreement between the Philippines and Cuba on agricultural cooperation. Secretary Alcala has extended a personal invitation to his Cuban counterpart, Minister of Agriculture Gustavo R. Rodriguez, to visit the Philippines this year in order to finalize and sign the draft agreement. From 17 to 22 May 2012, the representative for Asia of Labiofam S.A., a Cuban enterprise manufacturing products for human and veterinary use, visited the Philippines to promote Vidatox CH-30, a new alternative homeopathic product for anti-cancer treatment, as well as other Labiofam products such as Biorat, Griselef, Bactivec and other veterinary vaccines, to the National Center for Disease Prevention and Control, the Philippine Institute of Traditional and Alternative Health Care and the University of the Philippines. Farmers and fishermen have expressed interest in Labiofam products, and Unilab Inc., the largest pharmaceutical company in the Philippines, signed a confidentiality agreement with Labiofam, which is a step towards consolidation of business links between the two companies. The Philippines and Cuba also worked out a draft Philippine-Cuba plan of action, a two-year programme of cooperation in the areas of agriculture, biotechnology, culture, education, fishing, maritime matters, cooperation, public health, press (media), sports, trade and investment. The State of Qatar has not implemented any economic sanctions against Cuba. The State of Qatar continues to support resolution 67/4 as it is in line with the general foreign policy of the State of Qatar, which is based on the promotion of international peace and security, friendship and cooperation with all States and rejection of all forms of political or economic coercion. According to the general fiscal and economic development policy of the State of Qatar, which is based on the principle of international partnership and solidarity and initiatives to overcome difficulties and challenges to the strengthening of international cooperation on financing for development, the Government of the State of Qatar is moving forward towards achieving such goals according to the following principles. :: The establishment of a global economic system consistent with justice and full inclusion. :: Support for, and achievement of, the globally agreed Millennium Development Goals and promotion of sustainable development. :: Full commitment to the establishment of just and democratic societies for development. :: The effective use of trade and investment opportunities and the fight against poverty. The foreign and economic policy of the Government of the State of Qatar, in line with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly, therefore supports efforts to lift the economic embargo imposed against Cuba by the United States of America. The position of principle of the Russian Federation in respect of this resolution is well known. Our country fully shares the view of the overwhelming majority of members of the international community in firmly rejecting the blockade imposed by the United States against Cuba and in calling for its earliest repeal. We consider that the continuation of the commercial, economic and financial embargo imposed by the United States against Cuba is anachronistic and serves the sole purpose of hindering the island's economic development. We are convinced that ending the embargo against Cuba and normalizing United States-Cuban relations as whole would help to improve the island's situation. We expect that the decisions by the Government of the United States to relax some aspects of the blockade regime (the removal of some of the restrictions on visits by United States citizens to their relatives in Cuba and on the sending of monetary and postal transfers) will be followed by other actions in order to lift the blockade once and for all. The Government of the Republic of Rwanda, guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, fully implements General Assembly resolution 67/4, reaffirms its support for the said resolution and has neither promulgated nor applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of that resolution. Furthermore, Rwanda is able to state that there are no legal or regulatory impediments to free transit or trade between Rwanda and Cuba, and Rwanda voted in favour of resolution 67/4. In light of its commitment to international law and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and its obligations under same, the Government of Saint Kitts and Nevis wishes to emphasize that it has neither promulgated nor applied any laws and measures restricting the freedom of trade and navigation that impinge on the sovereignty of other States and the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction. Practices that violate the provisions of resolution 67/4 and that attempt to coerce citizens of third States to comply with foreign legislation do not augur well for international peace and good-neighbourliness. Measures of this nature ought to be reviewed with the aim of conforming to international law. Saint Kitts and Nevis therefore remains opposed to the extraterritorial application and effects of national legislation on the sovereignty of States as contravening the tenets of international law regarding the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States and harmonious coexistence. The Government of Saint Kitts and Nevis reiterates its support for General Assembly resolution 67/4 and once again calls for an immediate end to this unilateral action. [2 April 2013] In compliance with international legal obligations with the commitment to the principles of the sovereign equality of States, the Government of Saint Lucia has not promulgated any law, legislation or measure, or taken any other action that would contravene the exercise of sovereignty by a Member State in its lawful interests, or obstruct the freedom of commercial activity, trade or economic cooperation. The Government of Saint Lucia reiterates the consistent economic, educational, scientific and technical cooperation between Cuba and Saint Lucia in furtherance of socioeconomic advancement and sustainability. Saint Lucia reiterates its position on the extraterritorial application of national legislation and considers it to be contrary to the principles of international law, the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States and peaceful coexistence among nations. The Government of Saint Lucia has consistently supported the relevant General Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. [2 May 2013] The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly opposes the extraterritorial application of national legislation that demonstrates disregard for the sovereignty of States. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines views such actions as contrary to the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the principles of sovereign equality, peaceful coexistence and non-interference in the internal affairs of other States. The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines does not apply unilateral economic measures as a means of political or economic coercion against other States. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has no laws that in any way restrict the freedom of trade, navigation, economic cooperation or other commercial activity with Cuba. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines enjoys very friendly relations with Cuba and continues to engage in solidarity with the Government and people of Cuba through a variety of constructive, cooperative and mutually beneficial partnerships. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has consistently and unreservedly voted in favour of General Assembly resolutions on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines expresses its continued grave concern at the hardship and human suffering caused by the ongoing imposition of the embargo against Cuba, despite overwhelming international support for multiple resolutions that have called for an end to this blockade. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines views the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba as outmoded, unjust and illegal. The Government of the Independent State of Samoa reaffirms its absolute commitment to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, including, in particular, the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation, which also form fundamental principles of international law. Consequently, Samoa has neither promulgated nor applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in General Assembly resolution 67/4. The Republic of San Marino has always and generally been against any imposition of any embargo and therefore it is against the imposition of the unilateral embargo against Cuba as a means of pressure and because of the serious repercussions on the population. The Government of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe affirms the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nation, multilateralism in international relations, the fundamental principle of free trade and other international legal instruments. The Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe condemns any unilateral decision that seeks to restrict the economic, commercial and financial freedom of one State. In this case, considering that these coercive measures impeding its social and human development, had a direct impact on the Cuban people and especially on the most vulnerable sectors of society and are affecting Cuba's economic growth. In manifesting the excellent relation of cooperation and friendship with Cuba, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe has always voted in favour of the resolution against the embargo and once again renews its support for resolution 67/4. The Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe congratulates itself on the decision taken by the United States in 2012 and encourages both the United States and Cuba to seek solutions to improving relations in a peaceful and neighbourly spirit, in order to strengthen peace and cooperation all over the world. On several occasions, the Saudi Arabian Minister of Finance has stated that Saudi Arabia would welcome the opportunity to foster and increase trade between the two countries. Cuba has made a request through the Saudi export support programme to purchase Saudi materials and products. In 2011, trade between the countries amounted to 1.5 million riyals. In 1427 A.H., Saudi Arabia and Cuba signed a general cooperation agreement that covers cooperation in all areas, including trade and related investment and double taxation. Cuba hopes to expand its economic relations with Saudi Arabia through the conclusion of an agreement (memorandum on political consultation) that would see the establishment of a joint Cuban-Saudi Arabian committee. Certain parts of that agreement concern economic relations. The Saudi Fund for Development contributed $15 million towards the renovation of a maternity and children's hospital and $30 million towards a project for improving and expanding the Havana water system. Cuba has expressed interest in cultural cooperation. To that end, some Cuban painters will participate in an exhibition organized by the Ministry of Culture and Information entitled "The Kingdom as painted by the world's artists", to be held in 2014. Cuba has also welcomed Saudi Arabian students who have expressed a desire to enrol in its universities. The Ministry of Higher Education also participated in the 22nd Cuban Book Fair, which was held in Havana from 14 to 24 February 2013. The Ministry of Health recently contracted a number of Cuban specialist doctors to work in Government hospitals. Senegal, which voted in favour of the resolution calling for the lifting of the embargo and has consistently complied with the provisions thereof, has no trade, economic or financial legislation aimed at restricting or deterring trade or investment flowing to or from Cuba. The Republic of Serbia, guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and reaffirming its commitment to the rules and principles of international law, fully implements resolution 67/4, and has never promulgated or applied any laws or measures, or acts of the kind referred to in the preamble to the said resolution. Serbia has consistently supported the aforementioned resolution in the General Assembly and voted in its favour in this regard. The Republic of Serbia calls for an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, expressing the desire of the overwhelming majority of Member States of the United Nations. [9 May 2013] The Government of the Republic of Seychelles once again fully endorses the content of General Assembly resolution 67/4. Seychelles rejects the imposition of laws and regulations with extraterritorial impact and all other forms of coercive economic measures and calls on States to refrain from applying such measures as they affect the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of entities under their jurisdiction and the freedom of trade and navigation. Much has changed since the embargo was initially imposed. Globalization should create conditions for global solidarity and partnership among nations. Lifting the embargo would be in keeping with the spirit of the times. The embargo not only contravenes the fundamental norms of international humanitarian law and the principles of multilateralism, but is also contrary to both the letter and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and the Millennium Declaration. The significance of the embargo on the Cuban economy continues to be of great concern to the world community and its humanitarian impact on the Cuban people, especially in health care and food, is particularly saddening. Those consequences are exacerbated by the adverse effects of the global economic, financial, energy and food crises that seriously compromise Cuba's efforts to further improve its level of development. The blockade continues to cause irreparable damage to the economic, social and cultural development of Cuba as it deprives its people of their rightful opportunities emanating from free trade. As a fellow island nation, Seychelles also recognizes the particularly crucial role that trade plays in island development, as island societies are often more likely to be dependent on imports and are 12 times more vulnerable to fuel price shocks. Consistent with its obligation under the Charter of the United Nations and international law, Sierra Leone has neither promulgated nor applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of resolution 67/4. Sierra Leone supported the resolution and is convinced that the lifting of the discriminatory trade practice and the extraterritorial application of domestic law would not only help to alleviate the socioeconomic condition of the Cuban people, but also promote dialogue, good neighbourliness and cooperation among States. [15 April 2013] The Government of Singapore reaffirms its support for General Assembly resolution 67/4. Singapore has consistently supported resolutions calling for an end to the United States trade embargo on Cuba since 1995 and voted in their favour. Solomon Islands remains saddened to see remnants of the cold war persist to this day and age. The United States economic, commercial and financial embargo against the Government and people of Cuba continues to place the children and people of Cuba in a difficult situation. Solomon Islands calls for the unconditional lifting of the blockade in line with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. Solomon Islands acknowledges the spirit, the resilience and the generosity of the Government and people of Cuba in educating, sheltering and clothing children from a multitude of States who are studying there, despite the imposed hardship. Somalia has no laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of the present resolution, in conformity with obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and international law, which, inter alia, reaffirm the freedom of trade and navigation. The continued imposition of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba is a flagrant violation of the right to peace, development, security, the principle of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in each other's domestic affairs. Further to this, the blockade constitutes a violation of international law and its imposition shows disregard for the noble principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. After 50 years, the embargo has done nothing but hurt the people of Cuba economically. The situation has been further aggravated by the global financial and economic crisis, energy crisis and food crisis, as well as the challenges of climate change, which have affected many countries. The embargo affects all categories of trade, including humanitarian material such as food and medicine supplies. It is also applied extraterritorially. Thus, ships that dock in Cuba are banned from also docking in the United States for six months, even if those ships bring humanitarian goods, and companies outside the United States, including Canadian companies, are also subject to United States sanctions. Many traders that wish to conduct business with Cuba are mostly afraid because they risk losing access to the vastly larger United States market. This also affects foreign banking institutions, as they have fines levied against them for conducting operations with Cuba. The embargo is therefore hindering the Cuban economic recovery and also negatively impacts tourism, foreign direct investment and currency transfers. It is therefore against this backdrop that South Africa reiterates its support in expressing opposition to all aspects of this blockade and the unilateral action by the United States of America against Cuba. The Republic of South Sudan reiterates its profound concern at the continuation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. In line with the majority of Member States of the United Nations and African Union resolutions Assembly/AU/Res.1 (XVII), Assembly/AU/Res.1 (XIX) and Assembly/AU/Res.1 (XXI), the Republic of South Sudan calls for the lifting of the embargo endured by the Cuban people for over half a century. The Republic of South Sudan considers that the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba is a unilateral act contrary to the principles of international law enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles of the multilateral trading system. The Republic of South Sudan considers that these coercive measures are affecting Cuba's economic growth and impeding its social and human development. Sri Lanka does not approve of the use of unilateral economic measures against any country that are inconsistent with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. Sri Lanka is of the view that implementation of such measures impedes the rule of law and transparency of international trade and the freedom of trade and navigation. Sri Lanka has not promulgated any laws and measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of resolution 67/4. Sri Lanka has continuously supported the adoption of this resolution at the United Nations General Assembly and taken the position that the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba needs to end. [10 May 2013] The State of Palestine, suffering from the devastating humanitarian and economic impact of the blockade imposed by Israel, the occupying power, on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, reaffirms its principled position in support of General Assembly resolution 67/4 of 13 November 2012 and all relevant United Nations resolutions and positions adopted by the Non-Aligned Movement and by the Group of 77 and China, calling for an end to the trade embargo imposed against the Republic of Cuba. The State of Palestine, guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law has never promulgated or applied laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of General Assembly resolution 67/4. The State of Palestine enjoys full diplomatic relations with the Republic of Cuba and will continue to strengthen political, economic and cultural relations with the Republic of Cuba. The Government of the Republic of the Sudan pursues a policy of full respect of international law and the principles and purpose of the Charter of the United Nations, the sovereign equality of States, and non-interference in the internal affairs of others. Consistent with its principled stand, the Sudan opposes the imposition of sanctions on developing countries for their devastating impact on the efforts of those countries to achieve sustainable development and because they constitute a violation to the Charter of the United Nations. To that effect, the delegation of the Sudan participates every year in the debate of the General Assembly on the agenda item and votes with the majority of Member States, in favour of General Assembly resolutions prohibiting the imposition of such unilateral measures and sanctions. The Government of the Republic of the Sudan reaffirms that it does not promulgate or apply any laws or measures that could, by being applied outside its own national borders, affect the sovereignty of any State. The Government of the Republic of the Sudan calls for the repeal of laws that impose such measures. On the basis of the foregoing, the Sudan opposes the economic and commercial embargo imposed by the United States against Cuba, which has caused great damage and suffering to the Cuban people and violated their legitimate rights and interests, being a flagrant violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations and showing disregard for their lofty and noble principles. Sudan itself continues to suffer from the unilateral economic sanctions imposed on it by the United States of America since November 1997. Such unilateral sanctions are in violation of the legitimate right of the Sudan and Cuba and all developing countries and their peoples to choose their own political, economic and social system that fully respond to their aspirations. Since the adoption of this General Assembly resolution, the Government of the Republic of the Sudan has put the issue at the forefront of the multilateral system to mobilize support for the elimination of all forms of unilateral coercive economic measures against developing countries. The Sudan is increasingly promoting its bilateral relations with the Republic of Cuba. In this regard, the Joint Ministerial Commission between Sudan and Cuba was convened from May 2007 to June 2007 in Havana, and the delegation of the Sudan was headed by the Minister of International Cooperation along with other high-ranking officials. The Joint Ministerial Commission is the mechanism embodying all sectors of cooperation between the two countries. As means of fostering bilateral ties and combating the negative effects of the embargo, the Joint Ministerial Commission is expected to enhance and consolidate relations between the Sudan and Cuba in all fields. An advance step in bilateral relations between the two countries was taken when the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations was accredited as Ambassador to Cuba in December 2007. Furthermore, the bilateral relations between the two countries have been accomplished by exchange visits of senior officials to both countries. The Sudan participated at ministerial level in the ministerial meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement Coordinating Bureau, held in Havana from 27 to 30 April 2009, and called in its statement for the immediate end of the embargo against Cuba. In its bilateral meeting with Cuban officials the Sudan reiterated its commitment to enhancing bilateral relations with Cuba in all fields. The position of the Republic of Suriname is to remain committed to the purposes and principles as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and to upholding the principles of international law. In this connection, the Government of the Republic of Suriname has never promulgated or applied laws and measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of resolution 67/4. The Government of the Republic of Suriname is of the considered view that sovereign equality, non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries and other relevant norms governing international relations should be respected at all times. The Kingdom of Swaziland reaffirms its support for efforts aimed at ending the blockade against Cuba. Once again the Secretary-General has been requested to submit a report to the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly on the implementation of the latest resolution on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba (resolution 67/4). The blockade against the Cuban people remains the main obstacle to the development of the country and to national efforts to maintain its major economic and social achievements and to improve the quality of life of Cuban men, women and children. It is therefore our fervent hope that the Cuban people will be able to rely on the support of the international community in their legitimate demand that the blockade imposed on them by the United States of America be lifted and that Cuba will enjoy all the freedoms, rights and privileges enjoyed by all sovereign nation States without any hindrance. The Kingdom of Swaziland views the continued imposition of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba since 1960, further enforced by the Helms-Burton Act of 1996, as a violation of the principle of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in each other's domestic affairs. In addition to being unilateral and contrary to the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and to the principle of good neighbourliness, the embargo has caused huge material losses and economic damage to the people of Cuba. The blockade has not only caused incalculable suffering to the people of Cuba but also undermines the legitimate economic interests of third countries. In line with all previous United Nations resolutions on this item, among others, the Kingdom of Swaziland believes that constructive dialogue is necessary to foster mutual trust and understanding as well as harmony and peaceful coexistence among all nations of the world. The Kingdom of Swaziland supports the draft resolution before the General Assembly on this agenda item. The Syrian Arab Republic affirms that unilateral coercive measures in all their forms are illegal and constitute a violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of international law, human rights and international humanitarian law. They are in blatant contradiction to the rules and principles which govern relations between States, especially the principles of sovereign equality of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, and the need to develop friendly relations between States and promote the stability and well-being of their peoples. The Syrian Arab Republic rejects, as a matter of principle, the imposition by States or regional entities of any unilateral measures, whether economic, commercial or financial, for the purposes of coercing developing States in political or economic terms, or forcing them to take specific steps or modify their policy. Unilateral measures constitute a collective punishment for the people as a whole, undermine the United Nations system and adversely affect its powers. Moreover, they hamper international trade and the full realization of the rights provided for in human rights instruments. The Syrian Arab Republic refers to the fact that unilateral measures such as halting development aid for certain developing countries, breaking off economic relations with those States, imposing an economic, commercial and financial embargo on them, prohibiting financial and exchange operations with them and preventing investments into and out of certain developing States, in addition to the exercise of various forms of pressure and provocation on other Governments in order to force them to adopt such unilateral measures, reduce the opportunities for the peoples of affected States to achieve sustainable development. Moreover, those measures stir up feelings of hostility towards the West. The majority of such measures have been and continue to be imposed by western States, especially the United States of America and certain European States, in order to weaken the Governments of United Nations Member States and impose their own will on them, contrary to the wishes of the peoples of the concerned States and their national and regional interests. The Syrian Arab Republic also affirms that the embargo which the United States of America has imposed on Cuba for more than five decades is unlawful and is inconsistent with the standards adopted by the international community for interaction between States. The embargo has subjected Cuba to various kinds of economic, social and political harm. It has intensified the suffering of the Cuban people and affected their intensive efforts to achieve well-being and prosperity. The embargo has placed the United States of America in a position which cannot be justified under any circumstances from a legal or moral point of view, one that is politically at odds with the overwhelming majority of United Nations Member States. The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates the call of the sixteenth summit of the Non-Aligned Movement (Tehran, 26 to 31 August 2012) for an end to the embargo imposed by the Government of the United States of America against Cuba. It recalls that, during the second South Summit (Doha, 12 to 16 June 2005), the Group of 77 and China rejected unilateral coercive measures and appealed to the United States of America to bring an end to its embargo on Cuba. Proceeding from its position of principle in respect of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba and on the basis of the right of peoples to pursue all legitimate means to protect and strengthen their economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development, as enshrined in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Syrian Arab Republic voted in favour of General Assembly resolution 67/4, which emphasized the need for compliance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and reaffirmed the principles of the sovereign equality of States, non intervention in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation. In the resolution, the Assembly reiterated its call upon all States to refrain from promulgating and applying laws and measures of the kind imposed on Cuba and called urgently for an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on Cuba for more than five decades. The Syrian Arab Republic calls upon the General Assembly, in accordance with its mandate and its relevant resolutions, to take the necessary measures to put an end to the hostile practices, policies of embargo and unilateral economic measures contrary to international law that have been adopted by certain States towards their immediate geographical neighbours and towards other States that are far away from them in geographical terms. The Syrian Arab Republic calls for the intensification of international efforts to disclose the effects of the extreme coercive measures and to put an end to that phenomenon connected to the endeavour of the West to hold sway over the countries of the South and their resources. The Syrian Arab Republic calls for the embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba to be eliminated in all its forms and for the unilateral measures imposed by the United States of America and other western States on a number of countries, including Syria, to be brought to an end. The Syrian Arab Republic hopes that the international community will make its voice heard through the United Nations General Assembly and other international institutions and organizations, and that the United States of America will respect, and all its institutions will fully observe, that voice. The Government of Tajikistan reaffirms its position in support of resolution 67/4. Tajikistan is committed to the principles of international law and supports the fundamental rights of nations to freely choose their own ways of development. Taking into account, among other principles, the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade, Tajikistan believes that such economic, commercial and financial measures against Cuba continue to adversely affect the living conditions and human rights of the Cuban people and hamper the efforts of the Government of Cuba to achieve internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. Furthermore, given that the international community is facing major challenges such as the global financial and economic crisis and the resulting increase in poverty, unemployment and malnutrition, the imposition of embargoes and sanctions will be more unjustifiable than ever and deserve appropriate reactions at the global level. Such actions are contrary to the principles of international law, the sovereign equality of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States and peaceful coexistence among States. Tajikistan enjoys friendly diplomatic and economic relations with Cuba. Tajikistan will continue to undertake further measures to strengthen cooperation and develop friendly relations with Cuba. In principle, Thailand does not support the imposition by one country of its national law on another country which, in effect, compels a third country to comply with it. In Thailand's view, such an act would be contrary to the fundamental principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. Thailand has maintained neither legal provisions nor domestic measures of such nature and continues to discourage them. Thailand firmly believes in, among others, the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs of others and freedom of international trade and navigation. Any economic or political exercise should be achieved through voluntary and constructive cooperation and in conformity with the principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. Unilateral embargoes such as that imposed against Cuba undermine economic development of the country and cause suffering for its people. For these reasons, the Royal Thai Government has, for over two decades, consistently supported General Assembly resolutions calling for an end to the trade and economic embargo against Cuba and will continue to do so. The Republic of Macedonia fully implements resolution 67/4. [3 July 2013] The Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste adheres fully to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in particular, the principles of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in the internal affairs of States and the freedom of international trade and navigation. In this regard, the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste reaffirms its position in support of General Assembly resolution 67/4 and reiterates that it has not promulgated or applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to therein. The Government of Timor-Leste is opposed to the continued adoption and application of such extraterritorial measures and supports the immediate and unconditional lifting of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. In keeping with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, Togo has always striven to promote respect for the sovereign equality and territorial integrity of States and for non-intervention and non-interference in their internal affairs. Likewise, it supports unreservedly the principle of free trade and navigation, which is enshrined in numerous international legal instruments. Consequently, Togo systematically rejects the use of any unilateral measures to exert pressure on States. For this reason, it has never promulgated or applied any laws or regulations aimed at curtailing the sovereignty of other States or the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction. The Government of Togo has consistently supported the actions of the Cuban Government aimed at ending the embargo imposed against Cuba by the United States of America. The Kingdom of Tonga adheres fully to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and accepts under international law, in particular, the principles of sovereign equality of States, non-intervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation. Thus, the Kingdom of Tonga has not promulgated or applied any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble of resolution 67/4. The Kingdom of Tonga maintains friendly and diplomatic relations with Cuba. The Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago remains fully committed to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and, in particular, to the principles of the sovereign equality of States, nonintervention and non-interference in their internal affairs and freedom of international trade and navigation. The Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago believes that discriminatory trade practices and the extraterritorial application of domestic laws do not accord with the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and in international law. Accordingly, in conformity with its obligations under the Charter and in international law, Trinidad and Tobago does not apply unilateral economic measures as a means of political and economic coercion against other countries. The Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago enjoys friendly, diplomatic, economic and trade relations with the Republic of Cuba and consistently supports subregional, regional and international efforts to promote constructive dialogue aimed at a cessation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against that country, which has created real challenges to sustainable human development in Cuba. This position is reinforced in regional and interregional bodies of which Trinidad and Tobago is a member, such as the Caribbean Community, the Organization of American States, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States and the Non-Aligned Movement. Tunisia does not apply laws or unilateral measures with extraterritorial effect. [18 June 2013] The Republic of Turkey does not have any laws or measures of the kind referred to in the preamble to resolution 67/4; expresses concern at such measures that adversely affect the living standards of people; and reaffirms its adherence to the principles of freedom of trade and navigation in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and international law. The Government of Turkey maintains its stance that differences and problems between States should be settled through dialogue and negotiations. [12 April 2013] Turkmenistan supports the adoption of the aforementioned resolution. Moreover, its national legislation contains no provisions on limitation of freedom of trade and navigation. The Government of Tuvalu reiterates its position that the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba runs counter to the need for promoting dialogue and ensuring the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, which calls for solidarity, cooperation and friendly relations among all nations. Such discriminatory trade practices continue to adversely affect the living conditions and human rights and efforts of the Cuban Government and people to achieve the internationally agreed development and social goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. The Government of Tuvalu has not promulgated or applied laws or any measures against Cuba, therefore the Government of Tuvalu fully supports the lifting of the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba in line with the unequivocal and continued request of the majority of United Nations Member States. This will allow the Republic of Cuba to further consolidate and enhance its cooperation with small island developing States such as Tuvalu. [21 June 2013] Uganda enjoys normal economic, commercial and financial relations with Cuba. Uganda does not recognize or honour the embargo, which is a unilateral measure. Ukraine does not have any legislation or regulations whose extraterritorial effects could affect the sovereignty of other States and the legitimate interests of entities or persons under their jurisdiction, or freedom of trade and international navigation. Equally, the Government of Ukraine does not accept application of measures of the kind referred to above and adheres, in its relations with other countries, to the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the norms of international law and the freedom of trade and navigation. [10 April 2013] The United Arab Emirates voted in favour of resolution 67/4 and it acts according to its obligations in light of the principles and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. The United Arab Emirates therefore affirms the necessity for all countries to enjoy, in accordance with international law, the freedom of trade and navigation in international waters. Hence, the United Arab Emirates does not apply any economic, commercial or financial embargo against Cuba, nor does it allow the application of such measures outside international legality. The United Republic of Tanzania reiterates its solidarity and support to the Government and people of Cuba in calling for an immediate end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. The embargo continues to impede Cuba's economy and development and affect the daily lives of Cubans. Its termination, as called for by numerous resolutions of the General Assembly, including resolution 67/4, would open up greater opportunities for the Cuban people who, despite the protracted restraints, have continued to render valuable support and assistance to many nations, including the United Republic of Tanzania, in several fields such as health, agriculture and education. Tanzania acknowledges the positive steps undertaken by President Obama's administration and encourages the administration to take further steps towards ending the embargo. [23 April 2013] The Eastern Republic of Uruguay has repeatedly denounced the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and its effects on the well-being of the Cuban people as a result of unilateral coercive measures that affect the freedom and transparency of international trade. Uruguay maintains a foreign policy that encourages free trade and navigation and its legislation does not recognize extraterritorial application of the domestic laws of other States. It holds the view that, in addition to violating generally accepted principles of international law, this practice is a form of pressure that impedes dialogue rather than encouraging it. Accordingly, the Eastern Republic of Uruguay has neither promulgated nor applied any laws, decrees or measures of the kind referred to in General Assembly resolution 67/4. The Government of the Republic of Vanuatu fully endorses the content of resolution 67/4. The Government of the Republic of Vanuatu hereby informs that Vanuatu does not have any laws and regulations having extraterritorial effects, because such laws or measures impact upon the sovereignty of other States and are thus inconsistent with international law. Furthermore, the Government of the Republic of Vanuatu underscores the importance of trade and commerce to small island developing States; not only does it have wide repercussions on their ability to develop, but also adversely affects their right to development. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela does not and will never apply unilateral measures with extraterritorial effects that violate the sovereign rights and political independence of other States, as well as the human rights of their people, in accordance with the constitutional principles that underpin its actions in the community of nations, namely humanism, cooperation and solidarity among peoples, and its staunch commitment to peace, guided by its unconditional respect for the norms and principles of international law. The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates its categorical rejection of the application of unilateral measures with extraterritorial effects because, in its opinion, they violate the norms and principles of international law enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and other international legal instruments; freedom of trade and navigation; and the norms of the international trading system. In addition, it reaffirms its condemnation of application of the extraterritorial provisions of the Torricelli and Helms-Burton Acts, which have caused serious additional harm to the Cuban economy over the past 20 years in terms of its economic relations with third countries and with the subsidiaries of United States firms. Venezuela has strongly supported the 21 resolutions on this subject that have been adopted by an overwhelming majority of the General Assembly since 1991, as well as the declarations repudiating this type of hostile action, which undermines peaceful coexistence between nations and international legality, that have been made in other political forums. The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela again calls on the President of the United States of America, Barack Obama, to end the merciless economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against the fraternal people of Cuba by his Government. A favourable response to this international appeal would demonstrate his country's commitment to international law, as evidenced by its unconditional respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. The policy of confrontation that has been promoted and implemented by the United States of America for decades has affected the well-being of the Cuban people, whose human rights have been violated as a result of the illegal measures. The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela urges the United States of America to comply strictly with General Assembly resolutions 47/19, 48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10, 53/4, 54/21, 55/20, 56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12, 61/11, 62/3, 63/7, 64/6, 65/6, 66/6 and 67/4. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela therefore reiterates its condemnation of the strengthening of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against Cuba by the United States of America, an action that in no way contributes to the climate of dialogue and cooperation that must necessarily prevail in international relations among sovereign, independent States in conformity with the spirit and purpose of the Charter of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) (the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States), adopted on 24 October 1970. The Venezuelan Government notes with concern the measures recently taken by President Barack Obama's administration, such as the imposition, in December 2012, of unfair and illegal fines on banking institutions operating in Cuba on the pretext of alleged violations of the unilateral economic, commercial and financial sanctions regime. According to the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 67/4, the economic and financial losses caused by the embargo are great, amounting to over $1 trillion. Such punitive measures also include prohibiting United States authorities from selling health-care technologies to Cuba. Thus, the United States Government, with its policies of persistent aggression, is flagrantly violating the human rights of the Cuban people, and particularly its right to health, by blocking the sale of equipment and drugs to this fraternal Latin American country. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela endorses the repeated declarations made by, inter alia, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Ibero-American Summit of Heads of State and Government, the European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit, the Summit of Heads of State and Government of CELAC and the Association of Caribbean States in repudiation of the application of unilateral measures with extraterritorial effects, which it considers to be contrary to dialogue and cooperation as genuine expressions of inclusive and transparent multilateralism. It also wishes to draw attention to the special communiqué issued by the Summit of Heads of State and Government of CELAC, held in Caracas from 2 to 3 December 2011, in which: 1. [They express] their strongest opposition to the coercive and unilateral economic measures imposed on sovereign countries for political reasons. These measures impair the well-being of their peoples and are designed to prevent these countries from exercising their right to determine, of their own free will, their political, economic and social systems. 2. They reiterate their strongest condemnation of the application of laws and measures that contravene international law, such as the Helms-Burton Act, including the extraterritorial effect thereof, and urge the Government of the United States of America to end them. 3. Consequently, they call on the Government of the United States of America, in accordance with the successive resolutions adopted by the United Nations General Assembly and in response to repeated calls from the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, to put an end to the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, which is contrary to international law, inflicts extensive and unwarranted harm on the Cuban people and affects peace and harmonious relations among the nations of the Americas. In addition, at the Sixth Summit of the Americas, held in Cartagena, Colombia, from 14 to 15 April 2012, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of ALBA-TCP adopted an official communiqué in which the members decided, in full solidarity with the brotherly Latin American nation of Cuba: ... [to] demand that the United States Government end immediately the inhuman economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba, and open a process of dialogue on the basis of respect for the sovereign will and self-determination of the Cuban people. And, at the Sixteenth Summit of Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Teheran from 26 to 31 August 2012, the leaders "expressed deep concern over the widening of the extra-territorial nature of the embargo against Cuba and rejected the reinforcement of the measures adopted by the Government of [the] United States, aimed at tightening the embargo, as well as all other recent measures carried out by the Government of the United States against the people of Cuba". They also "urged the Government of the United States to return the territory now occupied by the Guantanamo Naval Base to Cuban sovereignty, and to put an end to aggressive radio and television transmission against Cuba". They "reiterated that those measures constitute a violation ... of the human rights of its people". Venezuela is convinced that the international community must continue to demand an end to the practice of applying unilateral coercive measures that seek to curtail the sovereign right of States to determine, in keeping with the right of self-determination, their own political and social model consistent with the actual situation in their respective countries and the particular requirements of their people. It considers that peoples should under no circumstances be deprived of their means of subsistence and development. Lastly, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela renews its firm commitment to unconditional respect for the norms and principles of international law and therefore appeals again to the Government of the United States of America to comply with the 21 resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and to end the merciless and criminal economic, commercial and financial embargo which it has maintained against Cuba for more than 50 years. The United States policy of blockade and embargo against Cuba over the past many decades represents a violation of international laws in general and free trade law in particular and an infringement of fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations, contravening the common desire of nations in the world to build sound and equal international relations, regardless of political systems and in respect for each nation's right to choose its own path of development. The United Nations General Assembly has for many consecutive years adopted, with an overwhelming majority, resolutions demanding that the United States end its economic, trade and financial blockade and embargo policies and laws against Cuba, the most recent of which is resolution 67/4 adopted with 188 votes in favour. It is the view of Viet Nam that the differences between the United States and the Republic of Cuba should be solved through dialogue and negotiation, in a spirit of mutual respect, respect for each other's independence and sovereignty, and non-interference in the other's internal affairs. Viet Nam reaffirms its strong support for the related General Assembly resolutions and believes that the United Nations will soon produce concrete initiatives and measures to rapidly implement the adopted resolutions in order to put an immediate end to the blockade and embargo against Cuba. Once again, Viet Nam confirms its friendship, cooperation and solidarity with the Cuban people and resolves to do its utmost with other peace-, freedom- and justice-loving peoples in the world to help the Cuban people overcome the consequences of the above-mentioned immoral and illegal blockade and embargo policy. [24 June 2013] It should be noted that for some 35 years the Republic of Yemen has enjoyed outstanding diplomatic relations with the fraternal Republic of Cuba at the economic, social and cultural levels. Yemen has consistently sought to develop and strengthen those relations in the joint interest of both countries and peoples. It has concluded several bilateral cooperation agreements with the fraternal Republic of Cuba at the diplomatic, economic, cultural and medical levels. As a result of those agreements, Cuban citizens have been sent to Yemen and educational missions have gone to Cuba, and there has been active cooperation in a number of areas. Yemen therefore supports the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. The Government of the Republic of Zambia opposes the unilateral coercive measures directed at any State Member of the United Nations as it is in violation of the Charter of the Organization, international law and international humanitarian law. Zambia therefore maintains its support for the call for all States to refrain from promulgating and applying laws and measures referred to in the resolution that hinder freedom of trade and navigation and urges States that have and continue to apply such laws and measures to take the necessary steps to repeal or invalidate them as soon as possible in accordance with their legal regime. Zimbabwe, once again wishes to express its concern over the illegal and ruinous economic, commercial and financial blockade of Cuba. Zimbabwe is dismayed that instead of being removed, the embargo is actually being reinforced, resulting in greater suffering for the people and tremendous disruption to Cuban business activities and financial transactions. The majority of Member States have continued to reject the passing of national laws with extraterritorial impact and all other coercive economic measures, including unilateral sanctions which are targeted mainly against developing countries that seek to reassert their sovereignty. Zimbabwe, which is also a victim of these ill-conceived, illegal and immoral sanctions fully understands their impact. Zimbabwe has during the past 20 years stated that the embargo against Cuba contravenes the fundamental norms of international law, international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United Nations and all the norms and principles governing peaceful relations among States. The embargo is also a violation of the principles of the sovereign equality of States and non-intervention and non-interference in each other's domestic affairs. These principles were reaffirmed in the Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels (resolution 67/1 adopted on 24 September 2012), in which Heads of State and Government strongly urged States to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral economic, financial and trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries. Zimbabwe therefore joins other countries in condemning the punitive embargo on Cuba and calls for its unconditional lifting so that the people of Cuba can be left alone to pursue their economic and social destiny. III. Replies received from organs and agencies of the United Nations system Cuba's recent economic performance Since February 2008, when Raúl Castro was officially appointed President of Cuba, the pace of economic and institutional transformation has accelerated. Administrative changes leading, for example, to the reorganization of State agencies, an improvement in the business climate, the adoption of anti-corruption measures and the boosting of agricultural activity have taken place. These changes gained new momentum with the approval, in April 2011, of the document entitled "Lineamientos de la Política Económica y Social" (Social and Economic Policy Guidelines), which serves as a road map for updating the Cuban economic model. The reform process has taken place amid a dramatic rise in global food and energy prices, a sharp decrease in the international price of nickel, one of Cuba's main exports, grave damages caused by the several hurricanes and tropical storms that have battered Cuba in recent years and the global economic crisis. These factors, coupled with some structural limitations of the Cuban economy and the severe external constraints to its economic growth exacerbated by the 1962 embargo, have created a "perfect storm". This situation has triggered additional efforts to update the economic model. In 2012, Cuba's economy grew by 3.1 per cent, slightly less than the Government target of 3.4 per cent, despite an expansion in investment associated with reconstruction efforts following hurricane Sandy, which affected important crops. Cuba's restricted ability to purchase supplies, machinery and equipment from abroad and to export its own products as a consequence of the embargo severely affected economic performance in 2012. The surplus in fiscal revenues was used to (a) capitalize State enterprises; (b) finance reconstruction costs associated with the damage resulting from hurricane Sandy; and (c) fund bank lending to the agricultural industry and non-agricultural cooperatives. During 2012, various policy measures consistent with the provisions of the Social and Economic Policy Guidelines were enacted to improve and streamline economic performance. These included measures on public subsidies for home repairs and the construction of new housing, which entered into force in January 2012. New regulation regarding the distribution of unused land also came into force, with the objective of stimulating agricultural activity and, in particular, reducing food imports (Cuba imports 80 per cent of the food it consumes). The new regulation seeks to consolidate the process of distribution of vacant land so that the land is put to productive use. In addition, a new regulation governing the activities of the Basic Units of Cooperative Production came into effect in August 2012. It intends to align the operation of the Units with the regulations governing the other two forms of agricultural cooperatives, namely the Credit and Service Cooperatives and the Agricultural Production Cooperatives. To expand the domestic market and provide employment options in the nonState sector, the Government of Cuba authorized the formation of nonagricultural cooperatives. During the first stage, the aim is to create 230 cooperatives, each with an independent management structure, in approximately 47 sectors related to transportation, construction and personnel, domestic and professional services (including translation, information and technology services and accounting). A new tax law designed to adjust the tax structure to the new economic reality entered into force in January 2013 (the previous law was from 1994). It includes special regimes and tax benefits for the agricultural sector, as well as a section on tax regulations for the self-employed. A new immigration law designed to ease the procedures and requirements for travelling abroad, as well as for entering Cuba, came into force in January 2013. This law expands opportunities for Cuban emigrants to return to Cuba to take advantage of the emerging domestic market and the new forms of non-State economic entrepreneurship and management. The effects of the United States embargo: recent developments In 2012, no efforts on the part of the Government of the United States to relax the embargo were observed. In May 2012, the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) of the United States Department of the Treasury updated the guidelines for implementing travel regulations for United States citizens, making travel requirements more cumbersome. Moreover, the United States Government refused to renew the registration of iconic Cuban trademarks, including Havana Club (rum) and Cohiba (cigars), which resulted in short- and long-term foreign exchange losses for the country. In 2013, the Government of the United States once again included Cuba in its list of States sponsors of terrorism. Countries on the list are subject to strict sanctions that go beyond the ban on arms-related sales to include controls over commercial exports and prohibitions of economic assistance. OFAC reported that in 2012 it had blocked $253.1 million, an increase of 33 per cent over the figure for 2011. Because this unilateral measure targets not only the Government of Cuba but also its nationals, including entities and individuals, the reported figure includes assets in which either the Government of Cuba or a Cuban national has an interest, as defined by OFAC. Some of these assets may be owned by third parties. According to the latest report from the Government of Cuba, the economic damage accumulated between February 1962, when the embargo began, and December 2011 exceeds $108 billion dollars in current prices (equivalent to 158 per cent of the GDP of Cuba in 2011). Cuban economic performance in 2013 The Government of Cuba has forecast a growth in GDP of 3.7 per cent in 2013. New reforms will be implemented in 2013 to update the economic model, including a gradual process to create wholesale markets for the agricultural sector. Improvements in the distribution of agricultural products are also in the pipeline, with pilot programmes starting in the provinces of Havana, Mayabeque and Artemis. Moreover, the Government has announced larger subsidies for home repair and construction, improved credit facilities and the expansion of non-agricultural cooperatives and pilot programmes to improve efficiency in large State-owned corporations. A major policy issue under discussion in the political sphere is the gradual elimination of the dual monetary scheme. The embargo limits key policy options. Advances in the process of updating the economic model are hampered by the embargo and the inclusion of Cuba, since 1982, among the States sponsors terrorism designated by the United States Secretary of State. The embargo's restrictions inhibit and even block international banking and financial transactions with Cuba. These highlight the extraterritorial nature of the embargo imposed on this nation by the United States. In this regard, in mid-2012, OFAC imposed the highest fine in history on a foreign bank for doing business with Cuba: the Dutch bank ING was forced to pay $619 million for conducting financial transactions with Cuba. For decades, the Cuban economy has been subject to severe external constraints. The effects of these constraints were exacerbated by the 2009 economic and financial crisis, as well as by the rise in global food and energy prices. The United States embargo and the additional sanctions derived from the inclusion of Cuba in the list of States sponsors of terrorism acutely affect the country's economic and social development, and have a severe impact on its population. Currently, the embargo significantly limits the potential positive effects of the measures implemented to update the country's economic model. The need to end the 50-year-old embargo is urgent. Overall situation: effects of the embargo on food security and on agriculture, fisheries and the food industry The main changes since the last reporting period can be summarized as follows: (a) Cereal production in 2012 is estimated at 758,000 tons (in milled rice equivalent), about 3.6 per cent above the 2011 output, mainly reflecting an increase in the rice crop. Total cereal production is 14 per cent higher than the average of the previous five years; (b) Paddy production officially rose by 25 per cent in 2011 to 566,000 tons (387,000 tons, milled basis) in part owing to increased cultivation and large gains in productivity. A further increase of 2 per cent, to 580,000 tons, has been estimated for 2012, in part owing to a continued expansion of plantings. Production of maize in 2012 is estimated at 371,000 tons, an increase of almost 5 per cent over the previous season. The volume of imported cereals has remained steady in recent years, at around 2 million tons, and imports are expected to cover almost three quarters of the country's domestic needs in 2012-2013. The main effects of the embargo on agriculture, fisheries, livestock and the food industry should continue to be viewed from two different perspectives: (a) The problem is brought about by the impossibility of taking full advantage of the export potential for coffee, honey, tobacco, live lobsters and aquaculture products in the nearest market, the United States. This has implied major losses, since it has been necessary to sell to markets located further away; the resulting higher marketing and distribution costs have negatively affecting the country's foreign exchange earnings and its capacity to purchase basic products, especially food; (b) The high cost of inputs needed for agricultural, fisheries and livestock production (fuel, spare parts for agricultural machinery, animal feeds, phyto- and zoo-sanitary products and fertilizers, top technological products such as herbicides, low-toxicity insecticides and other highly effective pesticides or veterinary pharmaceuticals, and disease-diagnostic kits that, in many cases, are only produced by United States firms) decreases profitability and lowers the country's ability to satisfy local food demand. Overall, the embargo has very negative implications for Cuba's balance of trade and foreign exchange earnings, as well as for the country's supply of food and agriculture products. The embargo affects the import of food products for human consumption, in particular those destined to meet the needs of social programmes, as restrictions limit their quantity and quality and thus have a direct effect on the food security of the vulnerable segments of the population. An additional problem resulting from the embargo relates to the difficulty for Cuba to access external multilateral financing for development programmes in agriculture and rural development in general, and the related unavailability of resources for restoring and modernizing agricultural equipment and infrastructure. Effects of the embargo on selected agricultural commodities Cereals Cuba's cereal production (in milled rice equivalent) in 2012 is estimated at 758,000 tons, about 3.6 per cent above the 2011 output and 14 per cent up from the average of the previous five years. Activities for the planting of the main paddy crops of 2013 were launched in April and are set to continue until July. Based on expectations of normal climatic conditions and continued expansion in plantings, paddy output is forecast to grow by a further 3 per cent in 2013, to 600,000 tons. Paddy production remained relatively unchanged in 2012, increasing by 2 per cent to 580,000 tons from the previous year. Paddy production was officially estimated to have reached 566,000 tons in 2011, which represents a full recovery from the losses prompted by poor rainfall in 2010. In spite of recent gains and the favourable production outlook for the coming season, the country is highly dependent on imports: current forecasts indicate that 400,000 tons of rice will be imported in 2013, that 720,000 tons of coarse grains will be imported from July 2012 to June 2013 and that about 800,000 tons of wheat will be imported. Overall, cereal imports account for more than 70 per cent of domestic needs. In general, despite the Government's efforts to liberalize and promote domestic food production in recent years, dependence on imports remains high, mainly as a result of the low availability of agricultural inputs. These factors are also behind the relatively slow growth in paddy production over the past season, even though Government efforts to curb imports, in particular of rice, have recently involved stepping up investment in agricultural machinery, irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Preferential trade agreements with Viet Nam since 2010 have facilitated the provision of much of the island's annual rice needs, with Brazil and Argentina also emerging as alternative suppliers more recently. Oilseeds Oilseed production in Cuba is not significant and, as a result, the country depends almost entirely on imports to supply its vegetable oil and meal needs. Commodities dominating imports are soybeans, soy oil and soy meal. Recently, Brazil started providing assistance to Cuba for the cultivation of adapted, high-yielding varieties on the island. Brazil and Argentina have become the main suppliers of soybeans and derived products. Both Mexico and Canada have, on occasion, shipped small volumes to Cuba. Countries from which Cuba imported non-soybean oils and meals include Argentina, Mexico, Canada and China; the European Union too has been a source of imports. Imports of soybeans and derived products from the United States resumed in 2002, largely replacing purchases from other regions. A measure introduced by the United States in 2005, however, is considered to have kept imports from that country below the level that could have been achieved in the absence of the measure, while permitting purchases from other countries, notably of soy oil from Brazil, to expand again. Raw sugar According to the latest estimates of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Cuba produced 1.6 million tons of sugar in 2012-2013, which is about 17 per cent above the average level for the period of 2007-2011. The increase in output confirms the moderate recovery of production that started in 2010 and was driven by investment in sugar production capacities at both the farm and factory levels. In addition, price incentives provided support for expansion. Sugar consumption is estimated to reach 645,000 tons in 2012-2013, a level that is unchanged from that of the 2011-2012 season. Because of rising production, exports increased by 50 per cent in 2012-2013 from the levels of 2002-2003. As a result of the embargo, Cuba does not have access to the United States market under the raw sugar tariff rate quota. Meat National meat production has been growing slowly and stood at 300,000 tons in 2012. Pork is the most important category of meat, followed by beef and poultry. In 2012, 267,000 tons of meat were imported. The principal category of imported meat is poultry, followed by pork and beef. Of the 210,000 tons of poultry that were imported in 2012, 75 per cent originated in the United States and 20 per cent was supplied by Brazil. Brazil is the main source of beef and pork imports, followed by the United States. Despite the recent changes in Government policy in favour of the development of national agriculture, productivity increases are hampered by restricted access to financial resources and technologies and limited infrastructure. Restrictions on the importation of technology and genetics means that the lowest cost or most convenient source of supplies cannot always be accessed. Dairy products Since 2005, milk production has increased substantially in Cuba and is estimated to have reached 600,000 tons in 2012. Imports account for approximately 50 per cent of consumption (in milk equivalent). Milk powder is the principal item that is imported, with supplies coming from Oceania, Latin America and Europe. The national dairy sector is a priority for the Government of Cuba, which aims to make Cuba less dependent on imported food. High prices on the international dairy market have led the Cuban authorities to increase producer prices in order to stimulate national milk output. Constraints on the sector's growth are the high cost of imported feed and the limited availability of fuel for transport and distribution. Fish products Almost all of Cuba's fish exports consist of high-value products, notably frozen shrimp and lobster, which are in strong demand on the international market. The economic crisis has had a negative impact on demand for these species. Moreover, the embargo prevents access to the United States market, which is one of the most important markets for fish and fish products. As a result, Cuba exports to more distant markets and thus incurs higher marketing and distribution costs. Export earnings amounted to an estimated $59.2 million in 2011 for a total volume of 4,500 tons (product weight), representing, in value terms, a decrease of 21 per cent compared to 2010. Fish imports, consisting mainly of low-value fish products, increased in 2011, reaching an estimated $29.8 million for a total volume of 16,000 tons (product weight), which represents a growth of 20 per cent in value terms with respect to 2010. Coffee Although coffee is not a major commodity, it is important for the livelihoods of small farmers. Coffee rust disease is a significant threat to coffee plantations in the region, as experienced during the past season. The embargo could limit procurement and use of fungicides to protect plantations from the disease. Technical assistance to Cuba by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) continues to support the Government of Cuba in promoting rural development and fisheries, with an emphasis on food security, and to assist Cuba in sharing its extensive knowledge on urban and peri-urban agriculture with other countries in the region. In 2012, hurricane Sandy severely affected nine municipalities in the region of Santiago de Cuba, causing damages that dramatically reduced the availability of food in the short and medium term for almost 500,000 people, placing them at risk of food and nutrition-related insecurity. A project to carry out emergency activities for the immediate recovery of farmers' livelihoods and to help reduce food vulnerability in the afflicted population began in December 2012. The initiative aims to restore the capacities of 50 urban and 30 suburban production units in order to ensure food production in those areas with the highest population density. Six projects were approved under a technical cooperation programme through which FAO aims to provide technical expertise to its member countries through targeted short-term catalytic projects. One of these projects is targeted at improving capacities for the sustainable production of honey and other bee products, another at the genetic improvement of swine in suburban and rural areas around Havana. Within the framework of the South-South Cooperation Programme, progress was made with regard to the tripartite agreement signed between Cuba, Cape Verde and FAO on 13 May 2011, whereby Cuba would provide technical assistance to Cape Verde through an expert and 12 technicians over a period of 18 months. The main objective is to plan and carry out activities in the following areas within the National Programme for Food Security of Cape Verde: horticulture and vegetable production, water management, small animal farming, hydroponic vegetable gardening and packaging of vegetable products. In December 2012, the main results of this effort were presented by a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture of Cape Verde at the Global South-South Development Expo hosted in Vienna by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization. Although the Cuban representative could not travel to Vienna, the strong partnership between FAO, Cuba and Cape Verde was acknowledged. FAO is part of two joint programmes funded by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)-Spain Millennium Development Goals Achievement Fund, in association with other resident agencies. With the United Nations Children's Fund, UNDP, the World Health Organization/Pan American Health Organization and the World Food Programme, as well as institutions under five ministries, FAO implements the programme "Support for the fight against anaemia in vulnerable groups in Cuba", and is responsible for activities involving food production and processing. The total budget of the joint programme is $8.5 million and FAO is responsible for administering $3.3 million. The second joint programme, "Support for new decentralization initiatives and production stimulation in Cuba", is implemented jointly with UNDP and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), as well as with the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of the Economy and Planning. The overall budget of the joint programme is $7 million, of which FAO is responsible for $1.1 million to support activities dealing with food production, processing and training. Technical support for the life cycle management of pesticides continues to be provided to Cuba as part of regional initiatives implemented under a project funded by the European Commission to support capacity-building related to multilateral environmental agreements in African, Caribbean and Pacific countries and for the clean-up of obsolete pesticides, pesticides management and sustainable pest management. The project has supported the inventory of obsolete pesticides, strengthening pesticide registration and raising awareness of pesticide issues. The FAO-funded project on using two pig semen processing centres to breed pigs in suburban and rural areas of Havana is a two-year pilot project (February 2013-January 2015) that could be extended to the rest of the country. The project will provide the Pig Research Institute of the Ministry of Agriculture the support needed to develop the pig sector through the provision of training and practical guidance by short-term consultancy services and FAO livestock officers and of supplies and equipment considered essential for achieving project results. Within the framework of the FAO/World Organization for Animal Health initiative on the Global Framework for the Progressive Control of Transboundary Animal Diseases, priority has been given to the following diseases: foot-and-mouth disease, classical swine fever, influenza (HPAI/H5N1, pH1N1), New World screwworm (Cochliomyia hominivorax), bovine spongiform encephalopathy and rabies. Cuba has several measures in place for the prevention, control and elimination of these diseases. FAO has provided technical support and assistance for the development of tools that would allow Cuba to establish a national information system for applying the new monitoring approach for the Global Plan of Action for the Conservation and Sustainable Utilization of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. The Cuban delegation participates routinely, through the FAO Commission and its intergovernmental working group on plant genetic resources for food and agriculture, in the development of the policy framework of the Second Global Plan of Action on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, Indicators and Targets for Plant Genetic Resources and Preparation of Genebank Standards for Plant Genetic Resources. Effects of the embargo on projects implemented by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Cuba Because of the embargo on Cuba, projects implemented by FAO in the country are affected in terms of their procurement procedures, as resources that could be imported from the United States have to be imported from European, Asian and other markets at much higher prices and with additional freight costs. It would be cheaper to purchase the goods in the United States, which would in turn make more funds available for projects. The embargo affects the purchase of equipment and other inputs for projects, including computers. It also leads to difficulties in the processing of payments and banking transactions from and to suppliers and in the banking processes affecting FAO personnel. Assistance activities by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to all of its member States, including Cuba, are governed by article III/C of the IAEA statute, which reads as follows: "In carrying out its functions, the Agency shall not make assistance to members subject to any political, economic, military, or other conditions incompatible with the provisions of this statute." The existing embargo, however, poses certain difficulties to the implementation of the IAEA technical cooperation programme in Cuba. The procurement of essential equipment and material (such as radiopharmaceuticals) is quite often subject to cost increases and delays as the number of vendors able to supply and/or ship to Cuba is very limited. In addition, restrictions apply to the participation of Cuban nationals in IAEA-organized training activities or meetings in the United States. In accordance with the above-mentioned article of its statute, IAEA tries to overcome these difficulties, to the extent that it can, for example by sending Cuban nationals for training in other countries, in order to meet the requirements of its technical cooperation programme in Cuba. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) held its sixth Worldwide Air Transport Conference in Montreal, Canada, from 18 to 22 March 2013, at which the issue of the United States embargo against Cuba was raised. Cuba presented a working paper entitled "Impact of the United States economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba in the civil aviation sector" (ATConf/6-WP/37). In its report on the meeting, the Conference stated that, regarding the information provided by Cuba on the impact in the civil aviation sector due to the United States embargo, the delegations from three member States supported Cuba's position and the recommendations proposed in the paper. They argued that the United States embargo was a unilateral decision that was contrary to the spirit of the Convention on International Civil Aviation and stated that it had an adverse impact on the development of civil aviation in Cuba. They expressed the view that the sixth Worldwide Air Transport Conference was the appropriate forum at which to address the issue, as the Conference dealt with the sustainability of air transport. The United States stated that the matter was a bilateral political issue and was not suitable for discussion during the Conference. The secretariat advised that the issue had been addressed during the thirty-seventh session of the ICAO Assembly, which was the governing body of the organization, and stated that the sixth Conference did not have the authority to resolve the issue. In closing, Cuba advised of its intention to raise the issue at the thirty-eighth session of the Assembly (see ATConf/6-DP/2, para. 1.2.2.). Activities undertaken during the period June 2012-June 2013 by the ICAO Technical Cooperation Bureau in Cuba Implementation activities No national projects are being implemented by the ICAO Technical Cooperation Bureau in Cuba. Cuba is, however, a member of the following regional projects currently under way: (a) The objective of project RLA/06/801 (technical cooperation with the Latin American Civil Aviation Commission), which is funded by the 22 States members of the Latin American Civil Aviation Commission (LACAC), is to provide administrative assistance for the management of the LACAC secretariat. The project began on 1 January 2007 and has been extended through 2014. It provides continuous support through numerous activities to the LACAC secretariat. Among those activities are administrative management training, meetings, seminars, the processing of fellowships and the organization of travel arrangements; (b) Project RLA/09/801 (implementation of performance-based air navigation systems in the Caribbean region), which began in 2009, is funded by the following participating States, territories and organizations: Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, France (French Antilles), Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Netherlands Antilles, Nicaragua, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago, United Kingdom (Anguilla, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands), United States, the Caribbean Aviation Safety and Security Oversight System, the Central American Corporation for Air Navigation Services and the Eastern Caribbean Civil Aviation Authority. The project has as an objective the provision of assistance to States in the Caribbean region to foster the implementation of performance-based air navigation systems leading to a seamless, global air traffic management system; (c) Project RLA/99/901 (regional safety oversight system), which began in January 2000, is funded by the following participating States: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, United States, Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). It has as an objective the establishment and operation of a safety oversight system in the American continent that is technically, logistically and administratively support in line with the provisions of the Convention on International Civil Aviation and its annexes. Development activities The ICAO Technical Cooperation Bureau is currently developing a project (CUB/13/601) through the delegation of Cuba to ICAO for the acquisition of civil aviation-related publications. The framework of the project has been agreed upon and it is expected that implementation will begin shortly. The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) maintains an open dialogue with the Government of Cuba, through its representatives in Italy, on all matters pertaining to rural development, agricultural production and food security in the country. Cuba participates in the IFAD Governing Council as a member State and, since September 2012, it has been reintegrated into the regular lending activities and programme of work of IFAD. In addition, IFAD keeps a fluid dialogue and cooperates with FAO and other United Nations agencies present in the country. Cuba is treated in the same way as any other State member of the International Labour Organization (ILO) and actively participates in the annual International Labour Conference and other ILO bodies. The ILO office in Mexico continues its technical cooperation programme on employment and decent work issues in Cuba. During the biennium 2012-2013, ILO is providing technical assistance in three substantive areas: (a) Promotion of productivity and decent work and development of responsible workplace practices through the implementation of the methodology of the System for the Measurement and Improvement of Productivity, based on labour competencies in the sugar industry; (b) Strengthening the capacity of constituents to consolidate safety and health programmes, placing special emphasis on the reduction of work-related accidents in the sugar industry; (c) Strengthening the capacity of constituents to apply the "SOLVE" methodology to address stress, tobacco, alcohol and drugs, HIV/AIDS and violence in sugar mills. ILO reiterates its view that the United Nations is the appropriate forum in which to address questions related to the economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba. As a State member of the International Maritime Organization (IMO), Cuba benefits from its participation in the meetings of IMO bodies and also from IMO technical cooperation programmes (IMO regional programmes on support to maritime development in Latin America and in the Caribbean, as well as global programmes as applicable). IMO maintains collaborative relations with all Latin American member States, including Cuba. Since the early 1980s, IMO has collaborated closely with the Operative Network for Regional Cooperation among Maritime Authorities of the Americas, which comprises South America, Cuba, Mexico and Panama. IMO assistance to Latin America is guided by the maritime strategies of the region, which are revised every five years, and IMO will continue to focus on supporting their implementation. Countries of the Operative Network for Regional Cooperation among Maritime Authorities of the Americas have addressed such issues as safety standards, training and protection of the marine environment through regional strategies, with numerous training activities organized in cooperation with IMO. In this context, and in pursuance of the decentralization policies adopted by IMO, most of its support is channelled through the Network by virtue of a memorandum of understanding signed with the Network's secretariat. Through this instrument, the Network is assigned responsibility for the management and execution of regional technical cooperation activities identified by the respective countries, including Cuba, as priorities in building capacities for the effective implementation and enforcement of IMO global maritime standards. From 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2012, Cuba, through its Ministry of Transport, was responsible for the duties of the Network secretariat. As a result of the embargo imposed by the United States, IMO encountered some difficulties in transferring to the secretariat funds allocated for the activities of IMO delegates to the Network. For other Network secretariats, the funds allocated for the training activities were transferred to a special bank account opened by the secretariat in a national bank. In the case of Cuba, all the funds had to be managed through UNDP in Cuba because it was not possible for the Ministry of Transport to hold a bank account in United States dollars. During the two years that Cuba was responsible for the duties of the Network secretariat, it organized and delivered the following activities: (a) A regional workshop on the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships and on the management of special areas and particularly sensitive sea areas, held in Ecuador in April 2011; (b) A regional training course on the use of dispersants (International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Cooperation of 1990 (level three)), held in Peru in August 2011; (c) A regional training course on the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code and the International Maritime Solid Bulk Cargoes Code, held in Argentina in April 2012; (d) A regional workshop on the ratification, implementation and enforcement of the International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships and on the control, monitoring, enforcement and implementation of the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediments, held in Peru in August 2012; (e) A regional workshop on the implementation of annex VI (on greenhouse gas emissions from ships) to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, the Nairobi International Convention on the Removal of Wrecks, 2007, and the Hong Kong International Convention for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships, 2009, held in Uruguay in September 2012. Cuba continues to receive technical assistance from the Regional Marine Pollution Emergency Information and Training Centre for the Wider Caribbean, a regional activity centre based in Curaçao, which aims to assist countries in the wider Caribbean region in preventing and responding to major pollution incidents in the marine environment. The situation of harmful interference in the broadcasting services (sound and television) of Cuba from stations mounted onboard aircraft under the jurisdiction of the Administration of the United States has not changed. This long-standing issue has been considered previously by the Council of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), at plenipotentiary and world radiocommunication conferences, and continues to be permanently on the agenda of the Radio Regulations Board. In conformity with the conclusions of the ITU World Radiocommunication Conference held in 2007, according to which a broadcasting station operating onboard an aircraft and transmitting solely to the territory of another administration without its agreement cannot be considered to be in conformity with the Radio Regulations, and upon request from the Radio Regulations Board, a letter dated 13 February 2013 was sent to the President of the United States urging his Administration to consider this issue with a view to its timely resolution. In the letter it was recalled that, in accordance with provision No. 197 (article 45) of the Constitution of ITU, all stations must be established and operated in such a manner as not to cause harmful interference to the radio services of other Member States and operate in accordance with the provisions of the Radio Regulations. In addition, pursuant to provision No. 198 (article 45) of the Constitution of ITU, each Member State undertakes to require the operating agencies that it recognizes and the other operating agencies duly authorized for this purpose to observe provision No. 197. To date, no reply to the letter has been received. Cuba has maintained a high human development rate and has already achieved many of the Millennium Development Goals. The main challenge is to maintain the quality of social services and the gains already achieved with regard to the Goals. For the second year, in 2012 the Government of Cuba continued to update its economic model through the implementation of the document entitled "Lineamientos de la política economica y social" (Social and Economic Policy Guidelines), which was approved by the Congress of the Communist Party in April 2011. The Government focuses on national priorities such as economic efficiency and productivity, the national food security strategy and the import substitution policy. In addition, national authorities have indicated a strong commitment to maintaining the social development standards already achieved and other accomplishments. Guideline No. 112 of the policy document calls for the promotion of multilateral collaboration, with particular reference to the United Nations system. In that regard, the United Nations system is supporting national authorities in addressing emerging issues and challenges. Hurricane Sandy, considered one of the most devastating hurricanes to have struck the eastern provinces in the past 50 years, passed through Cuba in October 2012, directly hitting the country's second largest city, Santiago de Cuba. Despite national and local authorities' preparedness measures, tens of thousands of homes were totally or partially destroyed. Agriculture and food facilities, communications and electrical infrastructure and social institutions, among others, were severely damaged. National authorities stated that the recovery process would require years of hard work and effort. The United Nations country team in Cuba is composed of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Health Organization/Pan American Health Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Children's Fund and the World Food Programme. In addition, non-resident agencies like the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women have important programmes and initiatives in Cuba. In 2012, Cuba's second United Nations Development Assistance Framework (2014-2018) was formulated. The formulation process offered a critical opportunity for dialogue with the Government and for the United Nations system to position itself strategically in the context of the national process for updating the Cuban economic model. The United Nations system in Cuba effectively defined, in cooperation with key national authorities, its substantive contribution to important social and economic structural transformations. In this context, the embargo has a pervasive impact on the social, economic and environmental dimensions of human development in Cuba, affecting the most vulnerable socioeconomic groups of the Cuban population in particular. Purchase of inputs at non-competitive prices and limitations on the import of goods, services and technologies patented in the United States Cuban national companies and foreign companies established in Cuba are not allowed to purchase products, components or technologies in United States territory even though the United States is the closest, most competitive and most diversified market. Alternative markets that are adequate are more distant, resulting in higher importation costs and delays in delivery time. Goods, services or technologies produced by the United States, covered by United States patents, or containing any component produced and/or patented by the United States, are not available to Cuba. Consequently, financial resources that could have been used to more effectively achieve the expected programme and development results are required to cover additional costs incurred as a result of embargo conditions. This has had a negative impact on the development and humanitarian assistance provided by the United Nations system to Cuba, in particular projects supporting the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and focusing on vulnerable groups. For example, the delivery of humanitarian assistance was affected in the aftermath of hurricane Sandy. The immediate provision of relief, vital aid and reconstruction materials was constrained by the difficult conditions imposed by the embargo in terms of access and transportation, which meant resorting to third countries for purchases and imports, longer acquisition processes and payments in a third currency. This situation resulted in delays and high costs. The daily work of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Cuba is directly affected by these United States polices. The United Nations system in the country can rarely benefit from global United Nations corporate contracts with United States companies to purchase and have access to equipment and services such as computers, software licences and Internet services. It is therefore necessary to identify providers exclusively for these offices, which often results in higher prices and administrative costs. Development credits granted by international financial institutions and financial services from United States banks The embargo has limited Cuba's access to development credits granted by international financial institutions such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank, which in turn has narrowed the possibility of obtaining resources to support financially the national and/or local development plans of Cuba. United Nations offices in Cuba cannot make use of corporate accounts with United States banks nor use the United States dollar as a currency of payment. These offices therefore have to take additional administrative measures to carry out programme-related financial operations, which results in higher costs, and use third-country banks, which entails a heavier administrative burden. The related incremented costs have been covered by United Nations and project funds from other donor countries. Also as a result of the embargo, Cuban United Nations staff on official missions do not have access to bank services, which limits their capacity to cover costs, especially in emergencies, owing to a lack of access to credit cards. The embargo has also affected the financial transactions, salaries and banking and insurance services of United Nations international staff. United Nations staff missions to United Nations Headquarters Cuban United Nations staff required to travel to Headquarters in New York or to Washington, D.C., have to request visas well in advance; even then, the visas are not always granted on time. In addition, longer and costlier alternative routes through third countries need to be booked because of the lack of regular direct flights from Cuba to New York or Washington, D.C. This negatively affects the exchange of experiences between Headquarters and the United Nations in Cuba, as it hampers the participation of United Nations system staff in corporate trainings and official meetings. Exchange of expertise Cuban experts and researchers invited to events in the United States have experienced difficulties in obtaining visas in a timely manner. This situation affects professional exchanges and partnership-building in key areas of development. Cuba is not a signatory to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees or the 1967 Protocol thereto. As such, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) receives and decides on asylum claims under its mandate and provides assistance to the refugee population. Thus far, Cuba has maintained its de facto policy of non-refoulement and of protection and assistance in the education and health sectors to refugees recognized under the UNHCR mandate, but does not offer the possibility of local integration. Therefore, and in the absence of prospects for voluntary return in most cases, the only durable solution for refugees in Cuba is resettlement sought by UNHCR in third countries. Cuba's readiness to become a party to the international refugee and statelessness instruments and to engage in finding solutions to the refugee situation within the country are most probably dependent on a change in its bilateral relations with the United States. In this sense, any measure contributing to ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed on Cuba would be a positive step that may lead to Cuba's accession to those instruments. The economic, commercial and financial embargo continues to affect the living conditions, education and development of Cuban children, adolescents and families. It also disrupts the sustainability of the progress made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals, in particular with regard to equity of treatment and protection of the rights of children and adolescents. Impact of the embargo on some fundamental rights of children and adolescents in Cuba Health According to the Ministry of Health, the health sector continues to be affected by the embargo because markets are located in faraway places, which leads to an increase in the prices of expendable materials and medical instruments, as well as of medicines, reagents and spare parts and equipment. The Ministry has indicated that institutions providing medical services, especially emergency and surgical units, and other specialized services for children and pregnant women have been affected by the lack of medicines, diagnostic equipment, expendable materials, spare parts and necessary medical equipment. In the framework of the country programme, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) provides support through the purchase of several basic supplies, for instance the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine for children of 1 year of age. The country faces material shortages and a limited access to markets, which makes it necessary for UNICEF to import supplies from Europe to assist the Government in providing quality medical services to children and pregnant women, a practice that elevates the costs of such assistance. Education In spite of Cuba's efforts to guarantee free access to education, the UNICEF country office has noted that the effects of the embargo have an impact on the quality of educational services. The Ministry of Education reports that, as a result of this policy, Cuba does not have access to the United States market to purchase school supplies, among other inputs, which results in an increase in average freight costs and a direct impact on the quality of education. The Ministry of Education has provided the following concrete examples: (a) The purchase of educational resources for labour education, geography, specialized laboratories for language schools and the replacement of outdated technology (mainly computers, televisions and video equipment) is limited; (b) The impact of the embargo is particularly strong in the area of artistic education because of the already high prices of specialized books, equipment and musical instruments; (c) The limited opportunities for academic exchanges with United States universities and research centres hinders the development of professors and schoolteachers; (d) The scarcity of English books and specialized dictionaries hinders the development of language teachers, as well as of science, information technology and technical professionals; (e) The country's restricted access to the Internet limits the availability of updated and timely information needed to strengthen the quality of education. Impact of the embargo on the country programme of cooperation The commercial limitations mentioned above also apply to the supplies that UNICEF needs to import for the implementation of the workplan and the achievement of results, causing an increase in prices and longer purchasing processes (up to 120 days). It is estimated that access to the United States market would also reduce freight-related and logistical expenses. In addition, it should be noted that current restrictions on bank transfers from and to Cuba using United States dollars are estimated by UNICEF to increase transaction costs by up to 3 per cent. Paragraph 25 of the Doha Mandate (see TD/500/Add.1), which was adopted at UNCTAD XIII in April 2012, reads as follows: States are strongly urged to refrain from promulgating and applying any unilateral economic, financial or trade measures not in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries, and that affect commercial interests. These actions hinder market access, investments and freedom of transit and the well-being of the populations of affected countries. Meaningful trade liberalization will also require addressing non-tariff measures including, inter alia, unilateral measures, where they may act as unnecessary trade barriers. Trends in Cuba The embargo has had significant negative effects on the Cuban economy and on the standard of living of Cuban citizens. As reported by the Government of Cuba in the 2012 report of the Secretary-General on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba (A/67/118), the overall losses caused by the embargo amounted to $108 billion by the end of December 2011. The losses are attributed to the additional costs incurred by the Government of Cuba and Cuban enterprises and citizens in obtaining goods, services and finance. In the same report, the Cuban Government stated that the losses incurred in the health sector amounted to $10 million during the period from May 2011 to April 2014, while those incurred in the food sector amounted to $132 million for the period from March 2011 to March 2012. These losses were caused mainly by the higher transaction costs resulting from the embargo. Moreover, Cuba estimated that it would have earned more than $222 million by exporting food and rum to the United States in the absence of the embargo. As for foreign direct investment, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) Cuba received inflows of $110 million in 2011; it could have received $350 million in such investment from the United States had there been no embargo. UNCTAD figures show that neighbouring Dominican Republic received $2,371 million in the same year. The embargo has also been a serious constraint for advancing science and technology in Cuba owing to the United States' significant position in these areas. Cuba's inability to connect to United States Internet service providers has contributed significantly to its low level of Internet access, which in turn adversely affects all economic and social sectors in the country. Furthermore, the negative impact of the extraterritorial application of the embargo is substantial, as United States firms are frequently involved in international mergers and business partnerships. This extraterritorial application affects Cuba negatively and deprives third countries of business opportunities with Cuba. It has been estimated that the Cuban economy grew by 2.8 per cent in 2011, an increase of 0.4 per cent over the previous year. Among 24 countries in Central and Latin America, Cuba ranked seventeenth in terms of GDP growth rate. In October 2012, hurricane Sandy hit Cuba, causing widespread damage and costing the country $2 billion. Cuba was still recovering from the devastation caused by hurricanes Gustav and Ike in 2008, which caused damages estimated at almost $10 billion. Reconstruction of infrastructure and buildings damaged by these hurricanes might be costlier in the current situation than it might have been without the embargo, as Cuba has to import goods and services from places other than the United States despite the fact that the United States exports those goods and services at competitive prices. As the UNCTAD statistics provided in table 1 show, the trends in Cuba's trade in merchandise in 2012 did not change from the previous year. UNCTAD estimates that Cuba exported merchandise for a value of $5.6 billion and imported merchandise for a value of $14.4 billion, which represents a decline of $128 million and an increase of $323 million, respectively, over 2011. The deficit in trade in merchandise was of $8.7 billion in 2012, which represents an increase of $451 million over 2011. The main categories of export items in 2012 were "ores and metals", which accounted for $3.6 billion or 63 per cent of the total, followed by "all food items" and "manufactured goods". As for the destination of Cuba's exports, the European Union was the major buyer of Cuban merchandise, accounting for about 34 per cent of the total. The main categories of import items in 2012 were "manufactured goods" ($6.8 billion or 47 per cent of the total) and "fuels" ($5.3 billion or 37 per cent), followed by "all food items". Latin America and the Caribbean were the largest suppliers of items imported by Cuba, accounting for one half of the total. The Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000 allows United States exports of agricultural products to Cuba, with many restrictions and requirements. This measure has made the United States the largest exporter of agricultural products to Cuba, although the level of United States exports declined every year from 2009 to 2011. Brazil's agricultural exports to Cuba superseded those of the United States in 2011, but in 2012 the United States once again became the largest exporter. The restrictions and requirements imposed on United States agricultural exports are, however, limiting the potential growth of the exports. The services sector has been the major source of foreign exchange earnings in Cuba. The trends in Cuba's trade in services in 2012 did not change from the previous year. UNCTAD estimates that Cuba exported $11.8 billion and imported $2.4 billion in services in 2012; the resulting surplus of $9.4 billion represented an increase of $622 million over 2011. The category "other services" took the major shares of exports, followed by "travel". For "other services", the export of medical personnel to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela continued to be of particular importance as, in return, Cuba receives oil from that country, on preferential terms. Tourism continues to be one of the main driving forces of the Cuban economy and development. According to the Caribbean Tourism Organization, in 2012, over 2.8 million people visited Cuba, 4.5 per cent more than in 2011. With access to the United States market blocked, the tourism sector remains heavily dependent on Canadian visitors, who accounted for 38 per cent of all international visitors, followed by visitors from the European Union, who accounted for 27 per cent of the total. The ban prohibiting United States citizens from travelling to Cuba has had serious economic implications for the Cuban tourism industry, which is losing over $2.3 billion annually (A/67/118). Remittances from relatives living abroad, including in the United States, are also a significant source of hard currency. The United States relaxed remittance restrictions in January 2011. With regard to the import of services, "transport" was the dominant category. Developments in the United States No significant actions were taken during the reporting period concerning the embargo. A number of legislative proposals were made during the 112th United States Congress. Some would have the United States lift or ease the embargo, while others would have it strengthen the embargo further. Conclusion Since the previous reporting period, there has been no significant change in the United States embargo. The embargo has continued to have a severe impact on the production, trade and welfare of Cuba, impeding its development. Related measures impose severe economic, commercial and financial restrictions on Cuba, and these come at a cost for the country. Furthermore, the devastation wrought by hurricane Sandy could add to the hardship of the Cuban people. The substantial losses incurred owing to the embargo include the foregone opportunities to strengthen infrastructure, build an efficient and vibrant economy and improve the standard of living of Cuban citizens. In particular, given the country's potential for developing knowledge-intensive and high-value-added industries, the inability to conduct trade with the United States has profound implications. The extraterritorial application of the United States embargo continues to affect citizens in third countries and impedes their ability to trade with and invest in Cuba. The impact of the extraterritorial application is considerable. Finally, the citizens of the United States too are affected by the embargo because they are unable to interact with Cuba in the economic, academic and social fields. Table 1 Merchandise exports and imports by Cuba (Millions of United States dollars) Partner Commodity group 2008a 2009a 2010a 2011a 2012a Exports European Union (27 States) All food items Ores and metal Fuels Manufactured goods Total Latin America and the Caribbean United States Rest of the world World Imports Source: UNCTAD secretariat calculations, based on the United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database and the International Monetary Fund Direction of Trade Statistics databases. Notes: All food items (United Nations Statistics Division Standard International Trade Classification, codes 0+1+22+4) Ores and metal (Standard International Trade Classification, codes 27+28+68) Fuels (Standard International Trade Classification, code 3) Manufactured goods (Standard International Trade Classification, codes 5-8 less codes 667 and 68) a Estimates. Table 2 Service exports and imports by Cuba Flow Service category Transport 1 620a 1 437a 1 772a 1 913a 1 928a Travel 2 447a Other services 5 374a 4 956a 6 253a 6 755a 7 409a 11 783a 1 546a 965a 1 154a 1 424a 1 516a 160a 212a 230a 236a 260a 373a 496a 538a 552a 612a 2 388a Source: UNCTAD and WTO (estimates). Figure Foreign direct investment flows to Cuba and the Dominican Republic, 20092011 Source: http://unctadstat.unctad.org. Cuba has maintained a high human development index ranking, having attained 59th place among 187 nations in 2012. Many of the Millennium Development Goals have been achieved, some long before they had been agreed upon. The main challenge is to maintain the quality of the social services and sustain the Goals that have already been achieved. Cuba was recently recognized by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations as one of 15 countries that has successfully reduced hunger before 2015. The Cuban development model is changing. The document entitled "Lineamientos de la política económica y social" (Social and Economic Policy Guidelines) was approved during the Communist Party Congress in April 2011. The Guidelines are innovative and challenging and efforts made at the local level will have an important role in implementing the decentralization framework. The driving force behind them is the objective of accelerating the economy. Universal social services and social development remain a priority for the Government and will continue to be a concern of the State while the traditional social protection network is adjusted to ensure a more effective focus and sustainability. Guideline No. 112 calls for the promotion of multilateral collaboration, with direct reference to the United Nations system. In that regard, the United Nations system is supporting national authorities in addressing emerging issues and challenges. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) has been cooperating with national authorities in the following priority areas, among others: promoting food security; supporting the national policy to reduce levels of imports; supporting local governments and their economic development strategies; introducing and applying measures for adaptation to climate change, especially in food production; contributing to sustainable development and a more effective disaster risk reduction strategy; and supporting the national response to HIV/AIDS and sexual diversity. The UNDP partnership with Cuban authorities is based on a long-standing relationship. UNDP has supported major local and national development strategies and policies for over 40 years. At present, cooperation is carried out within the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) for 2008-2013 and the UNDP country programme document for 2008-2013. In 2012, the United Nations system in Cuba, in close alliance with the Government, developed the UNDAF for 2014-2017 through a participatory process that included consultations with a wide range of national and local stakeholders: institutions, academic and research centres, universities and local governments, to name a few. Aligned with the cooperation areas identified in UNDAF, UNDP and its main development partners also formulated the country programme document for 2014-2017. Both documents address identified priority areas of cooperation contributing to the implementation of the Guidelines. Fostering sustainable human development will continue to be at the heart of UNDP cooperation efforts. UNDP will also promote South-South cooperation and technology and knowledge transfer. The main areas that are addressed in the documents for the period 2014-2017 include: sustainable economic development; food security; quality and sustainability of social services, including by building respect for diversity; use of renewable energy; strengthening of local governments; and environmental sustainability and disaster risk management. Gender and youth will be cross-cutting themes. Specific effects of the United States embargo The situation in 2012 remained very similar to that of previous years. The embargo affects the external economic relations of Cuba, and its impact can be observed in all spheres of the country's social and economic activities. It affects opportunities for national and local development and creates economic hardship for the population. The embargo has an impact on the population's most vulnerable groups and on human development in general. According to official estimates, the cumulative direct and indirect losses to the Cuban economy due to the embargo from the early 1960s until December 2011 amount to $108 billion. The embargo has limited Cuba's access to development credits granted by international financial institutions such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank, which has narrowed the possibility of obtaining resources to provide financial support for Cuba's national and/or local development plans. The travel of Cuban experts and researchers to the United States in the framework of cooperation agreements has also been limited owing to the process to obtain visas. It has also been difficult to establish partnerships and to collaborate with United States universities and research institutes, and to promote exchanges among experts from the two countries. The embargo has had negative consequences for external cooperation initiatives, creating many difficulties for programme and project implementation because of trade restrictions or prohibitions on purchasing inputs from United States companies and their subsidiaries. In addition, the embargo places restrictions on shipping line companies whose vessels reach Cuban harbours, which in turn limits the availability of transportation and delays in the loading of goods until ships with available cargo space arrive. Costs associated with intermediaries and long-distance transportation have also had a negative impact on the ability to access key inputs and on the final cost of imported project goods and equipment. Likewise, products for development projects have to be purchased and imported from more distant places at much higher costs. This situation has had a direct impact on all UNDP development projects and is particularly detrimental to time-sensitive and emergency activities, both because it increases the transaction costs of procedures to obtain project inputs and because it increases the cost of transporting the imported goods. Projects have been affected by significant delays in the purchase and distribution of project inputs, which has had a negative impact on the timely implementation of project activities and results. This situation was particularly harmful in the aftermath of hurricane Sandy, when humanitarian aid needed to be delivered promptly so that the needs of the disaster-affected population could be addressed. As an example, more than 220,000 dwellings were affected by Sandy (17,000 were totally destroyed), which left a very high number of families without a home or belongings. Zinc sheets for roofs, hygiene kits, kitchen kits, plastic tarpaulins for roofs and other immediate aid goods had to be purchased under the conditions imposed by the embargo, which resulted in higher costs and longer times of arrival. The communities and populations affected by the storm felt the impact of this situation the most, as they had to wait a considerable period of time before receiving emergency aid. All projects related to food security and local development face the same challenges: the process to access and import agricultural inputs such as irrigation systems, machinery and agricultural tools is long and complex. In general, procurement processes take longer, delaying project activities and their results. As a consequence, financial proposals and new projects have to be developed keeping in mind that an extended period of time will be needed just for procurement processes and that additional financial resources will be needed to cover incremental costs that would otherwise be allocated for development activities. These costs are covered by funds provided by all donors. The projects financed by the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, of which UNDP is the principal recipient, provide medicines, reagents and laboratory equipment for the benefit of 14,636 people of all ages living with HIV/AIDS. They are purchased from third countries and from secondary suppliers at prices significantly higher than those of comparable products sold on the international market. Even when UNDP long-term corporate agreements with international suppliers apply, the embargo hinders purchases of products that are manufactured or have a component manufactured in the United States. In these cases, the providers have to obtain a licence from the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury to deliver services or products to projects in Cuba, a bureaucratic process that takes much time and effort. The embargo also affects the day-to-day work of the UNDP office in Cuba, placing it at a disadvantage compared with other country offices. There are limitations to the benefits that could be gained from corporate long-term agreements to effectively implement and monitor development and emergency activities. These increase transaction costs by at least 15 per cent owing to the participation of intermediaries and higher costs for information and communications technology equipment and services and access to software licences. Access to Internet services is also affected negatively, thus limiting the effective use of corporative platforms. The UNDP Cuba office is also affected by not being able to use corporate accounts with United States banks or the United States dollar as a currency of payment. The office has to take additional administrative measures to carry out programme-related financial operations; for example, it has to use third-country banks, which results in higher costs to the office and its projects and a heavier administrative burden. The related incremented costs have been covered by UNDP and project funds from other donors, therefore using resources that could otherwise have been used for development activities. Another way in which UNDP is affected by the embargo is that national staff required to travel to UNDP headquarters in New York have to request their visas well in advance. Although this situation has improved lately, there have been several cases in which visas could not be granted on time and travel plans had to be changed or cancelled. Similar situations have occurred when Government officials have had to attend meetings at headquarters. Because there are no direct flights from Havana to New York, flights along longer, alternative air routes through third countries have to be booked, which ends up being more expensive. Moreover, this hinders the participation in and representation of UNDP staff from Cuba in corporate training sessions and official meetings and thereby limits the capacity of the office to remain up to date on the latest systems, policies and guidance implemented in other countries to effectively reach development and emergency goals. The negative impacts of higher costs and difficulties in obtaining a visa on time are also experienced by Cuban authorities and experts who have to travel to United Nations Headquarters and to other venues in the United States for meetings. UNESCO is a specialized technical agency within the United Nations system; it is not a funding agency. It is difficult, therefore, to quantify the damage of the embargo on programmes run by the organization within its fields of competence: education, science, culture and communication and information. However, from a qualitative point of view, the embargo continues to have an impact on UNESCO fields of competence and the following observations can be made. The situation has remained relatively unchanged since 2012. In the area of education, the embargo continues to have an impact on the availability of educational resources owing to trade restrictions that prevent the purchase of such resources at more competitive prices. In the area of science, the embargo continues to limit the ability to purchase up-to-date scientific materials. In the area of culture, the embargo continues to have an impact on the ability to obtain historic preservation materials and supplies for cultural industries and on cooperation with American institutions that might otherwise collaborate, including through exchanges. In the area of communications and information, Cuba remains unable to acquire underwater fibre-optic cables from United States firms, software licences and certain equipment. Although there are more possibilities for academic and cultural exchanges, these continue to be limited by visa policies that make travel, including for study, difficult. The embargo also affects the operations of the UNESCO office in Havana and programme-related activities implemented by the Cuban National Commission for UNESCO, including with regard to the receipt of funds and bank transfers to service providers, which results in additional costs for the organization in terms of aeroplane tickets, communications etc. Staff and their families are also affected personally, for example with respect to bank transfers and international communications. From the environmental perspective, the embargo imposed by the United States affects not only Cuba but also the Caribbean subregion and the United States itself. Conservation efforts in the Caribbean Island Hotspot are fragmented and incomplete. A common strategy is needed since Cuba is excluded from several of the most important projects in the subregion owing to the fact that those projects are being implemented with United States funds. For example, Cuba cannot participate in Global Environment Facility projects such as the Caribbean Challenge Initiative, a large-scale initiative that aims to protect 20 per cent of the marine and coastal habitats of participating Caribbean countries by 2020. This affects not only Cuba, which cannot benefit from the projects, but also the entire Caribbean, as the subregion cannot be approached as a whole. The embargo also significantly affects the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems shared by Cuba and the United States. For the proper management of such natural resources, including migratory birds and marine life, common conservation strategies and agreements between the Governments and the agencies and organizations of both countries should be in place; this is not possible because of the embargo. At present, there is an environmental agreement on migratory birds between Canada, Mexico and the United States, but there are no agreements between Cuba and the United States despite the fact that the number of migratory birds travelling between these two countries is very large, as with the above-mentioned North American countries. The embargo eliminates the possibility of implementing common strategies for the integrated management of the environment and the natural resources that surround these two countries and progress cannot be made in the absence of agreements and dialogue between the two Governments on their shared environments. Much of the work of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) is also carried out through South-South cooperation that involves knowledge transfer, capacity-building and technical support between Cuba and other countries of Latin America and the Caribbean by way of training events, capacity-building activities and workshops, among others. UNEP implements a number of projects in Cuba, some of which are affected by the embargo. The Caribbean Biological Corridor, for example, which is being implemented through an agreement between Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Haiti, with Jamaica as a permanent observer, is affected in terms of the gathering and processing of remotely sensed and spatial data. Cuba's lack of access to technology and equipment may hamper harmonization among the three countries involved. The continuing embargo translates into missed opportunities for environmental cooperation in the region. Other examples of the impact of the embargo are outlined below: (a) As United States companies are not allowed to sell equipment, technology and other products to Cuban companies, Cubans are forced to turn to other markets, which means increased cargo travel times and, consequently, increased carbon emissions associated with transport; (b) Cuba continues to increase energy efficiency under its energy revolution programme and to promote recycling and other green technologies. The aim is to decrease oil consumption and carbon dioxide emissions and to achieve general resource efficiency. However, United States companies or their subsidiaries in other countries are not allowed to sell to Cuba technologies that could enhance these efforts. The same is true for non-American companies wishing to sell products that contain parts or components provided by American companies or their subsidiaries and that could facilitate progress in this area; (c) Cuba is one of the world's leaders in biological research, with thousands of graduates from the country's 10 universities and institutes devoted to working in ecology, producing important technologies and products, including for application in biotechnology. Cuba also possesses significant knowledge in natural resources conservation. However, these technologies or products cannot to be sold in the United States; (d) The participation of Cuban experts in environmental and sustainable development conferences and training activities is often hampered by travel restrictions and thousands of dollars are spent on more expensive and often longer travel routes; (e) The embargo restricts Cuba's access to information from leading scientific and technical journals and publications, as well as Internet access to specialized companies and institutions in the United States. This limits access by Cuban academics, engineers and students to cutting-edge developments in energy and environmental sciences that could increase their capacity to implement sound environmental technologies. Connectivity restrictions also limit Cuba's ability to implement and comply with certain environmental treaties that require the constant use of the Internet; (f) Both the United States and Cuba have an interest in oil exploration and exploitation in shared marine areas. Joint environmental impact studies and environmentally friendly methods of operation are currently not possible as a result of the embargo. The 2010 oil spill underlines this issue, which should be addressed as a matter of urgency; (g) Both countries are located in regions with critical biological corridors that could benefit from full regional cooperation; (h) The United States and Cuba are located in a region where disasters, particularly hurricanes, are seriously affecting ecosystems and populations. Both countries are working to better prevent and prepare for disasters. In this sense, cooperation would benefit both countries, as well as other countries in the Caribbean; (i) Cuba has been recognized, using various criteria, as a country that has given high priority to environmental and sustainable development. Despite this, the United States has always opposed Cuban projects in the Council of the Global Environment Facility; (j) Another consequence of the embargo is the limited access to international loans and international financial institutions, which affects Cuba's ability to move towards sustainability. This has led to the general claim by Cuba that the embargo is hampering its sustainability efforts. Eliminating obstacles to a normal exchange between the two countries would contribute to making progress with regard to the sustainable management of shared ecosystems, improving cooperation between scientific and academic communities and increasing the contribution made by both countries in the fight against climate change, in ecosystem management and in the prevention of natural disasters and accidents. It would also benefit countries where the United States and Cuba have cooperative programmes. The mandate of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UNHabitat) is to coordinate the implementation of the Habitat Agenda and to assist Member States in achieving the Millennium Development Goals related to human settlements. The United States economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba limits free trade and the transfer of scientific and technological know-how and expertise for peaceful and humanitarian purposes, and thus has a negative impact on Cuba's human settlements-related goods, services and technologies. The embargo, in this way, negatively affects the ability of the Government of Cuba to implement the Habitat Agenda and attain the Millennium Development Goals related to human settlements. UN-Habitat wishes to make two observations related to its mandate and the effectiveness of its activities in Cuba. The first relates to the implementation of General Assembly resolution 67/4, the long-term objectives of which are: (a) A stable and speedy import of construction materials, tools and equipment (technology), as well as energy and raw materials for the construction and maintenance of human settlements, and for their reconstruction after natural disasters; (b) The transfer of more efficient and ecologically sound technologies and the use of patents originating from the Unites States, or commercialized by United States companies and other companies around the world; (c) Access to energy, energy-saving technologies and oil, which are important assets in the provision of basic urban services such as transport, solid waste collection and disposal, water supply and sanitation, as well as in emergency response to hazards, including fires, floods and hurricanes, so that Cubans can use efficient and environmentally sustainable alternatives; (d) Access to low-cost chemicals and equipment for water and wastewater treatment, needed to improve the quality and affordability of these services and, in turn, their impact on environmental and public health; (e) Settling of outstanding claims on properties previously owned by United States citizens or naturalized Cuban citizens, which will improve the use and rehabilitation of important facilities and the rationality and coherence of urban and real estate development; (f) Granting of visa and travel permits needed for scientific, technical and cultural exchanges, particularly for planners, architects, engineers and social scientists, for the purpose of advising their Cuban counterparts in the design, planning and management of housing and human settlements. In essence, from the human settlements perspective, the implementation of resolution 67/4 will not only improve the quality of social, economic and environmental human settlements planning and management in general, but will also, in particular, promote important improvements in the human settlements conditions of the poor and disadvantaged segments of the Cuban population. The second observation relates to UN-Habitat's latest activities in Cuba and plans for the near future, both of which stand to benefit from the implementation of resolution 67/4: (a) During the reporting period, UN-Habitat collaborated with the Cuban National Housing Institute and the Physical Planning Institute in developing cooperation projects and promoting the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, while at the same time supporting Cuba's contribution to South-South cooperation. More recently, UN-Habitat has collaborated with these institutions in realizing a national housing sector profile; (b) UN-Habitat is currently implementing its first country programme in Cuba (2011-2013). The programme has three main areas of work: urban governance and climate change; urban infrastructure, basic services and the environment; and support for the housing sector; (c) UN-Habitat has recently implemented a project entitled "Cuba-Colombia South-South cooperation: improving citizens' participation and capacities in adaptation to climate change and risk reduction processes", to support the conception and implementation of community initiatives aimed at mitigating the impact of climate change and reducing the risk of disasters. Eight municipalities in Cuba have been directly involved, together with four Colombian municipalities. In this project, UN-Habitat has collaborated with the Ministry of Foreign Commerce and Investment, the National Housing Institute, the Physical Planning Institute and Agenda 21 offices in selected municipalities; (d) Since hurricane Sandy hit Cuba in October 2012, UN-Habitat has been actively involved in the reconstruction process in the cities of Santiago and Holguín. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) is currently implementing technical projects aimed at assisting the Government of Cuba in further strengthening its industrial capabilities and competitiveness in priority industrial sectors, in line with the new political, economic and social strategies announced in 2011. UNIDO activities in Cuba have concentrated mainly on the following areas: :: Use of renewable energy in productive applications as an alternative source of energy :: Support for the fulfilment of international environmental agreements (mainly the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer) :: Support in strengthening agro-industrial value chains, in particular in the shrimp industry :: Technical support in food security programmes :: Strengthening South-South cooperation in areas related to industrial development UNIDO is participating in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for Cuba for 2013-2017. In addition, Cuba has been included in the global knowledge management system for private sector development financed by the Millennium Development Goals Achievement Fund and donor countries, which aims to enhance the United Nations system's ability to deliver policy advice, institutional capacity-building and pilot projects. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) notes that as long as the embargo remains in place the Caribbean region will continue to be confronted with a number of serious challenges related to the trafficking in illicit drugs and firearms and organized crime. Together with other Caribbean countries, Cuba finds itself between the world's largest cocaine producers in Latin America and the world's largest drug consumers, namely, North America and Europe. UNODC is in the process of strengthening its presence in the Caribbean in order to support Member States, including Cuba, in their efforts to counter these threats. In close cooperation with the Caribbean Community, UNODC is about to finalize and launch a regional programme for the Caribbean to address issues linked to preventing and countering organized crime and drug trafficking at the regional and country levels, as well as the deep and negative impact of organized crime and drug trafficking on society. Implementation of the regional programme foresees that UNODC will establish a presence in the Caribbean. Cuba is a State party to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol Against the Illicit Manufacture of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition. UNODC encourages Cuba to consider ratifying and implementing the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air. In addition, UNODC invites Cuba to voluntarily submit information, using the computer-based self-assessment checklist ("omnibus tool"), on the instruments to which it is party, in order to increase the effectiveness of technical assistance activities in the country and in the region. Cuba ratified the United Nations Convention against Corruption in 2007. A mechanism for reviewing implementation of the Convention by States parties was launched in 2010. The mechanism aims to highlight good practices that could be replicated in other countries and to identify gaps in implementation through the peer-review methodology set out in the terms of reference and guidelines of the mechanism. Moreover, the peer-review process helps States to identify and substantiate specific technical assistance needs, which can then be delivered when appropriate and requested. Cuba has been reviewed by Brazil and Guatemala and is reviewing Nicaragua, together with Nepal. The authorities of Cuba were proactive in conducting the country review and demonstrated a high level of political commitment to the process. In November 2012, UNODC launched the Regional Anti-Corruption Academy for Central America and the Caribbean in Panama. The Academy offers a variety of courses to Government officers from countries in the region, including Cuba, on ways to prevent and combat corruption, and on the international tools available to do so. Cuba participated actively in the twenty-second session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, held in Vienna on 7 December 2012 and from 22 to 26 April 2013, intervening when the Commission was considering agenda item 4, "Thematic discussion on the challenge posed by emerging forms of crime that have a significant impact on the environment and ways to deal with it effectively", and agenda item 5, "Integration and coordination of efforts by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and Member States in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice". In July 2012, members of the International Narcotics Control Board visited Cuba; this was the first mission by the Board to the country since 1999. In its report for 2012, the Board noted that the Government of Cuba, a party to all three international drug control conventions, was firmly committed to the goals and objectives of those treaties. The Board also noted that the national drug control policy was primarily focused on the prevention of drug abuse, and that health services were provided free of charge to the entire population. Active counter-narcotics efforts had prevented drug trafficking from having a significant impact on the country. There was no evidence of any major illicit cultivation of drug crops or illicit manufacture of drugs in the country. The controls applied to the licit movement of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances were satisfactory. The Government regularly provided to the Board the information required under the international drug control treaties, although with some delay and minor discrepancies. During their mission, the Board members discussed with the Government, among other things, the availability of narcotic drugs for the treatment of pain, which was lower in Cuba than in some other countries in the Caribbean. According to the latest survey, conducted in 2006, the prevalence of drug abuse in the country was low. They also discussed with the Government the need for a new survey on drug abuse to enable a comparison of drug abuse data and identify any new trends in drug abuse in the country. UNODC understands the need for increasing the technical assistance and initiatives in the Caribbean, including Cuba, and will continue to actively seek resources to carry out such activities. During 2012 and 2013 the embargo has been strengthened through the tightening of controls related to international financial transactions, including payments and the transfer of funds to United Nations agencies and other international organizations and the prohibition on Cuba to hold bank accounts in United States dollars in third countries or to access credit from United States banks, their subsidiaries in third countries or international institutions like the World Bank or the Inter-American Development Bank. In this context, the implementation by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) of its country programme continues to face serious difficulties, in particular with regard to the acquisition and purchase of commodities, equipment, medicines and laboratory materials produced by the United States or covered by United States patents. It is almost impossible to attain United States suppliers. As a result of this situation, reproductive health commodities in general have to be purchased in other regions, which leads to an increase in costs owing to more expensive transportation and freight charges. Alternative adequate markets are also more distant, resulting in higher importation costs and delays in deliveries. In many cases, providers request to be paid through transfers to banks outside the country owing to the lack of bank liquidity in the country. All these measures affect the sexual and reproductive health and family planning programmes that allow women and youth in Cuba to make responsible and informed choices. Additional budgetary resources are required to cover higher costs. Although the country office has started to formulate and negotiate a resource mobilization strategy in order to deal with financial limitations and expand its work in the country, the embargo limits the flow of international assistance to Cuba. The current situation affects the basic standards of reproductive health of the Cuban people and undermines the sustainability of the goals agreed upon at the International Conference on Population and Development and the Millennium Development Goals. As a specialized agency of the United Nations, the Universal Postal Union (UPU) is not directly involved in implementing General Assembly resolution 67/4, which directly affects only Member States. UPU has always regarded Cuba as a fully fledged member of the Union. As such, Cuba enjoys the same rights and obligations as other UPU members. In 2013, staff members in Cuba benefited from several scholarships for trainings sessions on a variety of topics, including on follow-up to the national quality of service plan, compensation and sustainable development. Furthermore, a UPU consultant supported the follow-up to the national quality of service plan. Cuba was re-elected member of the UPU Postal Operations Council at the last UPU Congress, held in 2012, and serves on a number of the Council's committees and working groups. The United States embargo continues to have a negative impact on the Cuban economy and on the operational conditions of the World Food Programme (WFP). The high cost of importing agricultural equipment and inputs is a key factor limiting high agriculture productivity in Cuba. Most Cuban farmers can only access a limited amount of agricultural inputs; new technology and equipment too are hard to come by. As a result, Cuba is unable to produce all the food it requires, which forces the Government to import a significant proportion of food commodities to meet the requirements of its national food-based social safety net programmes. This represents a significant budgetary burden for the country, threatening those most dependent on social safety nets and imposing significant challenges to food security in Cuba. Limitations imposed by the embargo restrict the ability of WFP to procure services and products from United States-based companies or companies that process payments through United States subsidiaries, directly affecting projects and the running of the WFP office. This year, for example, the WFP office in Cuba purchased 38 photometers for primary health-care centres to measure haemoglobin levels as part of its activities to prevent and control anaemia among children and pregnant women (anaemia prevalence continues to be high in Cuba, especially among children under 2 years of age, jeopardizing their development potential and hence that of the country). The photometers were purchased from a European firm; had it been possible to access the United States market, the cost would have been almost exactly half of the price paid and WFP would have been able to purchase double the amount of photometers. Moreover, payment for the purchases was made more difficult by the impossibility of using United States banks or their subsidiaries. The procurement and shipment of food and non-food commodities too was delayed owing to the above-mentioned logistical challenges. Because of the embargo, vessels are obliged to make a stopover in a neighbouring country for transhipment. This causes delays and additional costs, which also affect WFP shipments. The ongoing work of WFP in Cuba is affected by difficulties in purchasing equipment at more competitive prices. For example, WFP was not able find information technology equipment for its offices locally. Regionally too there were obstacles: for example, a Panama-based company that offered very competitive prices for computers could not sell to Cuba because it was a subsidiary of a United States company. These obstacles also apply to the purchase of spare car parts and office stationary, increasing regular costs. Moreover, the cost of voice and data communications was abnormally high because of having to avoid United States infrastructure. [Original: English and Spanish] The blockade affects the health and well-being of the Cuban population because it has a negative impact on access to essential equipment, reagents and medicines. Costs for acquiring essential items are elevated by having to channel purchases through subsidiary companies and third countries, which affects all facilities in the unified health system and has a direct impact on health services, health research, epidemiological surveillance and disease control. Quality of care is jeopardized as the blockade is associated with the need to employ less-than-optimal protocols and technologies for diagnosis and treatment, while incurring delays in treatment and resolution times. The blockade also affects human resources for health in Cuba by decreasing the available opportunities for scientific exchange and interaction among peers. Limited Internet connectivity and lack of access to important scientific journals negatively affects access to information and scientific knowledge in the country, which is crucial for generating and sharing new knowledge. The blockade affects the technical cooperation initiatives of the World Health Organization/Pan American Health Organization (WHO/PAHO) in the country, as well as its day-to-day operations because it has to purchase office equipment and materials in third countries, which results in higher administrative costs, and because of the severe limitations regarding Internet access and available software. WHO/PAHO also notes the negative effect of the blockade on global health and public health in general. By excluding Cuba from participation in regional and global activities and programmes, the blockade affects the global advancement and application of knowledge to improve health for all. Impact on the population, the health sector and personal health In economic terms, Cuban Government sources have estimated the cost of the blockade in the health sector at $2,398 million as at May 2013. This cost is due primarily to the need to acquire medicines, reagents, spare parts for equipment, instruments and other supplies from remote markets, often through intermediaries, which increases the final cost. Paying more for essential medicines and products limits the resources available for making investments into key public health-related infrastructure (linked to housing, roads, water and sanitation). The limitations imposed by the blockade have been aggravated by the current world economic crisis. In addition, the blockade slows public health development by not allowing access to loans or donations from international financial institutions such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. It limits access to donations from philanthropic organizations and American civil society. This impact is complex and less direct, which means that it is difficult to calculate its magnitude and monetary cost. Health services Costs for acquiring essential items are elevated by having to channel purchases through subsidiary companies and third countries, which affects all facilities in the unified health system and has a direct impact on health services, health research, epidemiological surveillance and disease control. Quality of care is jeopardized as the blockade is associated with the need to employ less-than-optimal protocols and technologies for diagnosis and treatment, while incurring delays in treatment and prolonged resolution times. Public health in the country may be compromised by the lack of resources necessary to address epidemiological threats. Below are examples of limited access to essential medicines and equipment: (a) The Cardiology and Cardiovascular Surgery Institute reported being unable to purchase non-fluoroscopic three-dimensional anatomical mapping equipment produced by United States companies. Consequently, patients have had to be sent to Italy for these procedures, at increased costs; (b) The Hermanos Ameijeiras Hospital reported that it did not have access to the "greenlight" potassium-titanyl-phosphate (KTP) laser treatment for patients with prostatic hyperplasia. Large companies in the United States that make the endoscopic, laparoscopic and bipolar resectoscope or laser KTP equipment cannot conduct business with Cuba and the procurement of these materials through other countries make the costs prohibitive. In addition, the hospital has limited access to drugs for the treatment of prostate and gall bladder cancer, such as Mitomicín C, Zoladex and Casodex, as well as limited access to other anti-androgens. The hospital also reported lack of access to monoclonal antibodies for the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma; (c) The Institute of Neurology and Neurosurgery, whose primary function is research, is affected by the lack of access to biological products and reagents, as well as the lack of key laboratory equipment used in research projects and clinical care. The Institute reported experiencing difficulties in the acquisition of Temozolamida, a cytostatic used in the post-operative treatment of primary tumours of the central nervous system; antiparkinson drugs such as Rotigotine and antidegenerative drugs used in the treatment of dementia such as Donepezil and Rivastigmina; and other products, including Mestinon, which is used to treat cases of myasthenia gravis. They also noted the lack of equipment, for example, of the gamma knife, used in the radiosurgery of tumours and arteriovenous malformations of the central nervous system, and difficulties in the procurement of valves for the treatment of hydrocephalus in children; (d) The Institute of Gastroenterology highlighted the lack of bipolar radiofrequency equipment for the ablation of liver tumours and of protease-inhibitor drugs. The Institute also experiences shortages of United States-produced drugs that are essential in the treatment of chronic incapacitating diseases, such as hepatitis B in children and adolescents and hepatitis C, which when treated in a timely manner can prevent cirrhosis of the liver and its complications; (e) The National Centre of Medical Genetics reported that it had not been able to acquire a genetic analyser, a piece of equipment produced exclusively by companies in the United States that makes it possible to conduct base readings of DNA sequences and is an essential tool for the study of genetic diseases. The Centre also points out the lack of reagents, for example of ß-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, reduced form (tetrasodium salt), which impedes the use of several techniques to measure genotoxicity, both environmental and endogenous. AmnioMAX, which is produced by a United States firm, is the most efficient and complete medium for the culture of human cells, and is used in cytogenetic laboratories worldwide for the purpose of obtaining chromosomes for the prenatal diagnosis of high-risk pregnant women. Such diagnosis has at times had to be stopped throughout the country owing to a delay in the product's arrival in Cuba; (f) The William Soler Paediatric Cardiology Centre reported difficulties in acquiring nitric oxide, a gas manufactured by United States companies. This gas is used on patients with pulmonary hypertension crises or emergencies and in cases of severe pulmonary distress. It is also needed in other cases, including in heart and lung transplants and persistent foetal circulation in newborns. The cardiology department reported difficulties in the procurement of the United States drug Bosentan, used in pulmonary hypertension in cases of non-operable Eisenmenger's syndrome in which the drug Sildenafil causes unexpected reactions or side effects; (g) The Institute of Nutrition and Food Hygiene reported difficulties in the determination of aflatoxins, which are carcinogenic toxins present in food contaminated by fungi. This test has been discontinued for over a year because of the lack of a supplier for the aflatoxins B2, G1 and G2; (h) The Frank País Orthopedic Hospital reported difficulties in the acquisition of prosthetic hand joints for patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A potential supplier in the United States was contacted but the products had to be acquired through a branch in France, delaying arrival and resulting in higher costs. Currently, patients must travel abroad or receive palliative operations for the treatment of their deformities; (i) The electromedicine institute reported difficulties in purchasing accessories and replacement parts for multiparameter monitors and defibrillators from United States manufacturers. The parts have to be purchased through a third country, which makes them more expensive; moreover, it is often difficult to obtain the required amounts. In addition, it was noted that staff of the institute are unable to obtain training on the use of positron emission tomography equipment, which is first-rate equipment for the diagnosis of cancer. The centre that would provide such training is in Cleveland, United States, which makes the participation of Cuban specialists very difficult. It was also reported that there were nine cobalt machines to provide teletherapy treatment to cancer patients in Cuba. The radioactive capsule of those machines should be replaced every six years. The first case of a capsule needing to be replaced occurred in 2009 and currently five capsules need to be replaced. Representatives from the company report that they need approval from the United States Department of the Treasury to supply the replacements and that they have not been granted permission to do so yet. Research The blockade continues to limit scientific exchanges, in spite of recognized advances in innovation and science in the country. It limits Cuban scientists' exposure to and interaction with peers, as well as access to relevant information. The Cuban scientific community cannot easily access fellowships and grants from the United States for further studies and training or for the development of research projects. There are also limitations on the procurement of and access to important scientific journals published in the United States. This access has become even more difficult since Cuba was disconnected from the HINARI Access to Research in Health Programme. There are also continued difficulties with regard to the publication of Cuban scientific articles in scientific journals published in the United States, and the blockade has hindered the inclusion of drugs and vaccines produced in Cuba in research protocols and clinical trials conducted in the United States. It is difficult to pay fees to international associations and global federations of health professionals. For example, the Cuban Society of Family Medicine has to make its yearly payments in person, when one of its members participates in one of the organization's events. The Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology of Cuba has faced a similar situation with regard to its subscription to services of the American Society for Microbiology. This situation limits the participation of health professionals from Cuba in the international arena. The blockade has also made the country's representation in international organizations and conferences located in United States difficult owing to delays in the issuance of visas or to the non-issuance of visas. Information technology and knowledge management Cuba does not have access to underwater fibre-optic cables, which limits Internet connectivity and increases costs for Internet services. This limits Cuban participation in virtual forums, scientific communities of practice and relevant research events. It also limits access to public software. Many websites, in particular those located in the United States, are not accessible from Cuba. Examples of such websites and software are listed below: (a) Sites for Google developers (developers.google.com and code.google.com), created to facilitate the free exchange of information and code sources among developers of all sorts of software; (b) Sourceforge.net, one of the most complete software repositories available; (c) Sites belonging to Nvidia, a company that produces graphic visualization and scientific computation technologies and whose repositories of information and software are essential for modelling and scientific simulation, as well as for the display of advanced imaging diagnostics systems; (d) Virtual programs for Java and Adobe Flash installers, essential technologies for a broad range of services (Elluminate, YouTube etc.) and tools (Greenstone, BigBlueButton etc.); Oracle prohibits the downloading of these programs. Impact on WHO/PAHO technical cooperation Owing to the blockade, the technical cooperation activities of the WHO/PAHO country office in Cuba incur higher administrative costs. The procurement of necessary equipment and office supplies is difficult and more expensive, which leaves fewer resources for technical cooperation activities in the country. The office of the WHO/PAHO representative in Cuba has been unable to access computer equipment or maintenance and other supplies whose acquisition is centrally managed by PAHO headquarters in the United States for all of its country offices. This makes it difficult to maintain uniformity of technology across the organization and means that all technology, technical services and guarantees have to be acquired from more distant regions, which in turn leads to cost increases. It is also impossible to purchase directly software programs that PAHO has standardized for its own use. The inability of Cuban staff in the WHO/PAHO country office to access information and professional development tools places them at a disadvantage and on unequal terms with colleagues in other offices. This situation is largely characterized by Internet-related difficulties and the high number of web pages that users in Cuba cannot view and from which they cannot download information, including free software. The blockade can also directly affect technical cooperation programmes. The funds needed to purchase influenza vaccines for an immunization programme involving older adults in Cuba had to be held in a Canadian bank owing to the lack of the requisite licence from the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury. Such incidents, if implemented regularly, will hinder future transactions. In conclusion, the negative effect of the blockade does not just touch the Cuban population: it affects the global and public health situation in general. By excluding Cuba from participating in regional and global activities or programmes, the blockade affects the global advancement and application of knowledge to improve health for all. As a result of the embargo, the following circumstances, which are obstacles to the country's advancement in the field of intellectual property and directly affect its technological, social and economic development, have been observed in Cuba: (a) By restricting access by Cuban citizens to the United States, the embargo limits the possibilities of human resources development on United States soil. As a result, specialized Cuban professionals may not fully benefit from higher specialization opportunities in the field of intellectual property, available especially in the United States. These include the opportunity to acquire experience with the implementation of technology transfer offices, with technology management and with intellectual property valuation and collateralization, issues of extreme relevance for the effective use of the intellectual property system; (b) Visa restrictions also hinder the possibilities of Cuban intellectual property professionals to participate in the regular training programmes, meetings and other events organized by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in the territory of the United States; (c) A restricted telecommunications infrastructure also hinders the widespread dissemination of WIPO online distance learning courses in Cuba, despite the efforts and commitment of local authorities to foster a nationwide culture of respect for intellectual property. Facilities for videoconferencing, which allow a most efficient and cost-effective means of communication, especially for educational and training purposes, are also unavailable, since a major portion of the technical equipment and software tools originate in the United States and may not be acquired; (d) Poor telecommunications facilities have a negative impact on and obstruct access by Cuban nationals to WIPO online databases and other digital services in the field of intellectual property. This situation, in particular the lack of online access to patent information databases, including Patentscope, which are available only through the Internet, is detrimental to the advancement of technological research and other innovation programmes carried out by the Government of Cuba in the fields of environmental, medical and life sciences, and bio- and nanotechnologies; (e) The embargo affects the availability of information technology equipment and software for administrative operations regarding filing and granting procedures, in particular patent and trademarks search and examination services. Although the country is administratively equipped to perform such functions, thanks to the presence of provincial branches of the Cuban Intellectual Property Office, the lack of specialized software critically hinders such performance. External procurement formalities to obtain the required equipment and software are extremely burdensome. This situation continues to cumulatively delay the services that these offices are required to render and prevents the normal growth and expansion of such services. Most importantly, this situation stifles the possibility of taking full advantage of the functionalities available under the WIPO Intellectual Property Automated System, since some of the system's operating tools are not freely accessible to users in Cuba. As such, the possibilities for expanding and customizing the system to the needs of Cuban users (both in the capital and in the provinces) are seriously compromised; (f) The extraterritorial effects of the embargo extend to the financial arena as well. Payments from Cuba to WlPO under the WIPO-administered treaties (the Patent Cooperation Treaty and the Madrid system concerning the international registration of marks) may only be effected in euros or Swiss francs, not in United States dollars, to avoid the restrictions imposed by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury. Likewise, payments from WIPO to the Cuban Intellectual Property Office must be made in the same currencies. The cost of these indirect transactions for the purpose of avoiding United States banks amounts to considerable financial losses and discourages the use by Cuban nationals of the Patent Cooperation Treaty and the Madrid system. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has provided support to projects, meteorological equipment and instruments, and has co-sponsored meteorological conferences in Cuba. The blockade may have affected or limited access by the Meteorological Institute of Cuba to projects and hampered its acquisition of some equipment produced in countries adhering to this blockade. However, the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed by the United States against Cuba has not affected scientific and technical relations between the Meteorological Institute of Cuba and WMO or those between the Institute and other national meteorological and hydrological services. Despite the blockade, the Institute has been able to exchange meteorological, hydrological and climatological data with other national services or regional centres, without restrictions. Moreover, the Institute received all the technical documentation produced in the WMO secretariat for distribution to all Member countries. The Meteorological Institute of Cuba was thus able to receive technical documentation that allowed it to serve its users, and its staff were able to attend meetings organized by WMO and other meteorological centres in the region and elsewhere, including meetings of technical commissions and working groups, as well as lectures on scientific and technical matters. Cuba continued to participate in the activities of WMO Regional Association IV, including in its sixteenth session, held in Willemstad, Curaçao, from 12 to 29 April 2013. During the period from March 2012 to March 2013, the United States economic, commercial and financial embargo against Cuba continued to be applied to general activities, including to travel by United States citizens to Cuba, directly affecting the Cuban tourism sector. The number of international tourists arriving in the Caribbean subregion grew by 2 per cent in 2012. The United States outbound market contributed importantly to this growth, sending over 50 per cent of the tourists to the subregion. This means that 13 million United States tourists visited the Caribbean (including the Mexican Caribbean); of this total, only slightly more than 70,000 United States citizens visited Cuba. This low number is a result of the limitations imposed. If around 15 per cent of the United States citizens travelling to the Caribbean visited Cuba, assuming an absence of limitations, and if, as the Caribbean Tourism Organization has estimated, each United States tourist in the Caribbean spends an average of $975 per stay, 2 million United States tourists would have travelled to Cuba and receipts for the Cuban tourism sector would have totalled $1.95 billion in 2012. United States cruise companies are dominant in the Caribbean cruise market, yet none of the 140 cruises operating in the area can call at Cuban ports. Cruise companies estimate that of the 7 million United States citizens who buy cruises to the Caribbean around 1 million would visit Cuban ports annually if they were allowed to. Cuban companies are also prevented from supplying goods and services to these cruises, with an estimated loss of $80 million in potential sales. In addition, Cuban marinas lose over $12 million from yachts and sailing boats from the United States. The United States does not participate in sports sailing competitions organized by Cuban marine clubs. Embargo measures affecting e-commerce, Internet usage and credit-card transactions for the payment of air tickets and tourist services are affecting tourism operations in Cuba, raising their costs and preventing Cuban-based entities from competing on the same playing field as other destinations in the subregion. Credit-card processing is affecting travel agencies and the charges applied to financial transactions related to Cuba, which are considered high risk, are above average. Of the four major global distribution systems in the world, Cuban hotels can only use one, Amadeus, as the other three (Sabre, Galileo and Worldspan) are United States companies. This situation prevents Cuban tourist entities from establishing a flow of business with tourism intermediaries and advertising their products through internationally renowned United States web portals, such as Google, Yahoo and MSN. Another area affected by the embargo is procurement for the tourism sector, especially because the geographical relocation of suppliers implies higher prices and transportation and insurance fees, owing to the long distance that suppliers need to cover and also the non-mobility of resources to keep large stocks of merchandise. This also implies higher financial costs because of the need to access the more expensive commercial credit, compared to softer State and bank credit, which is difficult for Cuba to obtain as a consequence of the pressure from the United States Government on third countries and because of currency exchange rate variations, as the United States dollar cannot be used as the purchasing currency. The total increase in procurement expenses due to the embargo could be estimated at around $30 million. In all, during the period from March 2012 to March 2013, national and international tourism in Cuba was affected by the economic, commercial and financial measures of the embargo imposed by the United States Government, with an estimated impact reaching an amount of $2.1 billion. Although members of the World Trade Organization (WTO) do not address the implementation of United Nations resolutions in the light of the purposes and principles of the Charter and international law, there are various WTO forums and mechanisms where the United States, Cuba and other members can address issues relating to their WTO rights and obligations, including obligations with regard to non-discrimination, the prohibition of quotas and the possibility of invoking exceptions to these obligations. In 2012, as in previous years, this issue was raised in a number of instances, including by the Dispute Settlement Body on 25 June, 23 July, 31 August, 28 September, 23 October, 19 November and 17 December 2012. Similarly, the matter was referred to the WTO General Council at its meetings of 25 and 26 July and 3 October 2012. 