%%%CRIME PREVENTION|CRIMINAL JUSTICE|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|TRANSNATIONAL CRIME|ORGANIZED CRIME|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|RULE OF LAW|DATA COLLECTION|RECOMMENDATIONS|

Sixty-eighth session Item 108 of the preliminary list* * A/68/50. Crime prevention and criminal justice Implementation of the mandates of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, with particular reference to the technical cooperation activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report has been prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 64/293, 67/186, 67/189, 67/190 and 67/192. It summarizes the activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to support Member States in their efforts to counter transnational organized crime, corruption and terrorism, as well as to prevent crime and reinforce criminal justice systems, thus strengthening the rule of law. The report also refers to developments relating to the governance and financial situation of the Office. It includes information on the status of ratifications or accessions to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto and the United Nations Convention against Corruption, as well as emerging policy issues, responses thereto and recommendations aimed at enhancing the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme. Page Introduction Action taken by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Enhancing international cooperation and responses to transnational organized crime Transnational organized crime Countering trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants Measures against trafficking in firearms Curbing corruption Countering terrorism International cooperation in the forensic field Strengthening the rule of law Preventing crime and strengthening criminal justice systems Africa Asia Latin America and the Caribbean North Africa and the Middle East South-Eastern Europe Data collection, research and trend analysis Emerging policy issues Governance and financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Recommendations The advancement of the rule of law is essential for sustainable economic and social development. Individuals and societies can realize their full development potential when they are free from fear and violence and have access to responsive institutions and rules that are enforced in a predictable and transparent manner. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) therefore supports joint efforts to promote justice, security and the rule of law as an important aspect of the global development agenda. In implementing the mandates of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme, UNODC addresses threats that undermine the rule of law and hinder sustainable development and the enjoyment of human rights. The present report provides an overview of efforts undertaken by UNODC, as requested by the Assembly in its resolution 67/189, including with respect to different areas of combating transnational organized crime, crime prevention and criminal justice reform, the application of relevant standards and norms, and data collection. It also provides an overview of measures taken to strengthen the rule of law, pursuant to Assembly resolution 67/186. In line with Assembly resolution 67/192, it includes a section on preventing and combating corrupt practices and the transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset recovery and returning assets to legitimate owners, in particular to countries of origin, in accordance with the United Nations Convention against Corruption. The report also provides information on progress made in improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons, pursuant to Assembly resolution 67/190, and in the implementation by the United Nations system of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted by the Assembly in its resolution 64/293. Emerging policy issues and possible responses thereto are described, as are developments concerning the governance and financial situation of the Office. II. Action taken by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice The Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice held its twenty-second session on 7 December 2012 and from 22 to 26 April 2013. In its thematic discussion, the Commission considered the challenge posed by emerging forms of crime that have a significant impact on the environment and ways to deal with it effectively. Seven of the 23 proposals approved by the Commission at its twenty-second session are recommended for adoption by the Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, including a draft resolution on the rule of law, crime prevention and criminal justice in the United Nations development agenda beyond 2015 (E/2013/30, chap. I.A, draft resolution IV). The Commission, in its role as preparatory body for the quinquennial United Nations congresses on crime prevention and criminal justice, approved a draft resolution for adoption by the Assembly on preparations for the Thirteenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, which will be held in Doha from 12 to 19 April 2015 (ibid., draft resolution I). Two draft resolutions recommended for adoption by the Assembly are aimed at enhancing United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice, in particular the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (ibid., draft resolution VI) and the model strategies and practical measures on the elimination of violence against children in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice (ibid., draft resolution V). Other draft resolutions focus on crime prevention and criminal justice responses to protect cultural property (ibid., draft resolution II) and on technical assistance for implementing the international conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism (ibid., draft resolution III). In one draft resolution, action against gender-related killing of women and girls is identified as a new priority for the international community (ibid., draft resolution VII). III. Enhancing international cooperation and responses to transnational organized crime A. Transnational organized crime During the reporting period, 8 States ratified or acceded to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (bringing the total number of parties to 176), 7 States ratified the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (bringing the total number of parties to 155), 6 States ratified the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air (bringing the total number of parties to 136) and 10 States ratified the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition (bringing the total number of parties to 101). The Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime was unable to adopt a mechanism to review the implementation of the Convention and the Protocols thereto at its sixth session, held in October 2012. The Conference, in its resolution 6/1, and the General Assembly, in its resolution 67/189, underlined the need for the urgent adoption of such a mechanism and urged States parties to continue to be actively engaged in that endeavour, on the basis of the work already accomplished by the open-ended intergovernmental working group on the review of the implementation of the Convention and the Protocols thereto. In its resolution 22/3, the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice reiterated the need for the establishment of a transparent, efficient, non-intrusive, inclusive and impartial mechanism to review the Convention and the Protocols thereto, aimed at assisting States parties in the full and effective application of those instruments, and invited Member States to continue the dialogue regarding the establishment of such a mechanism, particularly in view of the holding of the seventh session of the Conference in 2014. UNODC provided technical assistance to facilitate ratification and implementation of the Organized Crime Convention and the Protocols thereto, including through the provision of legal advice, capacity-building, training and tools. UNODC developed three manuals on international cooperation in criminal matters, the Model Legislative Provisions against Organized Crime, a knowledge management portal on transnational organized crime and the Digest of Organized Crime Cases: A Compilation of Cases with Commentaries and Lessons Learned. The Digest was prepared in cooperation with the Governments of Colombia and Italy and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). It gathers experience and good practices from law enforcement, prosecution and judicial services from various countries. Working with experts from Member States, UNODC also started revising its Counter-Kidnapping Manual, published in 2006, to reflect advances in procedures and practices. In several regions, UNODC successfully promoted cooperation between judicial and law enforcement authorities. The Office organized expert meetings aimed at establishing regional mechanisms of cooperation among prosecutors and national competent authorities in West Africa and the Gulf countries. It also supported existing networks, such as the Network of Prosecutors against Organized Crime in Central America and the judicial platform of the Sahel countries and the judicial platform for Indian Ocean Commission members, as well as regional law enforcement coordination bodies such as the Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre, the Gulf Criminal Intelligence Centre to Combat Drugs, the joint planning cell of Afghanistan, Iran (Islamic Republic of) and Pakistan, and the Southeast European Law Enforcement Center. In order to leverage the combined strengths of those networks, a "network of networks" is being considered to link them together and act as a force multiplier in the fight against illicit trafficking. UNODC will coordinate an inter-agency meeting in 2013 to explore this option together with the European Police Office, INTERPOL, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the World Customs Organization (WCO) and other international partner organizations. The meeting will examine the mandates and priorities of the various agencies, explore options for collaboration and technical assistance and seek to identify opportunities for coordinated operational activities. UNODC and INTERPOL strengthened their collaboration in the area of organized crime by jointly developing specialized tools and coordinating training activities, with a view to achieving synergies through joint delivery and information exchange, including through the INTERPOL Illicit Arms Records and Tracing Management System. UNODC also provided technical assistance through its Global Programme against Money-Laundering, Proceeds of Crime and the Financing of Terrorism. The Office helped by addressing the interlinkages between money-laundering and serious organized crime and by providing legal, regulatory, institutional and operational assistance to Member States, aimed at building the capacity of law enforcement and prosecuting agencies to analyse, investigate and prosecute money-laundering and related financial crimes, to prevent and suppress cash smuggling and to identify and confiscate the proceeds of crime. UNODC continued its long-term assistance in the development of viable regimes to counter money-laundering and financing of terrorism in nine subregions and 43 countries, through the delivery of 43 training sessions and two international conferences, in partnership with other agencies and organizations, where possible, as well as two substantive legal reviews. The Office trained more than 1,300 representatives from law enforcement agencies, financial intelligence units, judicial authorities and reporting entities. It also promoted cooperation among financial intelligence units, including under its regional programme for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries. B. Countering trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants Throughout 2012 and 2013, UNODC reached 50 countries through technical assistance activities addressing trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, providing assistance at the national level to 20 countries and supporting 10 interregional and regional responses. Capacity-building has continued to be a key component of the assistance provided. In 2012, police, border guards, prosecutors, judges, legislative drafters and civil society received specialized training in such countries as Benin, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Colombia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, India, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Togo and Uzbekistan. In addition to direct technical assistance, UNODC disseminated its core tools and publications to national and international practitioners and through its field office network in over 50 countries. UNODC also continued enhancing the human trafficking case law database and initiated work regarding the links between smuggling of migrants and corruption. UNODC produced new publications aimed at strengthening the criminal justice response, including the Assessment Guide to the Criminal Justice Response to the Smuggling of Migrants, which provides an inventory of measures for assessing the legislative, investigative, prosecutorial, judicial and administrative responses to the smuggling of migrants by land, air and sea, for deterring and combating such crime and for integrating the information and experience gained from such assessment into successful national, regional and international strategies. UNODC also developed an issue paper on the key concept of "abuse of a position of vulnerability", drawing on interviews with practitioners in 12 countries and using input from an expert group meeting held in Vienna in June 2012. In its resolution 6/1, the Conference of the Parties requested UNODC to continue producing technical papers on key concepts of the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. Implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons On the basis of the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, UNODC released the first Global Report on Trafficking in Persons in December 2012. The data collection for the 2014 Global Report started in May 2013 with a request to Member States to submit information by 1 October 2013. The Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons continued to promote coherence in the efforts of the United Nations system to respond to trafficking in persons. The Group committed itself to the publication of five policy papers examining issues identified as critical challenges in the fight against trafficking in persons in the coming decade. The first paper, entitled "International legal frameworks concerning trafficking in persons", was issued in October 2012. The United Nations system agencies and other relevant international organizations also supported the implementation of the Global Plan of Action in their individual capacities. The International Labour Organization (ILO) published a new global estimate of 20.9 million victims in forced labour in 2012, and its Governing Body placed forced labour on the agenda of the International Labour Conference in 2014. The International Organization for Migration (IOM) has implemented 882 anti-human trafficking projects in 94 countries since 1995, which included the provision of direct assistance in 6,394 cases involving victims of 89 different nationalities in 2012 alone. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) continued to provide technical assistance to Member States on the application of the rights-based approach to addressing human trafficking. Progress was also made in implementing the Global Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking. UNODC continued to manage the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and urged Member States to provide support. Grants had been provided to 11 grass-roots organizations directly assisting victims of trafficking in persons. C. Measures against trafficking in firearms UNODC supported several countries in West Africa and South America in strengthening their firearms control regimes and provided technical support for marking of and record-keeping on firearms. It also promoted regional cooperation and information exchange in cooperation with the Common Market of the South Working Group on Firearms. In 2012, two regional seminars were held, in Argentina and Senegal, to promote legislative harmonization of the domestic legal framework and support the implementation of the international and regional instruments on firearms. UNODC provided tailored legislative assistance and advice to those countries for the analysis of their laws and the development of specialized legislation, in order to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework on firearms. UNODC developed a "Ratification kit" to assist Member States in their efforts towards ratification of, or accession to, the Firearms Protocol. It is preparing a comprehensive training curriculum on firearms control to support the delivery of specialized capacity-building activities in the areas of investigation and prosecution of firearms-related criminality and links to transnational organized crime. Pursuant to resolutions 5/4 and 6/2 of the Conference of the Parties to the Organized Crime Convention, UNODC is developing a global study on the transnational routes and modi operandi used in firearms trafficking, its links to other cross-border trafficking flows and possible connections to organized crime and terrorism. The study will be based on information provided by States and is aimed at designing, in cooperation with interested States, effective crime prevention and criminal justice responses to counter trafficking in firearms. D. Curbing corruption 1. Ratification and implementation of the United Nations Convention against Corruption As at 24 May 2013, there were 140 signatories and 166 parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption. The Mechanism for the Review of Implementation of the Convention was launched in 2010. In the first year, 27 countries were under review, in the second year 41 countries and in the third year 35 countries. The fourth year started in May 2013; 62 countries were under review. A total of 38 country reviews were finalized, while a number of others were in the final stages. The Implementation Review Group held its third session in Vienna from 18 to 22 June 2012 and its resumed third session in Vienna from 14 to 16 November 2012. Its fourth session was held in Vienna from 27 to 31 May 2013. For the period 2010-2011, voluntary contributions were received from Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). For the period 2012-2013, voluntary contributions have been received from Australia, France, Mexico, Morocco, Norway, Sweden and the United States. In-kind contributions have also been provided by Benin, Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United Arab Emirates. The fifth session of the Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations Convention against Corruption is scheduled to be held in Panama from 24 to 28 November 2013. The open-ended intergovernmental working groups established by the Conference continued to advise and assist it on prevention and asset recovery (Working Group on the Prevention of Corruption: third meeting held in Vienna from 27 to 29 August 2012 and fourth meeting to be held in Vienna from 26 to 28 August 2013; Working Group on Asset Recovery: sixth meeting held in Vienna on 30 and 31 August 2012 and seventh meeting to be held in Vienna on 29 and 30 August 2013). Pursuant to resolution 4/2 of the Conference, the meeting of experts to enhance international cooperation under the Convention was convened in Vienna on 22 and 23 October 2012. UNODC provided expertise and technical assistance, in line with the Convention against Corruption and in preparation for and follow-up to the country reviews, to more than 40 countries, including through its field-based regional anti-corruption advisers. UNODC continued to provide support to countries undertaking surveys and studies on corruption and integrity, including on corruption affecting the business sector. Such activities respond to the need expressed by an increasing number of countries to assess their experience of corruption and other challenges to integrity through solid methodologies based on empirical evidence. In partnership with UNDP and the United Nations System Staff College, UNODC has developed a training programme for United Nations agencies on the incorporation of anti-corruption activities into the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). The Anti-Corruption Academic Initiative, led by UNODC, developed an online menu of anti-corruption topics. In cooperation with the International Olympic Committee, UNODC is in the process of finalizing a global overview of legislative approaches to match-fixing and illegal and irregular betting. UNODC participated as an observer in the Group of Twenty (G-20) Anti-Corruption Working Group and became a member of the Business-20 (B-20) Task Force on Improving Transparency and Anti-Corruption. Three projects were being implemented with funding from the Siemens Integrity Initiative, focusing on strengthening public and private partnerships in preventing and addressing corruption in public procurement and in legal incentives for corporate integrity. With support from the Russian Federation and in cooperation with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the World Bank, a practical handbook for businesses and a study on good practices for preventing corruption in the organization of major public events were developed. UNODC and the United Nations Global Compact continued work on the tenth principle of the Global Compact and the Convention against Corruption. 2. Preventing and combating corrupt practices and the transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset recovery and returning assets to legitimate owners, in particular to countries of origin, in accordance with the Convention The joint UNODC/World Bank Stolen Asset Recovery (StAR) Initiative continued to develop knowledge products. A systematic collection of asset recovery cases, an expanded version of the UNODC Mutual Legal Assistance Request Writer Tool and a study on settlements and their impact on asset recovery were being finalized. One hundred and two States parties had notified the Secretariat about their central authorities for mutual legal assistance. Networks of practitioners included the Global Focal Point Initiative on Asset Recovery, supported by the StAR Initiative and INTERPOL, and regional networks such as the Asset Recovery Inter-Agency Network of Southern Africa, supported by UNODC, and the Asset Recovery Network established by the countries of the Financial Action Task Force of South America against Money-Laundering, supported by the StAR Initiative. The StAR Initiative supported the first Arab Forum on Asset Recovery, held in Doha from 11 to 13 September 2012 and co-organized by Qatar and the United States presidency of the Group of Eight (G-8). The event was held in the context of the Deauville Partnership with Arab Countries in Transition, launched at the G-8 Summit in 2011, and the Deauville Action Plan on Asset Recovery, adopted in 2012, in which the StAR Initiative is identified as a key partner. The workplan developed as a follow-up to the Arab Forum outlined three special sessions on technical challenges: one to be held in Qatar from 2 to 4 April 2013, on domestic coordination and the asset recovery guides produced by the G-8 countries and Switzerland; another to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, from 11 to 13 June 2013, on financial investigations in support of asset recovery; and a third to be held in September 2013, on the role of civil society in asset recovery. The second Arab Forum on Asset Recovery was scheduled to be held in October 2013. The StAR Initiative has provided case-specific preparatory assistance and is currently working with 28 countries. A visible success of this engagement was the recent return to Tunisia of $28.8 million from Lebanon, through a concerted effort of the two Governments, the StAR Initiative and the regional UNODC Special Advocate on Stolen Asset Recovery. E. Countering terrorism UNODC, through its Terrorism Prevention Branch, continued to assist Member States in strengthening their national criminal justice systems to prevent and counter terrorism. The Office actively promoted the universalization of the 18 international legal instruments against terrorism. In this regard, considerable progress has been made, resulting in 27 new ratifications in the reporting period. UNODC provided legal assistance to Member States to bring national counter-terrorism legislation into line with relevant international standards. It provided training for 2,100 national criminal justice officials in 84 Member States, through national, regional and international capacity-building workshops devoted to strengthening their ability to implement such counter-terrorism legislation. UNODC strengthened its counter-terrorism technical assistance programmes, including those for Afghanistan, Colombia, Nigeria, Yemen, North Africa, the Sahel and South-East Asia. A strengthened network of field-based terrorism prevention experts enabled UNODC to work more closely with local officials in designing and implementing national and regional activities. To respond to the increasingly complex nature of terrorism, UNODC provided national criminal justice officials with specialized expertise in areas of terrorism prevention such as the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, victims of terrorism, chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear terrorism, transport-related terrorism offences, financing of terrorism and international cooperation in criminal matters. UNODC developed a technical assistance tool to strengthen the capacity of criminal justice officials to investigate and prosecute cases involving the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, used in the UNODC workshops for criminal justice officials in India, Mexico and Morocco. UNODC also worked with Member States to strengthen their legislation and policies aimed at supporting and protecting victims of terrorism. In April 2013, UNODC organized a photographic exhibition and a panel discussion on victims of acts of terrorism at the margins of the twenty-second session of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. UNODC is planning to compile best practices on victims of terrorism, including their role within the criminal justice framework. UNODC assisted Member States with the ratification and implementation of the international legal instruments dealing with chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear terrorism. At the high-level meeting on countering nuclear terrorism, with a focus on strengthening the legal framework, held at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 28 September 2012, UNODC highlighted the importance of the universalization and implementation of the international legal instruments related to nuclear terrorism. The transnational nature of terrorism makes it necessary to ensure effective international cooperation in criminal matters and the designation of central authorities. UNODC supported the judicial platform of the Sahel countries, and in November 2012 it organized the third meeting of the platform, in Burkina Faso, to further consolidate the process started in 2010. UNODC also developed a regional network of prosecutors and designated representatives of central authorities of States members of the Economic Community of West African States and Mauritania. Together with the Ministry of Justice and Freedoms of Morocco and the Global Counterterrorism Forum, the Office organized a conference on regional cooperation in criminal matters in the Maghreb and the Sahel, in Casablanca, from 16 to 18 April 2013, which focused on challenges in the region and ways to strengthen such cooperation. UNODC continued to cooperate and strengthen synergies with other United Nations entities in its counter-terrorism work. The Office participated in activities and on-site visits of the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the Security Council and its Executive Directorate, in addition to developing several joint technical assistance projects. A three-year joint project aimed at promoting the establishment of central authorities for international judicial cooperation in terrorism cases was officially launched at a meeting in Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, held from 19 to 21 February 2013. Participants discussed challenges and exchange of good practices for the establishment and efficient operation of central authorities. UNODC also contributed to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force by participating in its several thematic working groups and inter-agency coordination activities. In implementing these activities, UNODC focused on reinforcing the efforts of national Governments to respect the rule of law and human rights while preventing and combating terrorism. UNODC is also developing a module on human rights in criminal justice responses to terrorism as part of its counter-terrorism legal training curriculum. F. International cooperation in the forensic field UNODC continued to support the establishment and sustainability of forensic science networks in different geographical regions, encouraging their collaboration and promoting the work of national forensic science laboratories under the framework of the International Forensic Strategic Alliance. This included collaboration towards the development and promotion of minimum-practice requirements that guarantee an acceptable level of quality and interoperability of forensic science services worldwide. Key elements in increasing awareness and enhancing capacity in security document examination were the implementation of the standardized training programme in Latin America and the development of e-learning modules for worldwide use in the prevention of identity-related crimes. IV. Strengthening the rule of law Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 67/186, UNODC continued to promote the rule of law through its thematic and regional programmes. In implementing its 2011-2013 thematic programme of action against transnational organized crime, UNODC supported a United Nations system-wide response to organized crime by strengthening criminal justice institutions and assisted Member States in strengthening legal frameworks to effectively prosecute organized crime, including trafficking in persons and smuggling of migrants, in line with the rule of law. The UNODC regional programmes for East Africa and for East Asia and the Pacific also focus explicitly on the promotion of the rule of law and a coherent engagement of the United Nations system. Rule of law considerations are mainstreamed into all UNODC programmes and activities at both the field and headquarters levels. UNODC is an active member of the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group of the Secretariat, which aims to ensure effective and coherent United Nations rule of law efforts in line with the aspirations of national and international partners. Within that Group, UNODC contributed to the development and implementation of a unified rule of law training programme for United Nations field staff. The Office also contributed to the substantive preparation of the first high-level meeting of the Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels, held on 24 September 2012. UNODC is currently exploring with the Office of Legal Affairs and OHCHR ways and means to strengthen the promotion of and respect for rule of law at the international level. V. Preventing crime and strengthening criminal justice systems UNODC assists Member States in applying the United Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice under its thematic programme on crime prevention and criminal justice. The programme includes a portfolio of 43 projects in 40 countries worldwide. UNODC assists Member States in developing effective crime prevention strategies and policies and in building the capacity of their criminal justice systems to operate more fairly and effectively within the framework of the rule of law, with particular attention to women and children, as well as victims and witnesses of crime. In the reporting period, significant progress was achieved in various areas, particularly crime prevention, prison reform, prevention of violence against women, legal aid and justice for children. To support its technical assistance delivery, UNODC developed a Criminal Justice Handbook Series, together with other tools such as training curricula and model laws. During the reporting period, UNODC developed a guidance note on mainstreaming crime prevention in the work of the Office, the Introductory Handbook on the Prevention of Recidivism and the Social Reintegration of Offenders, the Training Manual on Policing Urban Space, the Handbook on the International Transfer of Sentenced Persons and, in collaboration with the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), an online training package on the Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime. UNODC provides technical assistance in partnership with a wide variety of international and local governmental and non-governmental organizations. It does so either on an ad hoc basis or as a member of coordination mechanisms such as the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender Equality, the Global Forum on Law, Justice and Development and the Interagency Panel on Juvenile Justice. A. Africa In Kenya, UNODC supported the 2011-2013 police reform programme and carried out a study on alternatives to imprisonment and social reintegration of offenders. In Somalia, the Office participated in an assessment of the prison system in south central Somalia. In Somaliland, it presented its criminal justice programme to local authorities. In Ethiopia, it developed a national integrated programme, with implementation to start in 2013. In South Sudan, it has been supporting a prison reform programme since 2007 and is developing a juvenile justice project. UNODC implemented projects on prison reform and on justice administration in Guinea-Bissau. In Cape Verde, UNODC and UNICEF developed a technical assistance programme to enhance the juvenile justice system, on the basis of a needs assessment endorsed by the Government. In Mauritania, it supported a crime prevention and rule of law capacity-building programme aimed at preventing inter-community tensions. In Nigeria, UNODC launched a comprehensive justice sector programme for 2013-2016 that will improve mechanisms for accountability and civil society engagement with justice institutions, thereby enhancing respect for human rights and public trust. UNODC continued to implement projects in South Africa and other countries of the Southern African Development Community covering victim protection and empowerment and prevention of violence against women and children. B. Asia In Viet Nam, UNODC implemented an anti-domestic violence project and assessed the situation of women in the criminal justice system. In Indonesia, it implemented a judicial integrity and capacity project. In Timor-Leste, it provided support to the juvenile justice system. In South Asia, UNODC developed its 2013-2015 regional programme, together with the Governments of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal and Sri Lanka, with a subprogramme on promoting efficient, fair and humane criminal justice systems. In Afghanistan, UNODC trained judges and prosecutors on various topics and assisted the Government in revising the penal code and in reforming the prison and juvenile justice systems. The Office also assisted Pakistan in the areas of law enforcement, police-prosecutor cooperation and prison reform. In the Islamic Republic of Iran, UNODC provided technical assistance on national legislation reform. In Kyrgyzstan, UNODC provided technical assistance to support prison reform. The Office supported Uzbekistan in, among others, the area of pretrial detention. C. Latin America and the Caribbean In Colombia, UNODC supported local safety audits and contributed to protecting vulnerable groups, especially women, internally displaced persons, and children and youth. UNODC also started a juvenile justice capacity-building project with the non-governmental organization Terre des Hommes fédération internationale. In Ecuador and Peru, UNODC assisted judges by compiling jurisprudence on juvenile justice. In Bolivia (Plurinational State of), UNODC promoted the implementation of the new law on the judiciary, assisted in reforming the criminal procedure code and the juvenile criminal justice bill and promoted restorative justice, rehabilitation of offenders and community policing. In Brazil, UNODC continued to work on crime prevention issues. In Mexico, UNODC is active in the areas of crime prevention, police reform and juvenile justice. It implements a project on security and justice for media, as well as a project on conflict prevention and peacebuilding in communities with internally displaced persons. In Panama, UNODC continues to implement a prison reform project and assists in developing new initiatives for the prevention of violence and crime. In El Salvador, UNODC conducted a second assessment of the prison system. In the Caribbean, the Office organized a workshop on prison reform and alternatives to imprisonment and a workshop on juvenile justice information management systems, with UNICEF and the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States. D. North Africa and the Middle East In Egypt, UNODC developed projects focusing on long-term police and corrections reform and on juvenile justice. In Libya, the Office resumed criminal justice reform assistance, including in juvenile justice and prison matters. In Lebanon, it supported penal reform. Activities in the State of Palestine focused on prison reform. In Jordan, UNODC expanded its juvenile justice activities and assisted in prevention of violence and support for victims in a camp for Syrian refugees. E. South-Eastern Europe In Central and Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, UNODC and UNICEF promoted the use of the online training package on the Guidelines on Justice in Matters involving Child Victims and Witnesses of Crime. VI. Data collection, research and trend analysis The first Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, based on data collected from 132 countries and issued in December 2012, analysed patterns and trends from 2007 to 2010. UNODC, in consultation with Member States and partner organizations, continued to develop global and regional analyses of transnational organized crime threats to assist the international community in developing strategic responses. Transnational organized crime threat assessments were completed for Central America and the Caribbean, West Africa, and East Asia and the Pacific, focusing on trafficking flows, emerging challenges such as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and related threats to governance and security. A similar assessment for East Africa will be finalized by mid-2013. In order to address challenges in improving crime statistics, UNODC developed, jointly with the National Institute of Statistics and Geography of Mexico, a road map to improve the quality and availability of crime statistics at the national and international levels. That document identified areas of work to strengthen methodological standards on crime statistics, to support countries' capacities and to improve international data on and analyses of crime. The road map was discussed and endorsed by the Statistical Commission at its forty-fourth session, in February and March 2013, and by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-second session, in April 2013. The Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice recommended for adoption by the Economic and Social Council a draft resolution supporting the activities presented in the road map and requesting UNODC to continue activities to improve statistical information on crime in accordance with the road map and to report to it and to the Statistical Commission regularly on those activities (E/2013/30, chap. I.B, draft resolution I). During the last year, UNODC has made considerable progress in the development of the international classification of crimes for statistical purposes, an activity addressed in the above-mentioned road map. The international classification will be a major tool for improving the accuracy, consistency and comparability of statistics on crime and criminal justice systems. Standardized concepts and classification schemes will increase the analytical power of data on crime trends and patterns. UNODC also continued to provide technical support to countries implementing surveys and studies on a number of crime issues, including on corruption, crime victimization, access to justice and accessibility of firearms. Evidence-based guidance was provided on how to better target crime prevention policies. VII. Emerging policy issues Piracy UNODC continued supporting countries in the East Africa region, including Kenya, Mauritius, Seychelles and the United Republic of Tanzania, in the prosecution of suspected pirates and in ensuring that trials were effective, efficient and fair. The Office also supported Somali prisons under the piracy prisoner transfer programme. Further work will include capacity-building for the Somali Coast Guard and assistance to released piracy hostages. A maritime crime programme was developed to include other forms of crime occurring at sea, and extending support to West Africa and other regions. Work to counter illicit financial flows from piracy continues through support to regulate the money-remittance sector and to conduct financial investigations. Cybercrime Under the guidance of the open-ended intergovernmental expert group to conduct a comprehensive study of the problem of cybercrime, UNODC prepared a draft comprehensive study in accordance with the methodology agreed at the group's first meeting. At its second meeting, in February 2013, the expert group took note of the study and requested the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to consider it further. In its resolution 22/7, the Commission expressed its appreciation for the work done thus far and requested the group to continue its work towards fulfilling its mandate. In its resolution 22/8, the Commission requested UNODC, in close cooperation with Member States, to advance the implementation of its Global Programme on Cybercrime, through which capacity-building and training were provided to judges, prosecutors and investigators. Use of new information technologies to abuse and exploit children As requested by the United Nations Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2011/33, UNODC will carry out a study facilitating the identification, description and evaluation of the effects of new information technologies on the abuse and exploitation of children, and design a training and technical assistance programme to assist Member States in combating such offences more effectively. UNODC envisaged the convening of an expert group meeting in autumn 2013 to advance the drafting of those materials and will present them to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-third session, in 2014. Countering trafficking in cultural property UNODC continued to consult with Member States on the development of specific guidelines on crime prevention and criminal justice responses with respect to trafficking in cultural property. The expert group on protection against trafficking in cultural property, at its second meeting, held in Vienna from 27 to 29 June 2012, reviewed the draft guidelines and the model treaty for the prevention of crimes that infringe on the cultural heritage of peoples in the form of movable property, and made recommendations to the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. UNODC continued to participate actively in the cooperative network with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, INTERPOL, the International Council of Museums, WCO and the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law. Illicit financial flows UNODC continued to deliver specialist mentoring and implement a range of technical assistance and capacity-building programmes to increase the ability of Member States to identify, investigate and interdict illicit financial flows linked to transnational organized crime. Through its Global Programme against Money-Laundering, Proceeds of Crime and the Financing of Terrorism and its regional programmes, UNODC raised awareness regarding the problem of illicit financial flows originating from piracy and from Afghan opiates. The Office is working to address new developments in the illicit cross-border movement of precious metals, trade-based money-laundering and the use of the Internet for money-laundering purposes. Environmental crime, including trafficking in endangered species of wild fauna and flora As a member of the International Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime, UNODC contributed to the implementation of several joint activities, including workshops and a ministerial round table at the sixteenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, in Bangkok in March 2013. UNODC also provided technical assistance to Bangladesh, Cambodia, Peru, Indonesia and Viet Nam. Relevant activities included support for implementing the Wildlife and Forest Crime Analytic Toolkit and for border liaison mechanisms to foster international and regional inter-agency law enforcement cooperation, as well as capacity-building and training on techniques for investigating the wildlife trade, illegal logging, the illegal timber trade and related corruption. UNODC mandates were recently strengthened in a resolution recommended by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-second session for adoption by the Council, entitled "Crime prevention and criminal justice responses to illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora" (E/2013/30, chap. I.B, draft resolution IV). Identity-related crime With the support of UNODC, the core group of experts on identity-related crime, at its sixth meeting, in January 2013, agreed on an outline for model legislation on identity-related crime and a checklist of important elements in developing national strategies for the prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment of identity-related crime. Further mandates in the area of identity-related crime are contained in a draft resolution recommended by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice at its twenty-second session for adoption by the Economic and Social Council, entitled "International cooperation in the prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment of economic fraud and identity-related crime" (ibid., draft resolution III). VIII. Governance and financial situation of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime The updated strategy for the period 2012-2015 for UNODC was developed in consultation with Member States at meetings of the standing open-ended intergovernmental working group on improving the governance and financial situation of UNODC. The strategy provides the overarching political vision for UNODC and is implemented through the strategic frameworks for 2012-2013 and 2014-2015. UNODC is engaged in efforts to institutionalize results based management and continues to engage with all stakeholders in discussions on the post-2015 development framework with a view to highlighting the links between development, justice and security and to creating a shared technical understanding of issues related to monitoring these areas. UNODC engages in technical cooperation pursuant to its integrated programming approach, comprising of thematic and regional programmes, which provide a normative and policy framework for thematic priorities and reflect regional priorities and strategies. The regional programmes, complemented by country programmes in selected locations, are developed in close consultation with and endorsed by regional entities and partner countries. Those programmes facilitate collaboration with the United Nations Development Group regional teams, the United Nations country teams and related United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks, thus providing opportunities for joint programming between UNODC and its partners. In its normative and technical assistance work, UNODC continued joining forces and strengthening coordination with other agencies and organizations. The Office cooperated with OHCHR to mainstream human rights into its programmes and activities, in line with its internal guidance note on the promotion and protection of human rights, and to implement the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces. In its capacity as co-chair of the United Nations system task force on transnational organized crime and drug trafficking as threats to security and stability, UNODC advanced the implementation of system-wide initiatives aimed at ensuring comprehensive and holistic responses. UNODC made significant progress in establishing an office-wide evaluation culture. Its Independent Evaluation Unit completed four in-depth evaluations of strategic importance to Member States and UNODC, in relation to the integrated programming approach, in addition to the backstopping of 48 project evaluations and 21 participatory self-evaluations. Further progress included training of staff on evaluation management; recruitment of an evaluation officer in Kabul; and the development of all key evaluation normative tools, a website, a tool for participatory self-evaluations, a database of international evaluation consultants, and an evaluation portal and tracking system of evaluation recommendations, soon to be finalized. The financial situation of UNODC remained vulnerable. Less than 1 per cent of the regular budget of the United Nations is allocated to the Office. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 65/233, the Secretary-General submitted proposals in his proposed programme budget for 2012-2013 to ensure that UNODC would have sufficient resources. As a result, the Assembly approved a small increase of $1.7 million under section 16 of the regular budget, from $39.2 million in the biennium 2010-2011 to $40.9 million in the biennium 2012-2013. The UNODC consolidated budget for the biennium 2012-2013, as revised, is $617.8 million, of which 13.6 per cent comes from regular budget funds (and includes regular budget resources under sections 1, 16, 23 and 29F of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013) and $533.7 million from extrabudgetary resources. Moreover, low levels of non-earmarked or soft-earmarked funding represent key challenges to an effective implementation of UNODC mandates and programmes and put a strain on management, coordination and normative functions. IX. Recommendations It is recommended that the General Assembly consider taking the following actions: (a) Invite UNODC to continue to engage with Member States and other relevant stakeholders in promoting justice, security and the rule of law, within its mandates, including in the discussions on the post-2015 international development agenda; (b) Call upon Member States that have not yet done so to ratify the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto; (c) Invite Member States to implement the Organized Crime Convention and the Protocols thereto, taking into account the need to focus on concepts that represent the key challenges to legislative drafters, criminal justice practitioners and law enforcement, as well as relevant stakeholders; (d) Invite Member States to establish and fully implement comprehensive legal and regulatory frameworks in compliance with United Nations conventions and internationally accepted standards to criminalize the laundering of money derived from transnational organized crime, strengthen financial regimes and enhance regulatory and reporting requirements; (e) Invite Member States to implement effective detection, investigation, prosecution and conviction measures for money-laundering and related financial crimes; (f) Invite Member States to engage in effective cooperation in countering money-laundering and in prosecuting money-laundering cases by strengthening mechanisms for domestic inter-agency coordination and information-sharing, and also by strengthening regional and international networks for the exchange of operational information among competent authorities, particularly financial intelligence units; (g) Urge Member States to support the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, to ensure that it continues to benefit victims of trafficking in persons; (h) Invite Member States to establish networks and other mechanisms to facilitate formal and informal cooperation, including through regional and interregional meetings and exchanges of experience among practitioners; (i) Encourage Member States to address illicit firearms trafficking, taking into account the increasing links to other forms of organized crime, drug trafficking and terrorism; (j) Encourage Member States that have not already done so to ratify or accede to the United Nations Convention against Corruption; (k) Encourage States parties and signatories to the Convention against Corruption to make efforts towards its full implementation; (l) Encourage Member States to afford each other the widest measure of cooperation and assistance for the return of assets; (m) Encourage Member States to ratify and implement the 18 international legal instruments against terrorism; (n) Request UNODC to continue to support Member States in strengthening the legal regime against terrorism and to continue the delivery of technical assistance, including the development of specialized expertise, to enhance related national capacities; Cooperation in the forensic field (o) Encourage Member States to continue to promote the collaboration of forensic science institutions worldwide in exchanging knowledge and expertise, through their active participation in regional forensic science networks; (p) Request UNODC, in collaboration with Member States, to continue the development of standardized procedures and training programmes, including guidelines and best-practice manuals, and to support the work of national forensic science laboratories in strengthening their technical skills and capabilities to prevent and combat transnational organized crime; (q) Encourage Member States to continue to attach high priority to strengthening the rule of law through the prevention of crime and the promotion of fair, humane and accountable criminal justice systems; (r) Encourage Member States to continue to update existing and elaborate new standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice; (s) Encourage Member States to adopt and implement coherent crime prevention and criminal justice reform initiatives, based on the standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice and other international standards; (t) Encourage Member States to continue supporting the work of UNODC in the area of crime prevention and criminal justice, as a cornerstone in the advancement of the rule of law and human rights and a prerequisite for fighting organized crime, corruption and terrorism; (u) Encourage the international community to further develop multilateral strategies against transnational organized criminal markets on the basis of global analyses and threat assessments; (v) Invite Member States to contribute to the 2014 edition of the UNODC Global Report on Trafficking in Persons by responding to the UNODC questionnaire by the indicated deadline, and to support the associated research by allowing field research to be conducted in their countries; (w) Encourage Member States to support UNODC in strengthening its global programme of technical assistance in relation to cybercrime; (x) Encourage Member States to support UNODC in its multi-agency approach to the delivery of technical assistance and capacity-building with the aim of preventing illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora; (y) Encourage Member States to address and raise awareness about the impact of environmental crime, including illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora, and the threats it poses to national and economic security, human development and health, and to take immediate action to address the problem, including by reducing demand, building on the momentum and agreements reached at the international level; (z) Encourage Member States to make illicit trafficking in protected species of wild fauna and flora a serious crime, as defined in the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime; (aa) Encourage Member States to continue to actively participate in the standing open-ended intergovernmental working group on improving the governance and financial situation of UNODC; (bb) Urge Member States to continue to support the work of the Independent Evaluation Unit; (cc) Encourage Member States to address, as a matter of urgency, the need to provide UNODC with adequate, predictable and stable resources, including additional regular budget resources, to enable it to implement its mandated work in a sustainable manner, and to provide UNODC the necessary voluntary contributions, preferably non-earmarked or soft-earmarked, to enable the Office to effectively respond to the increasing demand for technical assistance and to expand and consolidate its technical cooperation with regional bodies and partner countries worldwide. 