%%%SPECIAL MISSIONS|GROUPS OF EXPERTS|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|STAFFING|

Sixty-eighth session * A/68/150. Item 136 of the provisional agenda* Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015 Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council Thematic cluster II: sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report contains the proposed resource requirements for 2014 for 11 special political missions created by decisions of the Security Council and grouped under the thematic cluster of sanctions monitoring teams, groups and panels. The estimated requirements for 2014 for special political missions grouped under this cluster amount to $32,418,800 (net of staff assessment). Page Financial overview Special political missions Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea Panel of Experts on Liberia Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo Panel of Experts on the Sudan Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran Panel of Experts on Libya Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities Support to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate 1. The proposed resources for 2014 for special political missions grouped under this cluster amount to $32,418,800 (net of staff assessment). Table 1 allows for a comparison between proposed resources for 2014 and requirements for 2013 as approved by the General Assembly in resolution 67/246 and contained in the relevant report of the Secretary-General (A/67/346/Add.2). 2. As has been reflected in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015 (see, e.g., para. 22 of the introduction to the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015), the proposed budgets for special political missions include an overview of the resource changes and the related impact of those changes on the volume of outputs and performance targets, where applicable. Table 1 Resource requirements (Thousands of United States dollars) Requirements for 2014 Total requirements for 2013 Variance, Appropriation Estimated expenditure Variance Total Non-recurrent Category II. Special political missions A. Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea Background, mandate and objective 3. The Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea is a successor to the Monitoring Group on Somalia, whose mandate was expanded to encompass Eritrea with the adoption of Security Council resolution 1907 (2009). The mandate of the Monitoring Group was last extended by resolution 2111 (2013) for a period of 16 months, until 25 November 2014. 4. The Monitoring Group, which is based in Nairobi, comprises a Coordinator, who is also the regional expert, and seven other experts in the fields of arms, transport, humanitarian affairs and finance. On Somalia, the Group monitors an arms embargo, a ban on the export and import of charcoal, a travel ban and an assets freeze. On Eritrea, the Group monitors a two-way arms embargo, a travel ban and an assets freeze. The Group reports to the Council through its Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. According to paragraph 13 of resolution 2060 (2012), the Monitoring Group is mandated to undertake the following tasks: (a) To assist the Committee in monitoring the implementation of the measures imposed in paragraphs 1, 3 and 7 of resolution 1844 (2008), including by reporting any information on violations, and to include in its reports to the Committee any information relevant to the potential designation of the individuals and entities described in paragraph 1 of resolution 2060 (2012); (b) To assist the Committee in compiling narrative summaries, referred to in paragraph 14 of resolution 1844 (2008), of individuals and entities designated pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 2060 (2012); (c) To investigate any seaport operations in Somalia that may generate revenue for Al-Shabaab, an entity designated by the Committee for meeting the listing criteria in resolution 1844 (2008); (d) To continue the tasks outlined in paragraph 3 (a) to (c) of resolution 1587 (2005), paragraph 23 (a) to (c) of resolution 1844 (2008) and paragraph 19 (a) to (d) of resolution 1907 (2009), namely: (i) To continue investigating the implementation of the arms embargo by Member States and violations, inter alia, through field-based investigations in Somalia, where possible, and, as appropriate, in other States, in particular, those in the region; (ii) To assess actions taken by Somali authorities, as well as Member States, in particular those in the region, to fully implement the arms embargo; (iii) To make specific recommendations based on detailed information in relevant areas of expertise related to violations and measures to give effect to and strengthen the implementation of the arms embargo in its various aspects; (iv) To assist the Committee in monitoring the implementation of resolution 1844 (2008) by providing any information on violations of the measures imposed in paragraphs 1, 3 and 7 thereof, in addition to the general and complete arms embargo reaffirmed in paragraph 6 of the resolution; (v) To include in its reports to the Committee any information relevant to the Committee's designation of the individuals and entities described in paragraph 8 of resolution 1844 (2008); (vi) To assist the Committee in compiling narrative summaries referred to in paragraph 14 of resolution 1844 (2008); (vii) To assist the Committee in monitoring the implementation of the sanctions measures imposed on Eritrea; (e) To investigate, in coordination with relevant international agencies, all activities, including in the financial, maritime and other sectors, which generate revenues used to commit violations of the arms embargoes against Somalia and Eritrea; (f) To investigate any means of transport, routes, seaports, airports and other facilities used in connection with violations of the Somalia and Eritrea arms embargoes; (g) To continue refining and updating information on the draft list of those individuals and entities that engage in acts described in paragraph 1 of resolution 2060 (2012), inside and outside Somalia, and their active supporters, for possible future measures by the Council, and to present such information to the Committee as and when the Committee deems it appropriate; (h) To compile a draft list of those individuals and entities that engage in violations described in paragraphs 15 (a) to (e) of resolution 1907 (2009) inside and outside Eritrea, and their active supporters, for possible future measures by the Council, and to present such information to the Committee as and when the Committee deems it appropriate; (i) To continue making recommendations, based on its investigations, on the previous reports of the Panel of Experts appointed pursuant to resolutions 1425 (2002) and 1474 (2003) and on the previous reports of the Monitoring Group appointed pursuant to resolutions 1519 (2003), 1558 (2004), 1587 (2005), 1630 (2005), 1676 (2006), 1724 (2006), 1766 (2007), 1811 (2008), 1853 (2008), 1916 (2010) and 2002 (2011); (j) To work closely with the Committee on specific recommendations for additional measures to improve overall compliance with the Somalia and Eritrea arms embargoes, as well as the measures imposed in paragraphs 1, 3 and 7 of resolution 1844 (2008), and paragraphs 5, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 13 of resolution 1907 (2009) concerning Eritrea; (k) To assist in identifying areas where the capacities of States in the region can be strengthened to facilitate the implementation of the Somalia and Eritrea arms embargoes, as well as the measures imposed in paragraphs 1, 3 and 7 of resolution 1844 (2008), and paragraphs 5, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 13 of resolution 1907 (2009) concerning Eritrea; (l) To provide to the Council, through the Committee, a midterm briefing within six months of its establishment and to submit progress reports to the Committee on a monthly basis; (m) To submit, for the Security Council's consideration, through the Committee, two final reports, one focusing on Somalia, the other on Eritrea, covering all the tasks set out above, no later than 30 days prior to the termination of the mandate of the Monitoring Group. 5. On 6 March 2013, the Security Council adopted resolution 2093 (2013), by which it partially lifted the arms embargo on Somalia in order to support the development of the security institutions of the Federal Government of Somalia. In paragraph 41 of that resolution, the Council requested the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea to report on the progress made by the Government to put the infrastructure in place to ensure the safe storage, registration, maintenance and distribution of military equipment by the Security Forces of the Federal Government of Somalia, as well as the progress made by the Government in establishing the procedures and codes of conduct for the registration, distribution, use and storage of weapons by the Security Forces of the Federal Government of Somalia, and on training needs. The Council also requested the Monitoring Group to provide an assessment of any misappropriation or sale to other groups, including militias, in order to assist the Council in any review of the appropriateness of the modified arms embargo, and further requested the Monitoring Group to report on its own ability to monitor delivery of weapons, military equipment and assistance to Somalia. Cooperation with other entities 6. The Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea cooperates with other sanctions groups established by the Security Council, specifically in determining possible sources of weapons trafficking into Somalia. The Monitoring Group has also received support from the new Government of Somalia, particularly from the President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamed, and the Prime Minister, Abdi Farah Shirdon. The Monitoring Group is now focused on achieving the same strong cooperation at the working level. The Monitoring Group also received considerable cooperation and assistance from the authorities in Puntland and has established an effective working relationship with them. Unfortunately, despite many efforts on the part of the Monitoring Group, Member States and the Sanctions Committee, the Group has yet to be able to travel to Eritrea, although some meetings with Eritrean officials have taken place outside of Eritrea. 7. The Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea worked closely with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, and with the assistance of the Secretariat has developed the necessary points of interaction with the new United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). The Monitoring Group is making steady progress in its efforts to establish productive relationships with other United Nations agencies, in particular with agencies working on protection and humanitarian issues. 8. The Monitoring Group collaborates with regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union, the African Union Mission in Somalia, the League of Arab States, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the World Customs Organization. Furthermore, the Monitoring Group interacts with a wide range of Government officials and representatives of the private sector and non-governmental organizations on issues related to its mandate. 9. Based in Nairobi, the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea benefits from support of the United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA) and the United Nations Office at Nairobi. UNSOA provides administrative and logistical support to the Monitoring Group in Nairobi and Somalia, in particular the recruitment of local staff, providing access to information technology and communications equipment and networks, maintaining vehicles and making travel arrangements within the region, as well as other administrative arrangements on a cost-reimbursable basis. Safety and security advice for the Group continues to be sought from the Department of Safety and Security. Within Kenya, the United Nations Office at Nairobi continues to provide security officers as armed escorts for the panel on a cost-reimbursement basis. Performance information 10. The Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea was able to provide credible information to the Security Council Committee and the Council on the threats to peace and security in Somalia; violations of the arms embargo, obstruction of humanitarian assistance; violations of international humanitarian law, and violations of the charcoal ban. This was achieved through fieldwork in the region, especially to Somalia and beyond. In relation to its mandate on Eritrea, the Monitoring Group has been examining the possible relationship between Eritrea and a number of Somali warlords and agents of influence in Somalia, as well as violations of the two-way arms embargo. While not yet able to visit Asmara in the current mandate period, the Monitoring Group met on 31 January 2013 in Brussels, with Yemane Ghebreab, the Special Adviser to the President of Eritrea. 11. The Monitoring Group continued to submit monthly progress reports to the Security Council Committee, presented its midterm briefing to the Committee in February, and in July 2013 submitted its final reports on Somalia (S/2013/413) and Eritrea (S/2013/440). The report contained 28 recommendations for the Committee's consideration. Table 2 Performance for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2013 Expected accomplishments Actual results, with a focus on major indicators of achievement for 2013 (a) Enhanced capacity of the Security Council to take follow-up action on alleged violations :: The Monitoring Group maintained a regular presence in key areas of the region, including in Mogadishu, Kismayo, Garowe and Hargeysa, which allowed the Committee to receive timely updates on violations of the arms embargo and the charcoal ban and on humanitarian issues. The Monitoring Group provided the Committee with a comprehensive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regimes, including information on individuals and entities involved in violations, through monthly, investigation and final reports and briefings to the Committee :: The Committee was able to follow up on violations by sending letters to selected individuals/entities and, in some cases, the Chair of the Committee met with the stakeholders concerned (b) Enhanced capacity of the Security Council to adjust the sanctions regime :: The Monitoring Group investigated thoroughly all aspects related to the sanctions regimes on Somalia and Eritrea, including all possible links between the exploitation of natural resources and the purchase of arms and related materiel as well as the provision of military training and foreign assistance in violation of the sanctions regimes. This allowed the Committee to commence development of a due diligence guideline on the mining sector in Eritrea for optional use by Member States :: In its monthly updates, its midterm briefing and its final reports on Somalia and Eritrea, the Monitoring Group provided the Committee with a comprehensive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regimes and provided recommendations on possible actions to be taken by the Committee and adjustments to the sanctions regimes to be considered by the Security Council :: As a result of the activities of the Monitoring Group such as writing of letters and meetings, the awareness of Member States and entities of the different aspects of the sanctions regimes on Somalia and Eritrea, including the various exemption provisions, has increased. This has resulted in an increase in the number of exemption requests/notifications received and considered by the Committee. This contribution of the Monitoring Group is especially important in the context of the recent modification of the arms embargo on Somalia Planning assumptions for 2014 12. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea will continue to monitor the implementation of the arms embargoes on Somalia and Eritrea and the ban on the export and import of charcoal from Somalia. The Monitoring Group will also monitor compliance with the targeted sanctions imposed by resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907 (2009). It will conduct extensive fieldwork in Somalia and inform the Security Council Committee of its activities on a monthly basis. It will provide oral updates, a midterm briefing and two final reports setting out a detailed account of its investigations and making recommendations for consideration by the Council on how to make the sanctions regimes on Somalia and Eritrea more efficient and effective. It will also provide the Council with important information with regard to the partial lifting for 12 months of the arms embargo in accordance with resolution 2093 (2013). Pursuant to paragraph 12 of resolution 2102 (2013), the Monitoring Group will also cooperate closely with UNSOM in relevant areas of their respective mandates. 13. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Monitoring Group are set out in table 3 below. Table 3 Objectives, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures Objective: To prevent all delivery of weapons and military equipment to Somalia and Eritrea Indicators of achievement (a) (i) Number of official communications from the Security Council Committee to States and other entities on alleged violations cited by the Monitoring Group Performance measures Estimate 2013: 7 Target 2014: 7 (ii) Number of bilateral meetings between the Chair of the Committee and concerned States and organizations to follow up on the Monitoring Group's report Estimate 2013: 4 Target 2014: 4 Outputs :: Reports to the Security Council (2) :: Briefings to the Committee (5) :: Progress reports to the Committee (11) :: Investigations reports to the Committee on the violations or implementation of the Security Council's sanctions measures (11) (b) (i) Number of recommendations made by the Monitoring Group agreed upon by the Committee Estimate 2013: 20 Target 2014: 25 (ii) Number of amendments to entries on the sanctions lists Estimate 2013: 3 Target 2014: 3 (iii) Number of recommendations made by the Monitoring Group incorporated by the Security Council in subsequent resolutions Estimate 2013: 2 Target 2014: 2 :: Recommendations to the Committee on actions aimed at promoting or modifying the sanctions regime (30) :: Recommendations concerning new individuals or entities to be listed or concerning updates to the existing sanctions lists (3) (c) Improved compliance by States and other entities with the sanctions measures (c) (i) Number of communications from States and other entities informing on compliance-related issues Estimate 2013: 37 Target 2014: 37 (ii) Number of communications from States and other entities seeking advice on how to comply with the measures Estimate 2013: 15 Target 2014: 15 :: Communications from the Monitoring Group to States and entities requesting information relating to compliance with the sanctions measures (80) :: Investigations by the Monitoring Group into possible violations of the measures by States and other entities (15) External factors 14. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Monitoring Group and provided that the investigations of the Group are unhindered. Resource requirements (regular budget) Table 4 Financial resources requirements Civilian personnel costs Operational costs Table 5 Positions Professional and higher categories General Service and related categories National staff USG ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 Subtotal Field/ Security Service Total inter-national National Professional Officer Local level United Nations Volunteers Approved 2013 Proposed 2014 Change 15. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to the fact that the experts of the Monitoring Group did not request armed security escort during the current mandate. Based on the security risk assessment conducted by the Department of Safety and Security, a minimum of three armed United Nations security officers are required to accompany the experts of the Monitoring Group when they travel to official meetings outside the United Nations premises within Kenya. The United Nations Office at Nairobi has therefore made security officers available to the Monitoring Group on a cost-reimbursable basis. While the United Nations is required to provide armed security officers to the Group, the decision rests with the experts on whether to use the armed security officers. 16. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea beyond 24 August 2013 and should the Group operate for 11 months in 2014 as it has in the past, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $2,514,700 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for the continuation of seven positions (1 P-3, 1 General Service (Other level) and 5 General Service (Local level)) to provide substantive and administrative support to the experts of the Group ($407,600); charges pertaining to three security officers provided by the United Nations Office at Nairobi on a cost-reimbursement basis to provide security services and escort to the experts ($128,000); fees ($1,190,100) and official travel ($548,900) of the eight members of the Group; official travel of staff ($43,300); and other operational and logistical support requirements, such as the rental of premises, the rental of vehicles, communications, information technology equipment and maintenance, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($196,700). 17. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea. 18. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable to a combination of factors, namely the cost of entitlements for the incumbents of the positions being higher than budgeted in 2013; an increase in the average fees of the experts as the composition of the Group changes; an increase in the common service charged by the United Nations Office at Nairobi/UNSOA; and a new requirement for the rental of office space in Somalia. Extrabudgetary resources 19. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea for 2014. B. Panel of Experts on Liberia 20. The Panel of Experts on Liberia was established by Security Council resolution 1343 (2001) to monitor the implementation of the sanctions measures on Liberia. The Security Council first imposed an arms embargo on Liberia in 1992 by its resolution 788 (1992) and has modified the sanctions regime since then. The mandate of the Panel of Experts was last extended by resolution 2079 (2012), until 12 December 2013. 21. The Panel of Experts comprises a Coordinator (also the arms expert), a finance expert and a natural resources expert. The Panel monitors an arms embargo against non-governmental entities and individuals operating in the territory of Liberia, and a travel ban and an assets freeze, imposed on listed individuals and entities. The Panel reports to the Council through its Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia. According to paragraph 5 of resolution 2079 (2012), the Panel was requested to undertake the following tasks, in close collaboration with the Government of Liberia and the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire: (a) To conduct two follow-up assessment missions to Liberia and neighbouring States in order to investigate and compile a midterm and a final report on the implementation, and any violations, of the measures on arms as amended by resolution 1903 (2009), including any information relevant to the designation by the Committee of the individuals described in paragraph 4 (a) of resolution 1521 (2003) and paragraph 1 of resolution 1532 (2004), and including the various sources of financing, such as from natural resources, for the illicit trade of arms; (b) To assess the impact, effectiveness and continued need of the measures imposed by paragraph 1 of resolution 1532 (2004), including particularly with respect to the assets of former President Charles Taylor; (c) To identify and make recommendations regarding areas where the capacity of Liberia and the States in the region can be strengthened to facilitate the implementation of the measures imposed by paragraph 4 of resolution 1521 (2003) and paragraph 1 of resolution 1532 (2004); (d) Within the context of the evolving legal framework of Liberia, assess the extent to which forests and other natural resources are contributing to peace, security and development rather than to instability and to what extent relevant legislation (National Forestry Reform Law, Lands Commission Act, Community Rights Law with respect to Forest Land, and Liberia Extract Industries Transparency Initiative Act) and other reform efforts are contributing to this transition, and to provide recommendations on how such natural resources could better contribute to the country's progress towards sustainable peace and stability; (e) To cooperate actively with the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, including during a planned mission in 2013, and to assess the compliance by the Government of Liberia with the Kimberley Process; (f) To provide a midterm report to the Council through the Committee by 1 June 2013 and a final report to the Council through the Committee by 1 December 2013 on all issues listed in the present paragraph, and to provide informal updates to the Committee as appropriate before those dates, especially on the progress in the forest sector since the lifting of paragraph 10 of resolution 1521 (2003) in June 2006, and in the diamond sector since the lifting of paragraph 6 of resolution 1521 (2003) in April 2007; (g) To cooperate actively with other relevant panels of experts, in particular that on Côte d'Ivoire re-established by paragraph 13 of resolution 1980 (2011); (h) To assist the Committee in updating the publicly available reasons for listing for entries on the travel ban and assets freeze lists. 22. In 2013, the Panel of Experts worked in close collaboration with the Government of Liberia and the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire. The Panel regularly interacts with representatives of the Government of Liberia in Monrovia (including with Liberia security and justice agencies) and New York to exchange information. The Panel of Experts also cooperated on a regular basis with the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire, specifically with regard to investigations related to sanctions violations along the Liberia-Côte d'Ivoire border. The Coordinator of the Panel of Experts met with the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire in Brussels, in March 2013, to be briefed on the latest situation on the Liberia-Côte d'Ivoire border prior to undertaking the Panel's first assessment mission in Liberia and the region. 23. The Panel also interacted with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). While in Liberia, the Panel shared information with the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the Joint Mission Analysis Cell, the United Nations police and the military component of the mission. During its field visits, UNMIL extended valuable administrative support to the Panel, including office space and information and communications technology equipment, and arranged for transport and security, thus enhancing the ability of the Panel to conduct its fieldwork. Costs related to the salary, overtime and daily subsistence for drivers hired in connection with the Panel's assessment missions were provided on a cost-reimbursement basis. The Panel also benefited from strong support from the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. Both missions provided the Panel with administrative and logistical support in connection with its field investigations in Côte d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone, in March/April 2013. 24. During its field visits to Liberia and neighbouring countries, the Panel interacted with Government officials, international partners, diplomatic missions, civil society organizations and private sector entities. 25. As requested in resolution 2079 (2012), the Panel collaborated with the Kimberly Process Certification Scheme, including during the Kimberly Process assessment mission that took place in March/April 2013. The Panel also had informal interactions with the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission Configuration for Liberia, the World Bank and donors, the United Nations Development Programme and INTERPOL. As a result of this cooperation with INTERPOL, the Security Council Committee was able to issue 19 INTEPOL-United Nations Security Council Special Notices for individuals on the travel ban list. 26. The Panel submitted its midterm report to the Security Council in May 2013 (S/2013/316). The report provided new information on arms embargo violations and cross-border attacks, in particular security issues along Liberia's borders with Côte d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone. The report also provided new information concerning individuals on the travel ban and assets freeze lists who live in Liberia and the subregion. This updated information provided by the Panel was useful to the Security Council Committee as it undertook its review of the sanctions regime. The report also outlined developments in the natural resources sector, Liberia's compliance with the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and patterns of diamond trafficking. It also included new information on the gold sector and provided an update on the agriculture and forestry sectors. The midterm report provided the Council with the necessary information that enhanced the Council's capacity to assess the sanctions regime, and the Panel is thus on track to meet the expected accomplishments for 2013. Table 6 :: The Panel of Experts on Liberia was able to quickly conduct investigations into the March 2013 cross-border attacks along the Liberia-Côte d'Ivoire border, which provided the Security Council with the evidence of arms embargo violations :: The Panel, through its reports, provided the Committee with an exhaustive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regime in Liberia, including a list of stakeholders involved in the activities of investigation of the Panel. As a consequence, the Committee followed up by sending letters to selected entities :: The Panel provided up-to-date information on the 6 individuals on the travel ban and assets freeze list, so that the Sanctions Committee may consider delisting of individuals, where appropriate :: The Panel provided the Committee with an exhaustive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regime, including recommendations on possible developments and adjustments to be considered by the Committee 27. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Panel of Experts on Liberia is expected to continue to investigate the implementation of the sanctions measures imposed by the Security Council and any violations of those measures; assess the progress made towards meeting the conditions of the Council for lifting those measures; and make recommendations on how the capacity of States can be strengthened to facilitate the implementation of the travel ban and assets freeze. The Panel is moreover expected to continue to assess the extent to which forestry and other natural resources contribute to peace, security and development, assess the compliance of the Government of Liberia with the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, and make relevant recommendations on how the natural resources of Liberia can better contribute to its progress towards sustainable peace and stability. The Panel is also expected to continue to assist the Security Council Committee in updating the publicly available reasons for the listing of entries on the travel ban and assets freeze lists. 28. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Panel are set out in table 7 below. Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures Objective: To ensure the implementation and enforcement of the relevant sanctions measures adopted by the Security Council (a) Number of official communications from the Committee to States on alleged violations cited by the Panel of Experts Estimate 2013: 8 Target 2014: 8 :: Reports to the Committee (2) (b) Number of findings and recommendations made by the Panel agreed upon by the Committee Estimate 2013: 26 Target 2014: 26 :: Recommendations to the Committee on actions aimed at promoting or modifying the sanctions regime (26) (c) Number of communications from States and other entities informing of compliance-related issues :: Investigations into the compliance of States and other entities with the sanctions regime (2) 29. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Panel of Experts and provided that the investigations of the Panel are not hindered. Table 8 30. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to a decrease in the amount of travel of the experts to European capitals as the Panel of Experts focused more on the issue of natural resources, and cross-border insecurity along the Liberia-Côte d'Ivoire border, which required greater time in Liberia and the West Africa region. 31. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Liberia beyond 12 December 2013 and should the Panel operate for 11 months in 2014 as it has in the past, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $531,600 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for the fees ($328,300) and official travel ($168,500) of the three members of the Panel and for other operational and logistical support requirements, such as communications, information technology equipment and maintenance, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($34,800). 32. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable mainly to the discontinuation of the provision for consultants. The additional work that was required in the area of forestry, specifically on the issue of the private use permits, has been completed and the information was presented to the Security Council in the 2012 final report and 2013 midterm report of the Panel of Experts. With regard to armed groups and cross-border trafficking, sufficient data has been collected to provide the Security Council Committee and the Council with a good understanding of the causes and dynamics of the cross-border insecurities between Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire. Continued attention to the cross-border issues in 2014 will be achieved through cooperation with the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire. 33. Resource changes of $19,700 and the related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 9 below. Table 9 Primary areas of resource change Net reductions in inputs Description Reductions in the volume of outputs Reductions in performance targets Reduction Travel of experts Reduction in travel of experts Total reduction: $19,700 The experts of the Panel, with the exception of the Coordinator, would participate in the presentation of their initial and midterm briefings to the Committee via videoconference. This approach would utilize available communications technology to reduce travel costs. This would however reduce the number of opportunities for Member States to interact directly with the experts in bilateral meetings 34. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Panel of Experts on Liberia for 2014. C. Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire 35. The Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1584 (2005). The mandate of the Group has been extended by the Council several times, most recently by resolution 2101 (2013), until 30 April 2014. 36. The Group, which is home-based, comprises a Coordinator (also the regional expert) and four other experts in the areas of arms, diamonds, customs/transport and financial issues. The Panel monitors an arms embargo, a travel ban and an assets freeze. The Panel reports to the Council through its Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d'Ivoire and is mandated to undertake the following tasks in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 1727 (2006), as renewed by paragraph 18 of resolution 2101 (2013): (a) To exchange information with UNOCI and the French forces in the context of their monitoring mandate set out in paragraphs 2 and 12 of Council resolution 1609 (2005); (b) To gather and analyse all relevant information in Côte d'Ivoire and elsewhere, in cooperation with the Governments of those countries, on flows of arms and related materiel, on the provision of assistance, advice or training related to military activities, on networks operating in violation of the measures imposed by paragraph 7 of resolution 1572 (2004) and on the sources of financing, including from the exploitation of natural resources in Côte d'Ivoire, for purchases of arms and related materiel and activities; (c) To consider and recommend, where appropriate, ways of improving the capabilities of States, in particular those in the region, to ensure the effective implementation of the measures imposed by paragraph 7 of resolution 1572 (2004) and paragraph 6 of resolution 1643 (2005); (d) To seek further information regarding the action taken by States with a view to implementing effectively the measures imposed by paragraph 6 of resolution 1643 (2005); (e) To keep the Committee regularly updated on its activities; (f) To provide the Committee in its reports with evidence of any violations of the measures imposed by paragraph 7 of resolution 1572 (2004) and paragraph 6 of resolution 1643 (2005); (g) To cooperate with other relevant groups of experts, in particular that established on Liberia by resolutions 1521 (2003) and 1579 (2004); (h) To monitor the implementation of the individual measures set out in paragraphs 9 and 11 of resolution 1572 (2004). 37. In carrying out its mandate, the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire liaised with West African countries and the French forces in Côte d'Ivoire. The Group of Experts exchanged information with UNOCI, other United Nations system agencies, regional and intergovernmental organizations, such as the Agency for the Safety of Aerial Navigation in Africa, the Central Bank of West African States, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the European Union, the International Cocoa Organization, INTERPOL, the Kimberley Process and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 38. The Group also cooperated with other sanctions groups established by the Security Council, notably the Panel of Experts on Liberia, and sought information from banks and other private financial institutions to verify the implementation of the financial restrictions imposed by the Council in its resolution 1572 (2004). The Group also benefited from meetings and exchanges with civil society and non-governmental organizations. 39. The Group's findings, as set out in its reports (S/2012/766 and S/2013/228), provided the Committee with new information in relation to the sanctions regime, highlighting possible or actual violations. Pursuant to the recommendations of the Group, the Committee addressed letters to Member States and entities directing their attention to relevant findings in the Group's final report. On the basis of the Group's recommendations, the Security Council was able to take informed decisions in terms of addressing the Ivorian situation, by refining the sanctions regime in resolution 2101 (2013). 40. With regard to the individuals on the Committee's sanctions list, the Group was able to document various cases of flagrant breaches of the individual sanctions (assets freeze and travel ban), keeping the Security Council updated on violations for its action, as appropriate. Table 10 :: The Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire maintained a constant presence in the country and the region, also travelling to particular areas of interest for its mandate. The Group collected information and evidence on major national and international networks involved in the illicit traffic of arms and related materiel in violation of the sanctions regime. Among others, the Group highlighted and described cases concerning ammunition, weapons and related materiel found in violation of the embargo :: The Group contacted numerous companies involved in the exploitation of natural resources in Côte d'Ivoire and analysed their role in possible violations of the sanctions regime. The Group was able to confirm that revenues obtained from natural resources continue to present a risk for being used for the purchase of arms and related materiel. The Group was also able to shed light on the presence of a national, and possibly regional, criminal network as well as on the activities of radical pro-Gbagbo groups in favour of a political and military destabilization in Côte d'Ivoire :: The Group, through its monthly and regular reports, provided the Committee with an exhaustive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regime in Côte d'Ivoire, including a list of stakeholders involved in the activities of investigation of the Group. As a consequence, the Committee followed up by sending letters to selected entities and, in some cases, the Chair of the Committee met with concerned stakeholders :: The Group investigated thoroughly all aspects related to the arms and diamonds embargoes, including all possible links between the exploitation of natural resources and the purchase of arms and related materiel in violation of the sanctions regime, military training and foreign assistance :: The Group provided the Committee with an exhaustive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regime in Côte d'Ivoire, including recommendations on possible developments and adjustments to be considered by members :: The Security Council, also in the light of the Group's reports, adjusted the sanctions regime imposed on Côte d'Ivoire, reflecting the changes in resolution 2101 (2013) (c) Improved compliance by States with the sanctions measures :: The Group continued to inform and support the newly elected Government of Côte d'Ivoire on best practices in the implementation of the sanctions regime. On many occasions, during meetings with Ivorian authorities, the Group explained the exemptions procedures to the arms embargo :: The Group also convened several meetings at the Ministry of Energy and Mines to discuss the possible future participation of Côte d'Ivoire in the Kimberley Process and the criteria necessary to become a participant, in the event that the diamond embargo is lifted :: The Group maintained contacts with many States of the region and elsewhere in order to discuss and receive updates on the implementation and enforcement of the measures imposed on Côte d'Ivoire :: Member States communicated to the Committee the measures taken for the implementation of the sanctions regime imposed on Côte d'Ivoire, including a description of laws and decrees adopted in that context 41. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire will continue to collect information on the implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Security Council, consider ways to improve the capabilities of States to ensure the effective implementation of the measures imposed by the Council in resolution 1572 (2004), and monitor overall compliance with the sanctions regime and report on possible violations. 42. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Group are set out in table 11 below. Table 11 Objective: To ensure the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1572 (2004) and all subsequent related decisions of the Council in connection with the arms embargo, diamond embargo and related travel and financial sanctions measures concerning Côte d'Ivoire (a) (i) Number of official communications from the Committee to States on alleged violations cited by the Group of Experts Estimate 2013: 30 Target 2014: 30 (ii) Number of bilateral meetings between the Chair of the Committee and concerned States to follow up on the Group's reports :: Progress reports to the Committee (6) :: Investigations related to the implementation and/or violation of the Council's sanctions provided to the Committee (2) (b) (i) Number of findings and recommendations made by the Group agreed upon by the Security Council Committee Estimate 2013: 40 Target 2014: 40 (ii) Number of recommendations by the Group of Experts incorporated by the Security Council in subsequent resolutions (iii) Number of amendments to entries on the Committee's sanctions lists 2012: zero :: Recommendations on adjustments to the sanctions regime (3) :: Recommendations concerning new individuals to be listed or updates to the existing sanctions list (5) (c) (i) Number of communications from States and other entities informing of compliance-related issues (ii) Number of laws or decrees adopted by States to implement sanctions measures :: Communications to States and other entities requesting action or updates relating to compliance with the sanctions measures (10) :: Investigations into the compliance of States and other entities with the sanctions regime (8) 43. The objectives would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with relevant resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Group of Experts and provided that the Group's investigations are unhindered. Table 12 Table 13 44. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to a decrease in the amount of travel to the Middle East and Asia as the Group of Experts focused more on investigations in West Africa and Europe. In particular, owing to the security and political situation in the aftermath of the electoral crisis of 2010-2011 in Côte d'Ivoire, the Group had to intensify its presence in the region in order to collect the evidence necessary to fulfil its mandate. 45. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire beyond 30 April 2014 and should the Group operate for 11 months in 2014 as it has in the past, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $1,307,800 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for one P-3 level position to provide substantive backstopping and support to the members of the Group ($134,300); fees ($500,000) and official travel ($570,700) of the five members of the Group; official travel of staff ($45,400); and other operational and logistical support requirements, such as the rental of premises, the rental of vehicles, communications, information technology equipment and maintenance, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($57,400). 46. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire. 47. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable mainly to a change in the travel practices for initial and midterm briefings as explained in table 14 below. The change in standards of travel for the experts also contributes to the variance. 48. Resource changes of $11,600 and the related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 14 below. Table 14 Total reduction: $11,600 The experts of the Group, with the exception of the Coordinator, would participate in the presentation of their initial and midterm briefings to the Committee via videoconference. This approach would utilize available communications technology to reduce travel costs. This would however reduce the number of opportunities for Member States to interact directly with the experts in bilateral meetings 49. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire for 2014. D. Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo 50. The Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1533 (2004). The mandate of the Group has been subsequently extended by the Council, most recently by resolution 2078 (2012) until 1 February 2014. 51. The Group, which is home-based, is composed of a Coordinator (also the natural resource expert) and five experts in the areas of arms, armed groups, finance, customs and aviation, and regional issues. The Group of Experts monitors an arms embargo, travel ban and an assets freeze. The Group reports to the Council through its Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo. According to paragraph 18 of resolution 1807 (2008) and paragraphs 9 and 10 of resolution 1857 (2008), the mandate of the Group is as follows: (a) To gather, examine and analyse information on flows of arms and related materiel, and networks operating in violation of the arms embargo concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including information gathered by the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the context of its monitoring mandate; and share with the Mission, as appropriate, information that might be of use to its monitoring mandate; (b) To cooperate with Governments to gather and analyse all relevant information on flows of arms and related materiel, and on networks operating in violation of the embargo by providing arms, military or financial assistance to non-governmental entities and individuals operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; (c) To focus its activities on areas affected by the presence of illegal armed groups, including the provinces of North and South Kivu and Orientale Province, as well as on regional and international networks providing support to illegal armed groups, criminal networks and perpetrators of serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights abuses, including those within the national armed forces, operating in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; (d) To report on the implementation of measures to enforce the arms embargo and related targeted sanctions, with recommendations in that regard, including information on the sources of financing, such as from natural resources, which are funding the illicit trade in arms; (e) To provide the Committee with a list, with supporting evidence, of those found to have violated the terms of the embargo and those found to have supported them in such activities, for possible future measures by the Council; (f) To continue to study the impact of due diligence; (g) To report to the Security Council, through the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) on the implementation of measures to enforce the arms embargo and related targeted sanctions, and make recommendations on the implementation of measures to enforce the arms embargo; (h) To recommend individuals and entities, with supporting evidence, for designation by the Committee as subject to financial (assets freeze) and travel (travel ban) measures; (i) To assist the Committee in its designation of the following individuals and entities, and in compiling and updating the narrative summaries of publicly available reasons for designation: persons or entities acting in violation of the arms embargo; political and military leaders of foreign armed groups operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo who impede the disarmament and voluntary repatriation or resettlement of combatants belonging to those groups; political and military leaders of Congolese militias receiving support from outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo who impede the participation of their combatants in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes; political and military leaders operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and recruiting or using children in armed conflicts in violation of applicable international law; individuals operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and committing serious violations of international law targeted at children or women in situations of armed conflict, including killing and maiming, sexual violence, abduction and forced displacement; individuals obstructing access to or the distribution of humanitarian assistance in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; individuals or entities supporting illegal armed groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo through illicit trade of natural resources; individuals or entities who plan, sponsor or participate in attacks against MONUSCO peacekeepers. 52. The Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo works closely with MONUSCO, which was mandated by the Council to monitor the implementation of the arms embargo and to share information with the Group of Experts. Aside from substantive collaboration with MONUSCO, the Group of Experts benefits from administrative synergies with the Mission, which assists the Group by providing it with office space in Goma and Bukavu, with ground and air transportation, and with an armed escort for special field missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Group also benefits from administrative services made available by local MONUSCO offices in the region. Most services are provided free of charge while the cost of drivers is reimbursed by the Group. 53. In addition, the Group cooperates with relevant States and regional actors. In this connection, the Group also liaised with the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, a number of countries in Europe and the Great Lakes region to collect, analyse and verify information on individuals and entities in relation to its mandate. The Group also cooperated with officials of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior, presidential security advisers, the President's Special Envoy and the Permanent Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations, as well as numerous provincial and local authorities. 54. The Group also collaborates actively with other sanctions groups established by the Security Council, in particular with the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire, the Panel of Experts on Liberia, the Panel of Experts on Libya and the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea. The Group is also in close contact with INTERPOL, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and other United Nations system agencies. 55. On the basis of the Group's reports, the Security Council was able to take informed decisions in terms of addressing the current situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in refining the sanctions regime. Recommendations contained in the Group's 2012 final report (S/2012/843) were incorporated in Council resolution 2078 (2012), while the Security Council Committee adopted recommendations to send out notes verbales and letters to Member States and relevant United Nations bodies such as MONUSCO. The Committee also added five individuals and two entities to the list of individuals and entities subject to travel ban and assets freeze, following the publication of the Group's final report. 56. In 2013, the Group has been providing regular updates to the Committee on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as the political situation significantly changed following the publication of the Group's final report. Table 15 :: The Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo maintained a constant presence in the country and the region, also travelling to particular areas of interest for its mandate. The Group investigated thoroughly all aspects relating to the arms embargo, including all possible links between the exploitation of natural resources and the purchase of arms and related materiel in violation of the sanctions regime. Particular focus was given to armed groups of the region, specifically on the structure and sources of support of the M23 :: The Group, through its monthly and regular reports, provided the Committee with an exhaustive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regime in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including a list of stakeholders involved in the activities of investigation of the Group. As a consequence, the Committee followed up by sending letters to selected entities :: The Group provided the Committee with a confidential list of proposed names of individuals and entities for possible targeted sanctions, in conjunction with its final report :: The Group provided periodic reports to the Committee, such as proposed updates of the Committee's sanctions list, and other reports, as necessary :: The Group highlighted key trends and events with regard to the implementation of due diligence requirements in the gold, tin, tantalum and tungsten sectors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and at the regional and international levels. The Group provided the Committee with an exhaustive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regime in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including recommendations on possible developments and adjustments to be considered :: The Group continued to inform and support the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on how to implement the sanctions regime :: The Group maintained contacts with many States of the region and elsewhere in order to discuss and receive updates on the implementation and enforcement of the measures imposed on the Democratic Republic of the Congo :: Member States communicated to the Committee measures taken for the implementation of the sanctions regime imposed on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including notifications of the export of military equipment and related materiel, as well as training, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo 57. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo will collect information on the implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Security Council; investigate and analyse information regarding the flow of arms and the operation of networks in violation of relevant measures imposed by the Council; and make recommendations for consideration by the Council on future action to be taken, including on individuals who commit serious violations of international law targeting children and women, on political and military leaders of armed groups who prevent their combatants from disarming, on individuals obstructing access to or the distribution of humanitarian assistance in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and on individuals or entities supporting the illegal armed groups in the eastern part of the country through the illicit trading of natural resources, including gold. The Group will also continue to evaluate the implementation of due diligence guidelines for importers, processing industries and consumers of Congolese mineral products. 58. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Group are set out in table 16 below. Table 16 Objective: To ensure the full implementation of Security Council resolution 1533 (2004) and all subsequent related decisions of the Council in connection with the arms embargo on non-governmental entities and individuals in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including indirect support to such entities and individuals through the exploitation and trafficking of natural resources (a) Number of official communications from the Committee to States or other entities on alleged violations cited by the Group of Experts Estimate 2013: 25 :: Investigation reports to the Committee on the violation or implementation of measures imposed by the Security Council (b) (i) Number of findings and recommendations made by the Group agreed upon by the Committee Estimate 2013: 35 Target 2014: 35 (ii) Number of recommendations incorporated by the Security Council in subsequent resolutions (iii) Number of amendments to entries on the consolidated list of designated individuals and entities Estimate 2013: 17 Target 2014: 17 :: Recommendations concerning new individuals to be listed or updates to the existing sanctions list (25) (c) (i) Number of communications from States and entities informing of compliance-related issues Estimate 2013: 80 Target 2014: 80 (ii) Number of laws or decrees adopted by States and regional organizations to implement sanctions measures :: Communications to States and other entities requesting action or updates relating to compliance with the sanctions measures (15) :: Investigations into the compliance of States and entities with the sanctions regime (7) 59. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Group of Experts and provided that the Group's investigations are not hindered. Table 17 Table 18 Sub-total General Service and related categories National Professional Officer 60. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to a reduction in the amount of travel by the experts and the staff outside of the region as the Group of Experts focused more on investigative activities in the Great Lakes region. This change in substantive focus is a reflection of the fluid political and security developments in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 61. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo beyond 1 February 2014 and should the Group operate for 11 months in 2014 as it has in the past, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $1,424,800 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for one P-3 position to provide substantive backstopping and support to the members of the Group ($172,000); fees ($566,600) and official travel ($528,700) of the six members of the Group; official travel of staff ($35,900); and other operational and logistical support requirements, such as the rental of premises, the rental of vehicles, communications, information technology equipment and maintenance, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($121,600). 62. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 63. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable mainly to a reduction in the amount of travel undertaken by the experts, as explained in table 19 below, and because the experts will focus their investigative work in the region, thereby reducing travel to other parts of the world. The change in standards of travel for the experts also contributes to the variance. This is offset partly by an increase in the average fees of the experts as the composition of the Group changes. 64. Resource changes of $50,800 and the related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 19 below. Table 19 Reductions in the volume of outputs Total reduction: $50,800 65. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo for 2014. E. Panel of Experts on the Sudan 66. The Panel of Experts on the Sudan was established by Security Council resolution 1591 (2005). The Panel, when first established, was composed of four members and based in Addis Ababa. In 2006, the Security Council, in resolution 1713 (2006), added a fifth expert to the panel and in 2012, the duty station of the experts was changed from Addis Ababa to home base. The mandate of the Panel of Experts was most recently extended by resolution 2091 (2013) until 17 February 2014. 67. The Panel, which is home-based, comprises a Coordinator (also the regional expert) and four other experts in the areas of arms, aviation, finance and international humanitarian law and human rights. The Panel monitors an arms embargo, a travel ban and an assets freeze. It also conducts investigations on aviation and offensive military overflight, violations of international humanitarian law and human rights, and sources of financing of the armed opposition groups. The Panel also looks at progress towards removing impediments to the peace process. The Panel reports to the Council through its Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan. According to paragraph 3 (b) of resolution 1591 (2005), and paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 6 of resolution 2091 (2013) the mandate of the Panel of Experts is as follows: (a) To assist the Security Council Committee in monitoring the implementation of the measures in paragraphs 3 (d), 3 (e) and 7 of resolution 1591 (2005) and paragraphs 7 and 8 of resolution 1556 (2004), namely the travel ban, the assets freeze and the arms embargo, and to make recommendations to the Committee on actions the Council may want to consider; (b) To provide a midterm briefing on its work to the Committee no later than 31 July 2013, and an interim report no later than 90 days after the adoption of resolution 2091 (2013) and a final report no later than 30 days prior to the termination of its mandate to the Council through the Committee with its findings and recommendations, including on the implementation and effectiveness of paragraph 10 of resolution 1945 (2010), and a monthly update regarding its activities, including Panel travel, any obstacles encountered in the fulfilment of its mandate, as well as violations of the sanctions; (c) To coordinate its activities as appropriate with the operation of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and with international efforts to promote the political process in Darfur and to assess in its interim and final reports progress towards reducing violations by all parties of the measures imposed by paragraphs 7 and 8 of resolution 1556 (2004), paragraph 7 of resolution 1591 (2005) and paragraph 10 of resolution 1945 (2010), and progress towards removing impediments to the political process, threats to stability in Darfur and the region, violations of international humanitarian and human rights law, or other atrocities, including sexual and gender-based violence, and other violations of the above-mentioned resolutions, and to provide the Committee with information on the individuals and entities that meet the listing criteria 3 (c) of resolution 1591 (2005). 68. In carrying out its mandate, the Panel of Experts on the Sudan cooperates with other sanctions groups established by the Security Council, for example, with the Panel of Experts on Libya. It also cooperates with national, regional and international actors, civil society organizations and private sector entities. It also interacts with research institutions, such as the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, and private companies that supply arms or related materiel. 69. The Panel also works closely with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict as well as with United Nations-led field missions in the region, including the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, which provides the Panel with logistical and transport support as needed and within available capacity. The Panel also cooperates with UNAMID, which provides the Panel with reports and substantive briefings, operational support and security while on mission in Darfur. 70. The Panel also cooperates with INTERPOL, which signed an agreement with the Security Council Committee in November 2012. This framework facilitates cooperation on individuals and entities appearing in the Committee's sanctions list through the issuance of INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special Notices. 71. The Panel provided monthly updates to the Committee and submitted its final report, pursuant to resolution 2035 (2012), on 22 January 2013 (S/2013/79). The findings and recommendations of the Panel have assisted the Security Council in gaining a more comprehensive understanding of the conflict in Darfur; the direct and indirect supply, sale or transfer of technical assistance and support in relation to aircraft used in Darfur; and the movement of the Darfur armed groups. It also provided the Council with a detailed understanding of the underlying factors for the attacks against civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian actors in Darfur. The recommendations of the Panel also enabled the Council to take follow-up action on alleged violations and make adjustments to the sanctions regime. All 14 recommendations contained in the Panel's 2013 final report were considered by the Committee, which took follow-up action on four of them, while the remaining recommendations were addressed to the Security Council or were not agreed upon. Three of the 14 recommendations were reflected in Council resolution 2091 (2013). Table 20 (a) Enhanced capacity of the Security Council to adjust the sanctions regime :: The Panel provided the Committee with an analysis of the impediments to the peace process and the implementation of the sanctions measures, including recommendations on ways to address issues of limited or no compliance with the measures and on improving the operating environment for monitoring the implementation of the sanctions :: The Committee also updated the list of designated individuals in follow-up to the Panel's recommendations and communicated the update to all Member States :: The Security Council, also in light of the Panel's reports, adjusted the sanctions regime imposed on the Sudan, reflecting the developments in resolution 2091 (2013) (b) Improved compliance by States with the sanctions measures :: In the course of the Panel's field visits and in the written communication issued to the Sudan and to other Member States, the Panel continued to provide information on the sanctions regime and on compliance with the sanctions measures :: The Panel maintained contact with the relevant Member States in the region and elsewhere on issues of implementation of and compliance with the sanctions measures :: Member States communicated to the Committee the measures taken for the implementation of the sanctions regime imposed on Sudan, including a description of national measures adopted in that context 72. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Panel of Experts on the Sudan will continue to collect information on the implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Security Council and possible violations, make recommendations to the Committee on future action that the Council may wish to consider and coordinate its activities with UNAMID and with international efforts to promote the political process in Darfur. The Panel will also continue to serve as a source of information on individuals and entities who, on the basis of the criteria contained in resolution 1591 (2005), and updated by resolution 2035 (2012), could possibly be designated as subject to the travel ban and assets freeze. 73. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Panel are set out in table 21 below. Table 21 Objective: To ensure the enforcement of the sanctions measures imposed by Security Council resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1591 (2005), as updated in resolutions 1945 (2010) and 2035 (2012) (a) Number of official communications from the Committee to States on alleged violations cited by the Panel Estimate 2013: 6 Target 2014: 6 :: Reports to the Committee (3) :: Monthly updates to the Committee (9) (b) (i) Number of recommendations made by the Panel agreed upon by the Committee :: Recommendations on adjustments to the sanctions regime (2) :: Recommendations concerning new individuals to be listed or updates to the existing sanctions list :: Communications to States and other entities enquiring about compliance-related issues (110) 74. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Panel of Experts on the Sudan and provided that the activities of the Panel are not hindered. Table 22 Table 23 75. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable to reduced requirements for language consultants, as four of the five experts were Arabic speakers, and to the actual fees of the experts being lower than budgeted. 76. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan beyond 17 February 2014 and should the Panel operate for 11 months in 2014 as it has in the past, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $1,322,600 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for one P-3 position to provide substantive backstopping and support to the members of the Panel ($132,200); fees ($522,200) and official travel ($381,300) of the five members of the Panel and fees ($71,700) and official travel ($101,900) of two translators; official travel of staff ($46,500); and other operational and logistical support requirements, such as the rental of premises, the rental of vehicles, communications, information technology equipment and maintenance, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($66,800). 77. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Panel of Experts on the Sudan. 78. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable mainly to: (a) the discontinuation of the consultancy on sexual and gender-based violence; and (b) a reduction in the amount of travel undertaken by the experts, as explained in table 24 below. The change in standards of travel for the experts also contributes to the variance. 79. Resource changes of $152,500 and the related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 24 below. Table 24 Reduction: Total reduction: $53,500 The experts of the Panel, with the exception of the Coordinator, would participate in the presentation of their interim and midterm briefings to the Committee via videoconference. This approach would utilize available communications technology to reduce travel costs. This would however reduce the number of opportunities for Member States to interact directly with the experts in bilateral meetings Consultants Reduction in consultancy fees and travel Total reduction: $99,000 The discontinuation of the consultancy of the expert on sexual and gender-based violence would require a change in the responsibilities of the expert on international humanitarian law to include the sexual and gender-based violence dimension 80. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Panel of Experts on the Sudan for 2014. F. Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 81. The Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1874 (2009), by which the Council requested the Secretary-General to create for an initial period of one year a group of up to seven experts to carry out the tasks assigned in paragraph 26 of resolution 1874 (2009). In 2013, the Security Council adopted resolutions 2087 (2013) and 2094 (2013), in response to the launch conducted in December 2012 by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea using ballistic missile technology, and the nuclear test it conducted in February 2013. These new resolutions significantly expanded the scope of the measures originally imposed by resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009) by, inter alia, expanding the financial measures and broadening the criteria for individuals and entities to be considered for designation. In this context, the Security Council expanded the Panel of Experts to include an additional expert to increase the capacity of the Panel to investigate violations of these more complex measures. The mandate of the Panel was last extended until 7 April 2014, by resolution 2094 (2013). 82. The Panel, which is based in New York, is composed of a Coordinator (also the regional issues expert) and seven experts in the areas of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, nuclear issues, missile technology, finance, customs, export control and nuclear items. The Panel monitors an arms embargo, a luxury goods ban, financial sanctions, an assets freeze and a travel ban. The Panel reports to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). Its mandate is as follows: (a) To assist the Security Council Committee in carrying out its mandate as specified in resolution 1718 (2006) and the functions specified in paragraph 25 of resolution 1874 (2009); (b) To gather, examine and analyse information from States, relevant United Nations bodies and other interested parties regarding the implementation of the measures imposed in resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009), in particular incidents of non-compliance; (c) To make recommendations on actions the Council, the Committee or Member States may consider to improve the implementation of the measures imposed by resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009); (d) To provide to the Committee a planned programme of work no later than 12 July 2013; (e) To provide to the Committee no later than 7 October 2013 a midterm report on its work and submit it to the Council no later than 7 November 2013; and provide a final report to the Committee no later than 7 February 2014 with its findings and recommendations and submit it to the Council no later than 7 March 2014. 83. The Panel of Experts cooperates with and seeks information from Government authorities and diplomatic missions of countries that have potential information about violations of the sanctions regime. In 2013, the Panel has interacted with more than 30 States (some of which multiple times) regarding the implementation of the Council's relevant sanctions measures. In addition to their meetings with representatives of several missions to the United Nations in New York, members of the Panel visited Austria, Brazil, Chile, Djibouti, Estonia, Ethiopia, France, Japan, Namibia, the Netherlands, Paraguay, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Uruguay. 84. The Panel also seeks the cooperation and assistance of United Nations bodies. The Panel benefits from cooperation with ICAO, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, UNODC, and other sanctions panels established by the Security Council, including the Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran. It also benefited from the cooperation of other multilateral organizations such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific, the Financial Action Task Force, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), INTERPOL, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World Customs Organization. 85. Finally, the Panel is also in contact with experts from governmental and nongovernmental think tanks and universities. Such contacts have enabled the Panel to benefit from technical expertise in niche areas such as the air transport industry and the analysis of satellite imagery. 86. The Panel's major findings and recommendations, contained in its final report (S/2013/337) may serve to assist the Committee and the Council in taking more informed decisions relating to the sanctions measures. More specifically, the Panel's final report provided 30 recommendations to the Council, the Committee and Member States aimed at improving the implementation of the sanctions measures imposed by resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009), including through 15 proposals of individuals and entities to be included in the designations list to be subject to the assets freeze and travel ban measures. The Panel also examined in detail several cases of reported violations of Security Council resolutions. As requested by the Committee, the Panel also produced one implementation assistance notice that may be helpful to Member States in improving their national implementation mechanisms. 87. The Panel of Experts also continued its work in assisting States to improve compliance with the sanctions measures. In 2013, the Panel travelled to seven States to conduct investigations concerning alleged violations and/or to discuss issues relating to the implementation of the sanctions regime. Through its investigations and in-depth correspondence and dialogue with States, the Panel assisted those States in better understanding and implementing the measures imposed by resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009). Table 25 :: The Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, acting under the direction of the Committee, undertook physical inspections and conducted investigations in the framework of its mandate :: The Panel of Experts continued to prepare incident reports and implementation assistance notices; it also presented its final report, including recommendations, to the Security Council :: The Committee provided direction to the Panel in the provision of informal advice and guidance to Member States on compliance-related issues, in particular alleged violations. On behalf of the Committee, the Panel also took follow-up actions with concerned States on reported violations, with a view to obtaining information clarifying the background and circumstances of the violations :: The information received from States on alleged violations contributed to the incident reports prepared by the Panel for the Committee's information and to the Panel's final report to the Security Council :: In accordance with their obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions, Member States provided reports and communications on implementation and compliance-related issues. The Committee and the Panel of Experts received reports and other communications on specific compliance-related issues, including on alleged violations :: The Panel participated in outreach events and made country visits upon request for information-sharing and technical assistance in implementing the relevant measures and for the purpose of furthering the Committee's mandate as set forth in relevant Council resolutions 88. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Panel of Experts will continue to carry out its mandated activities, in particular by monitoring the implementation of the measures imposed by resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087 (2013) and 2094 (2013). The Panel will collect information on and monitor the implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Council, conduct extensive fieldwork and on-site investigations of reported alleged violations and make recommendations thereon. It will continue to submit to the Committee regular reports on its activities. It is also expected to submit to the Council an interim report and a final report on its activities that would include specific recommendations. 89. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Panel of Experts are set out in table 26 below. Table 26 Objective: To ensure that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea abandons all nuclear weapons and its existing nuclear programme and acts strictly in accordance with the obligations applicable to parties under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the terms and conditions of the International Atomic Energy Agency Safeguards Agreement :: Investigation reports to the Committee on the violation or implementation of the Council's sanctions measures (7) :: Open briefings to Member States on the implementation of the measures imposed by the Council (1) :: Recommendations to the Committee on actions aimed at promoting or modifying the sanctions regime (5) :: Recommendations concerning new individuals or entities to be listed or updates to the existing consolidated list (2) Target 2014: 20 Target 2014: 5 :: Consultations with States on the implementation of the Council's sanctions measures (15) :: Draft implementation assistance notices and discussion papers on good practices and technical assistance (3) :: Outreach events to facilitate the implementation of the sanctions regime (10) 90. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Panel of Experts and provided that the investigations of the Panel are not hindered. Table 27 91. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to a higher vacancy rate for staff than budgeted in 2013. 92. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea beyond 7 April 2014 and should the Panel operate for 12 months as it has in the past, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $2,797,900 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for four positions (2 P-3 and 2 General Service (Other level)) to provide substantive and administrative support to the members of the Panel ($434,200); fees ($1,638,600) and official travel ($396,300) of the eight members of the Panel; official travel of staff ($63,300); facilities and infrastructure, including the rental of premises ($196,700); and other operational and logistical support requirements such as the rental of vehicles, communications, information technology equipment and maintenance, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($68,800). 93. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 94. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable mainly to the addition of an eighth expert mandated in resolution 2094 (2013) and to an increase in the average fees of the experts as the composition of the Panel changes. This is offset mostly by a reduction in travel requirements, as explained in table 29 below, and because of the change in standards of travel for the experts. 95. Resource changes of $179,100 and the related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 29 below. Total reduction: $179,100 Adjustments would be made in travel practices, such as limiting the number of experts attending outreach conferences. The reduced number of experts participating in outreach activities would mean that the depth of expertise would be reduced in those activities. When possible, experts would participate by teleconference and videoconference in lieu of in-person travel 96. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for 2014. G. Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran 97. The Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran was established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1929 (2010), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to create for an initial period of one year a group of up to eight experts to carry out the tasks assigned in paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010). On 5 June 2013, the mandate of the Panel was extended by resolution 2105 (2013) until 9 July 2014. 98. The Panel, which is based in New York, is composed of a Coordinator (also the non-proliferation expert) and seven experts in the areas of nuclear and missile technology, conventional arms and related materiel, finance, transportation, export control, customs enforcement and issues relating to non-proliferation. Since its establishment in October 2010, the Panel monitors sanctions measures related but not limited to the nuclear and missile programmes of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the alleged transfer of conventional arms, the attempted procurement of items for prohibited purposes and the designation of individuals and entities that were found in violation of Security Council resolutions. The Panel reports to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). Its mandate is as follows: (a) To assist the Security Council Committee in carrying out its mandate as specified in paragraph 18 of resolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph 28 of resolution 1929 (2010); (b) To gather, examine and analyse information from States, relevant United Nations bodies and other interested parties regarding the implementation of the measures decided upon in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010), in particular incidents of non-compliance; (c) To make recommendations on actions the Council, the Committee or a State may consider in order to improve the implementation of the relevant measures; (d) To provide to the Council an interim report on its work no later than 90 days after the Panel's appointment and a final report to the Council no later than 30 days prior to the termination of its mandate with its findings and recommendations. 99. In addition to seeking the cooperation and assistance of Member States, the Panel of Experts cooperates with experts from other United Nations organizations, including the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the Economic Commission for Europe, UNODC and other sanctions panels established by Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1540 (2004), the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea, the Panel of Experts on the Sudan, the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire. The Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran seeks regular advice and assistance from IAEA and other specialized organizations such as IMO and the World Customs Organization. The Panel meets representatives from research institutions to obtain information concerning the implementation of measures under the relevant Security Council resolutions and related issues. The Panel is in contact with experts from governmental and non-governmental think tanks and universities. 100. The cooperation and interaction with these entities have enabled the Panel to gain a better understanding of the increasingly complex procurement methods of the Islamic Republic of Iran, including front companies, intermediaries, false documentation and new maritime routes to circumvent United Nations sanctions measures. 101. The Panel's major findings and recommendations, contained in its final report (S/2013/331), may serve to assist the Committee and the Council in taking more informed decisions relating to the sanctions measures. More specifically, the Panel's final report provided six recommendations on actions the Council or the Committee may consider in order to improve the implementation of the relevant measures concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran. The Panel also examined in detail several cases of reported violations of Council resolutions, in particular incidents in breach of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007) on the arms embargo. In addition to conventional arms and related materiel, the Panel also studied at length issues relating to nuclear and ballistic missile activities, export control, shipping and transportation and financial and business sanctions. 102. The Panel of Experts also continued its work in assisting States to improve compliance with the sanctions measures. In 2013, the Panel held consultations with numerous Member States and conducted physical inspections in regard to five reported incidents of non-compliance. The Panel, through its outreach campaign targeting a wider United Nations membership, helped to raise the awareness of Member States on their reporting obligations. In a similar vein, the Panel drafted letters providing advice aimed at helping States to better understand the provisions of relevant Security Council resolutions. In carrying out its mandate, the Panel actively sought to broaden its contact with representatives of other international organizations, think tanks and academia to obtain information concerning the implementation of measures decided upon in the relevant Council resolutions. 103. The Panel held a series of outreach meetings with New York-based permanent representatives and missions, and co-organized outreach seminars in collaboration with the International Institute for Strategic Studies, the Institute for Security Studies and the Governments of the United Kingdom and Togo. Table 30 :: The Security Council Committee took action on five reported incidents of non-compliance with Council sanctions measures. Acting under the direction of the Committee, the Panel of Experts undertook physical inspections and investigations in order to provide the Committee with an exhaustive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regime :: The Panel took further actions to follow up with concerned States on the reported violations in terms of background and circumstances surrounding the violations. The Panel of Experts prepared five incident reports and presented its final report, including recommendations, to the Committee :: The Committee, assisted by the Panel, provided guidance to States on implementation issues, including implementation assistance notices. It also received from the Panel information related to possible additional designations of entities and goods :: The Committee provided direction to the Panel in the provision of technical advice and guidance to Member States, intergovernmental organizations, the private sector and humanitarian organizations on ways to better understand and interpret the provisions set out in relevant Security Council resolutions :: The information the Panel gathered from its consultations with Member States and other interested parties contributed to the analyses and findings contained in the Panel's final report to the Committee and the Security Council :: Acting on the recommendations of the Panel, the Committee designated one entity under sanctions which is subject to assets freeze :: The above-sanctioned entity will be added to the Consolidated List, which will be updated and made available to Member States on the Committee's web page :: In accordance with the relevant Council resolutions, Member States have provided reports and communications on implementation and compliance-related issues. The Committee and the Panel received reports and other communications on specific compliance-related issues, including on alleged violations :: The Panel has participated in three major regional seminars and has made country visits upon request for information-sharing and technical assistance in implementing the relevant measures and for the purpose of furthering the mandate of the Committee as set out in the relevant Council resolutions :: As a result of Panel's outreach initiatives and advice, Member States have adopted relevant regulations and established national coordination mechanisms aimed at improving their implementation of the sanctions regime :: Under the direction of the Committee, the Panel has provided technical advice to Member States, intergovernmental organizations, the private sector and humanitarian organizations on ways to better understand and interpret the provisions set out in relevant Security Council resolutions 104. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Panel will carry out its mandated activities, in particular by monitoring the implementation of the relevant measures imposed in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010). Particular tasks of the Panel will also include those identified in the Committee's programme of work, which was prepared and approved by the Committee pursuant to resolution 2049 (2012). The programme of work covers inspections, consultations, outreach, reporting and technical assistance to the Committee. 105. The Panel will collect information on and monitor the implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Security Council and is expected to conduct extensive fieldwork and on-site investigation of reported alleged violations and make recommendations thereon. It is also expected to submit to the Council, through the Committee, an interim and a final report on its activities that would include specific recommendations. 106. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Panel are set out in table 31 below. Table 31 Objective: To enforce the relevant measures contained in Security Council resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010) pertaining to the Islamic Republic of Iran Estimate 2013: 9 Target 2014: 9 :: Inspection reports to the Committee on the violation or implementation of the Council's sanctions measures (10) :: Open briefings to Member States on implementation of the Council's measures (2) (b) (i) Number of findings and recommendations made by the Panel agreed upon by the Committee (ii) Number of amendments to entries on the Consolidated List of designated individuals and entities :: Recommendations to the Committee on actions aimed at promoting or modifying the sanctions regime (14) :: Draft implementation assistance notices and discussion papers on good practices addressed to Member States (10) :: Assessments of national implementation reports of States (2) :: Reports to the Security Council through the Committee (2) Estimate 2013: 14 Target 2014: 14 (ii) Number of queries from States or other entities seeking advice from the Committee and the Panel on ways to improve compliance Target 2014: 16 :: Consultations with States on implementation of the Council's sanctions measures (32) :: Outreach events to facilitate the implementation of the sanctions regime (3) :: Technical guidance letters to States on ways to improve implementation of the Council's sanctions measures (6) 107. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Panel of Experts and provided that the investigations of the Panel are not hindered. Table 32 Table 33 inter-national 108. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to a higher vacancy rate for staff than budgeted in 2013. 109. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran beyond 9 July 2014 and should the Panel operate for 12 months in 2014 as it has in the past, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $2,971,500 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for four positions (1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 2 General Service (Other level)) to provide substantive and administrative support to the members of the Panel ($466,400); fees ($1,638,600) and official travel ($527,000) of the eight members of the Panel; official travel of staff ($95,000); facilities and infrastructure, including the rental of premises ($196,700); and other operational and logistical support requirements such as the rental of vehicles, communications, information technology equipment and maintenance, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($47,800). 110. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran. 111. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable mainly to a reduction in travel requirements for the experts, as explained in table 34 below, and as a result of the change in standards of travel for the experts. 112. Resource changes of $128,300 and the related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 34 below. Table 34 Total reduction: $128,300 113. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Panel of Experts on the Islamic Republic of Iran for 2014. H. Panel of Experts on Libya 114. The Panel of Experts on Libya was established by Security Council resolution 1973 (2011) to monitor the sanctions measures imposed concerning Libya. Following positive developments in the country, the Council modified the arms embargo and assets freeze measures in resolutions 2009 (2011), 2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013) and reduced the number of experts from eight to five in 2012. In 2013, the mandate of the Panel was extended for a period of 13 months until 16 April 2014. 115. The Panel of Experts, which is home-based, comprises a Coordinator (also one of the two arms experts) and four other experts in the fields of arms, finance and regional issues. The Panel currently monitors and assists in the implementation of an arms embargo, a travel ban and an assets freeze established in resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) and modified in resolutions 2009 (2011), 2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013). In addition, as requested in resolution 2017 (2011), the Panel developed proposals to counter the illicit proliferation of all arms and related materiel (in particular man-portable surface-to-air missiles), to secure stockpiles; and to strengthen borders control. The Panel reports to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). According to paragraph 14 of resolution 2095 (2013), the mandate of the Panel of Experts is as follows: (a) To assist the Committee in carrying out its mandate as specified in paragraph 24 of resolution 1970 (2011); (b) To gather, examine and analyse information from States, relevant United Nations bodies, regional organizations and other interested parties regarding the implementation of the measures decided upon in resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) and modified in resolutions 2009 (2011), 2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013), in particular incidents of non-compliance; (c) To make recommendations on actions the Council, the Committee, the Government of Libya or a State may consider in order to improve the implementation of the relevant measures; (d) To provide to the Council an interim report on its work no later than 90 days after the Panel's appointment and a final report to the Council no later than 60 days prior to the termination of its mandate with its findings and recommendations. 116. The Panel of Experts on Libya works closely with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), notably its Security Sector Advisory and Coordination Division. To date, the Panel has made 19 visits to Libya; 17 of those visits took place after the establishment of UNSMIL, with the Mission providing support at no cost to the Panel. 117. The Panel also exchanges information with other sanctions panels established by the Security Council, such as the Group of Experts on Côte d'Ivoire, the Panel of Experts on Liberia, the Panel of Experts on the Sudan, the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. The Panel of Experts on Libya also cooperates with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Office for Disarmament Affairs and UNODC. 118. In addition the Panel cooperates with Member States (in particular those in the region), regional organizations or arrangements (the African Union, ECOWAS, NATO), other international organizations, such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, INTERPOL, civil society and non-governmental organizations. 119. The Panel submitted its final report pursuant to resolution 2040 (2012) on 15 February 2013 (S/2013/99). The Panel's findings and recommendations have assisted the Security Council and its Committee to gain a more comprehensive picture of arms and related materiel coming into, and out of, Libya, and to provide guidance to Member States on the proper application of the arms embargo measures. 120. Based on the Panel's recommendations, the Committee approved two implementation assistance notices. One notice provides guidance to all Member States on what types of information should be submitted in seeking an exemption from the arms embargo in order to provide security or disarmament assistance to the Libyan authorities. The second implementation assistance notice provides guidance to Member States on the reporting of detections of violations of the arms embargo to the Committee. 121. Furthermore, the Security Council, based on the Panel's recommendation, removed the need for exemption notifications for certain types of security assistance and non-lethal items in resolution 2095 (2013). Also based on a recommendation from the Panel addressed to the Government of Libya, the Government assigned a focal point through which future security assistance procurement will be channelled. 122. The Panel submitted its interim report pursuant to resolution 2095 (2013) on 2 July 2013. Based on a recommendation from the Panel addressed to the Committee after the establishment of a body responsible for supplies of arms and related materiel to Libya, the Committee sought clarifications from the Government of Libya on the scope of responsibility of the new body; on the provision of end-user certificates; and on the implementation of safeguarding procedures. 123. Finally, the findings of the Panel reported to the Committee have also helped to shed more light on the implementation and impact of the travel ban and assets freeze, thereby allowing the fine-tuning of designations made under those measures. Based on information provided by the Panel of Experts, the Committee has updated, and provided additional details on the existing entries contained in its list of individuals and entities subject to the measures. With assistance provided by the Panel, the Committee approved one implementation assistance notice relating to the assets freeze. Table 35 :: The Panel provided the Committee with an exhaustive analysis of the implementation of the sanctions regime in Libya, including recommendations on possible developments and adjustments to be considered by members of the Security Council :: The Security Council, also in the light of the Panel's reports, adjusted the sanctions regime imposed on Libya, reflecting the changes in resolution 2095 (2013) :: The Panel provided the Committee with updated information to entries on its list of individuals and entities, on the basis of which the Committee updated its sanctions list :: The Panel provided the Committee with proposals for the revision of the Committee's guidelines regarding the conduct of its work :: The Panel maintained contacts with many States in the region and elsewhere in order to discuss and receive updates on the implementation and enforcement of the measures imposed in relation to Libya. The Panel also undertook country missions to investigate the compliance of Member States and entities with the sanctions regime :: The Committee and the Panel received communications seeking advice on ways to improve compliance. The Panel provided its input, as appropriate :: Pursuant to the recommendations of the Panel in its final and interim reports, the Committee wrote two letters to Libya concerning the implementation of a national mechanism for facilitating the implementation of the arms embargo :: The Panel provided the Committee with input concerning the compliance of Member States and entities with the sanctions regime :: The Panel frequently travelled to Libya to explain the implications of the sanctions regime to the national authorities and to discuss the modalities of the implementation of a national mechanism for facilitating the implementation of the arms embargo :: The Panel assisted the Committee in drafting implementation assistance notices addressed to Member States 124. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Panel will carry out its mandated activities, in particular by monitoring the implementation of the relevant measures specified in resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), as updated in resolutions 2009 (2011), 2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013). The Panel will collect information on and monitor the implementation by States of the measures imposed by the Security Council. The Panel will continue to conduct extensive fieldwork and on-site investigation of reported alleged violations and make appropriate recommendations. The Panel will submit an interim report and a final report on its activities to the Council that will include specific recommendations. 125. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Panel of Experts are set out in table 36 below. Table 36 Objective: To enforce the relevant measures contained in Security Council resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), as updated in resolutions 2009 (2011), 2040 (2012) and 2095 (2013), pertaining to Libya :: Investigation report to the Committee on the violation or implementation of the Council's sanctions measures (1) Target 2014: 10 :: Recommendations concerning new individuals or entities to be listed or updates to the existing sanctions list (3) Estimate 2013: 50 Target 2014: 50 (ii) Number of communications from States and other entities seeking advice on ways to comply with the measures Estimate 2013: 10 :: Communications to States and other entities requesting action or updates relating to compliance with the sanctions measures (50) :: Written reports from the Panel to the Committee on compliance-related issues (10) 126. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Panel of Experts and provided that the investigations of the Panel are not hindered. Table 37 127. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to a decrease in the amount of travel of the experts owing to the long lead time required in planning country visits, initial delays in obtaining visas for Libya, the change in location for the drafting of reports and the fact that not all Panel members travelled to Libya for every visit. 128. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Libya beyond 16 April 2014 and should the Panel operate for 11 months in 2014 as it has in the past, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $1,270,700 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for two positions (1 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other level)) to provide substantive and administrative support to the members of the Panel ($192,300); fees ($538,800) and official travel ($411,200) of the five members of the Panel; official travel of staff ($47,200); and other operational and logistical support requirements, such as the rental of premises, the rental of vehicles, communications, information technology equipment and maintenance, and miscellaneous supplies and services ($81,200). 129. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Panel of Experts on Libya. 130. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable mainly to a reduction in the amount of travel undertaken by the experts, as explained in table 39 below, and as the initial process of establishing formal contacts with interlocutors has been achieved and therefore fewer trips to raise awareness of the sanctions regime are needed. The change in standards of travel for the experts also contributes to the variance. 131. Resource changes of $63,800 and related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 39 below. Total reduction: $63,800 132. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Panel of Experts on Libya for 2014. I. Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) concerning AlQaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities 133. The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team was established on 15 March 2004 by the Security Council in its resolution 1526 (2004) as a successor special political mission to the Monitoring Group established by resolution 1363 (2001). The Monitoring Team, composed of eight experts, reports to two Committees: the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) concerning the Taliban and associated individuals and entities. 134. The Monitoring Team, which is based in New York, includes a Coordinator and seven experts in the areas of information analysis and counter-terrorism; political analysis; banking, finance and alternative remittance systems; arms trade and arms embargo issues; customs and travel ban enforcement and legal aspects of the Security Council sanctions, including legal challenges against the regimes. The Monitoring Team oversees an arms embargo, a travel ban and an assets freeze imposed on members of Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and sanctions imposed on individuals and entities associated with the Taliban in constituting a threat to the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan. The Monitoring Team is mandated to undertake the following tasks: (a) To gather information on, and keep the Committees informed of instances and common patterns of non-compliance with the measures imposed in the relevant resolutions, as well as to facilitate, upon request by Member States, assistance in capacity-building; (b) To work closely with States of residence, nationality, location or incorporation of listed individuals and entities, designating States and other relevant States and to provide recommendations to both Committees on actions taken to respond to non-compliance. 135. In paragraph 20 of resolution 1904 (2009), the Security Council established the Office of the Ombudsperson to assist the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) when it considers requests from individuals and entities seeking removal from the list of sanctioned individuals and entities. In 2011, the Council strengthened the Office of the Ombudsperson through the adoption of resolution 1989 (2011), which directs the Ombudsperson to submit recommendations on delisting petitions and envisions the delisting of individuals recommended by the Ombudsperson, unless the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee decides by consensus to retain the listing or seeks a decision to retain the listing from the Council. 136. The Office of the Ombudsperson provides an independent mechanism through which a listed person or entity can seek delisting from the Al-Qaida Sanctions List. The Ombudsperson works in an impartial manner; it neither seeks nor receives instructions from any Government. 137. The functions and tasks of the Ombudsperson are set out in annex II to Security Council resolution 2083 (2012), and they are as follows: inform the petitioners of the general procedures and answer specific questions; inform the petitioners in case the delisting petition fails to properly address the original designation criteria; forward the delisting request to members of the Committee and other relevant States; engage in dialogue with relevant States; forward the delisting request to the Monitoring Team in order to receive relevant information from the Monitoring Team; present written updates to the Committee at the end of the four month information-gathering period; meet with the petitioners where relevant; gather opinions from relevant States on the delisting requests; draft and circulate to the Committee a comprehensive report with conclusions and a recommendation on the delisting request. 138. The Monitoring Team interacts closely with the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the Group of Experts that supports the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Both in New York and during joint technical missions, the Monitoring Team experts have continued to coordinate their work and share information with the experts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in order to capitalize on complementarities and synergies and minimize duplication, while taking full advantage of opportunities to maximize access to key Government officials in relevant States. The three expert groups regularly exchange information, including through joint visits. For example, the Monitoring Team participated in: (a) a country visit with the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to Norway and Sweden; (b) a conference on border control cooperation in the Sahel and the Maghreb that took place in Rabat, organized by the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the Government of Morocco; (c) a conference on addressing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and promoting international cooperation that took place in Geneva, organized by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the Government of Switzerland; and (d) a coordination meeting between the United Nations and the European External Action Service in Brussels, where the United Nations was represented by the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, UNODC and the Monitoring Team. These joint trips allowed the Monitoring Team experts to discuss issues related to the threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates in the countries concerned as well as the implementation of Security Council sanctions in a cost-effective manner when expertise is drawn from the different groups. 139. The three expert groups also cooperate on outreach activities and country visits within the respective mandates. For instance, the Monitoring Team represented the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate at the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force meeting in Marrakesh, Morocco, in November 2012, while the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate also routinely conveys to Governments, on behalf of the Monitoring Team, requests to submit information and responses to the Al-Qaida and the 1988 Sanctions Committees. The Monitoring Team and the other two expert groups also continue to participate and coordinate their work within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. All three expert groups are among the 31 international entities that make up the Task Force, and they contribute to its work through various working groups, such as the Working Group on Border Management relating to Counter-Terrorism, of which all three expert groups are members. 140. In 2013, the Monitoring Team also maintained its cooperation with other sanctions panels established by the Security Council, in particular the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea, with which it co-chairs the regional meeting of intelligence services of East Africa. 141. The Team also continued to strengthen its cooperation with other international and regional organizations such as the Terrorism Prevention Branch of UNODC, the Action Against Terrorism Unit of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the African Union, the Organization of American States Inter-American Committee against Terrorism, the Financial Action Task Force and its regional bodies, and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The work of the Monitoring Team also continued to benefit from cooperative arrangements with INTERPOL, through the use of INTERPOL databases and the issuance of INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special Notices. The Monitoring Team also regularly convenes regional meetings with the intelligence and security agencies of Member States. 142. The Office of the Ombudsperson interacts with petitioners seeking delisting, the relevant States, the Monitoring Team, and United Nations entities, including the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism and the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Moreover, the Ombudsperson also interacts with States or regional organizations where the sanctions measures of the Security Council have been challenged in courts of law (such as Canada, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the European Union). 143. The Monitoring Team continued to actively promote and deepen understanding of the Al-Qaida and the 1988 sanctions regimes of the Security Council and to address non-compliance issues. In the area of the assets freeze sanction, the Monitoring Team, in its most recent report to the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee provided information on the latest trends in terrorism financing, explaining the difference between legitimate sources of funding and funding through crime, such as kidnapping for ransom in the case of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. The Team, in its most recent report to the 1988 Sanctions Committee, provided information about the main sources of Taliban funding, with particular attention on the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Afghanistan, and made recommendations on the implementation of exemptions to the assets freeze measure. The Monitoring Team informed the Sanctions Committees of its participation in relevant meetings of the Financial Action Task Force and its regional bodies in order to promote the regime. 144. On the travel ban sanction, the Monitoring Team, in its most recent report to the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, informed of its findings on the effectiveness of the travel ban, and made recommendations on how to improve common challenges to its implementation, such as areas with porous borders and unsophisticated border controls. In its most recent report to the 1988 Sanctions Committee, the Team provided information on the impact of this sanctions measure in the reconciliation process, and made recommendations on granting exemptions to the travel ban for listed Taliban individuals. 145. On the arms embargo sanction, the Monitoring Team, in its most recent report to the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, informed about the use of arms by listed entities and on the scope of the arms embargo and made recommendations on how to improve implementation and address non-compliance with this sanctions measure. In its most recent report to the 1988 Sanctions Committee, the Team informed about its findings on the availability of arms for Taliban fighters and their use of improvised explosive devices, providing recommendations on the improvement of this sanctions measure. 146. The Monitoring Team has so far completed the narrative summaries of reasons for the listing of more than 15 individuals and entities in 2013. 147. In 2013, the Ombudsperson has so far received a total of 10 delisting petitions. Each of these cases involved an information-gathering process that required interaction and follow-up with various States. Independent research has also been conducted and in some cases other sources of information have been pursued. The process involves a dialogue with the petitioners. The method of the dialogue has varied depending on the facts of the case and has included in-person discussions and the submission of questions and responses by e-mail or letter. In several cases, it was necessary to translate questions and answers into and from a language that the petitioner understands, including languages other than the six official languages of the United Nations. 148. In accordance with annex II to resolution 2083 (2012), each petition requires in-depth analysis of the information gathered, and the preparation and presentation of a comprehensive report to the Committee. Also in accordance with the mandate, the Ombudsperson submitted two biannual reports to the Security Council on the activities of the Office and has fulfilled other requirements, such as sending notification letters to newly listed persons and entities. 149. The Ombudsperson has also taken steps to raise awareness about the Office and to make it accessible to potential petitioners and to the public generally. This has included the development of a website and of handout material for distribution and notification letters to listed individuals with known addresses. The Ombudsperson continues to develop policy documents to ensure transparency and consistency of approach. These include guidelines for the submission of delisting applications, information on the procedures for handling delisting requests, as well as an outline of the approach and standards to be applied by the Ombudsperson in assessing delisting petitions. The Ombudsperson continued discussions with several States with regard to arrangements or agreements that would allow for the sharing of classified/confidential information with the Ombudsperson. Twelve such arrangements have been put in place thus far, as well as other arrangements for ad hoc assistance. The Ombudsperson also delivered presentations at various international and regional forums and met with domestic, regional and international judges and other officials involved in work of relevance to the mandate of her Office. For the development of the policy documents and the preparation of presentations, extensive legal research was conducted. Table 40 (a) Improved compliance by States with the sanctions most recently reiterated by the Security Council in resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011) :: The Monitoring Team continued its outreach and visits to Member States during 2013, as mandated by the Security Council :: The Monitoring Team gathered information on the sanctions implementation and instances of non-compliance to the travel ban, arms embargo and assets freeze :: Numerous States visited indicated that they would take specific action to enhance their implementation of the sanctions, for example, by adopting or upgrading legislation or enhancing the distribution of updated sanctions lists among border control posts and financial institutions. Member States were also informed by the Monitoring Team of specific international assistance available to them in order to improve their capacity for compliance with the sanctions. The Monitoring Team participated, together with INTERPOL, in three regional training seminars for police and security forces (in Rome, Bratislava and Lyon, France) on the implementation of the sanctions :: The Monitoring Team has continued to provide advice and recommendations to the Sanctions Committees on enhancing the sanctions regimes, through its reports, written communications and through participation in the Committees' meetings. The Security Council has agreed, either fully or partially, with a significant number of the recommendations contained in the thirteenth report of the Monitoring Team to the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the second report to the 1988 Sanctions Committee, which were later adopted by the Council (c) Improved fairness and transparency of the delisting process of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee :: The Ombudsperson visited relevant States to conduct personal interviews with separate delisting petitioners :: The Ombudsperson continued updating the Security Council in the biannual reports of the Ombudsperson (d) Improved recourse by listed individuals and entities to an independent and impartial review of their listing :: To date in 2013, 10 new requests have been received by the Office, six comprehensive reports have been submitted and six presentations have been made to the Committee 150. In 2014, the projected requirements for which are outlined in the present report, the Monitoring Team will continue to carry out its mandated activities and will also continue to develop its contacts with Member States, in particular with officials most concerned with countering the threat posed by Al-Qaida, in order to provide the Security Council, through the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, with current information on the changing nature of the threat. The Monitoring Team will also continue to work closely with UNAMA to maximize the contribution of the 1988 sanctions regime to the promotion of peace and stability in Afghanistan and in neighbouring countries. The Monitoring Team will continue to contribute to the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy through the Secretary-General's Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. 151. As the work of the Ombudsperson becomes known and the process more established, it is anticipated that the number of delisting petitions presented will continue to increase. The work involved will continue to be labour-intensive, with each petition requiring follow-up with States and the petitioner, independent research and the preparation of detailed reports. Effective dialogue with the petitioner will, in some cases, require the translation of outgoing and incoming communications and, in a few instances, the assistance of an interpreter may be required. The Ombudsperson will also continue to fulfil the additional responsibilities of the Office, including sending notifications, where possible, to newly listed individuals and entities. The Ombudsperson will continue to take steps to publicize the existence of the Office, especially to those individuals or entities that might want to present a delisting petition. Extensive work will be necessary to put in place agreements and arrangements with respect to the disclosure of confidential information. 152. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Monitoring Team are set out in table 41 below. Table 41 Objective: To prevent terrorist activities perpetrated by individuals or entities belonging to or associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban (a) (i) Number of discussions within the Committees' meetings on instances of non-compliance with the sanctions regime as reported by the Monitoring Team or a Member State (ii) Number of references in the Committees' position papers or in Security Council resolutions of non-compliance with the sanctions regimes, including measures to address them :: Comprehensive reports to the Committees (3) :: Country visit reports (9) :: Reports on the participation of Monitoring Team in meetings of international organizations and other meetings (12) (b) (i) Number of findings and recommendations made by the Team agreed upon by the Committees (ii) Number of new standard forms for listing submissions and explanatory notes agreed upon by the Committees (iii) Number of amendments to entries on the sanctions lists Estimate 2013: 125 Target 2014: 130 :: Recommendations to the Committees and to the Security Council on actions aimed at promoting or modifying the sanctions regime (30) :: Narrative summaries of reasons for listing names on relevant sanctions lists (40) :: Proposals for revision of the documents on the Committees' website (4) :: Presentations to the Committees on the results of country visits (20) Estimate 2013: 130 Target 2014: 140 :: Cooperation projects to broaden the engagement with international, regional and subregional organizations on issues relevant to the work of the relevant Committees (5) :: Updated information package for Member States on the sanctions regimes, the sanctions measures and the work and procedures of the Committees (2) :: Regional meetings for security and intelligence services on the Al-Qaida threat and the implementation of the sanctions regime (2) :: Updated comparative tables on the work of the Committees (2) (d) Improved fairness and transparency of the delisting process of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee (d) (i) Number of communications from States and relevant bodies enabling the Ombudsperson to tell petitioners what the case is against them Estimate 2013: 250 Target 2014: 275 (ii) Number of cases of listed individuals and entities under review providing petitioners with the possibility of answering the case against them Estimate 2013: 18 :: Letters to States and relevant bodies seeking in-depth information on delisting petitions received (100) :: Communications to petitioners and listed persons and entities (81) (e) Improved recourse by listed individuals and entities to an independent and impartial review of their listing (e) Number of enhanced delisting requests presented to the Committees that include the analysis and observations of the Ombudsperson Target 2014: 24 :: Comprehensive case reports in relation to delisting petitions (30) :: Updated information regarding individuals and entities that have submitted delisting requests through the Ombudsperson (10) 153. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that States comply with the resolutions of the Security Council and cooperate with the Monitoring Team and the Ombudsperson and provided that the gathering of relevant information and its analysis are not hindered. Table 42 Table 43 154. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to savings under general temporary assistance for meetings following the cancellation of one regional meeting of intelligence services owing to the political and security situation prevailing in the regions where the meeting could have been held. 155. The mandates of the Monitoring Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities and of the Office of the Ombudsperson have been extended until 16 June 2015. The estimated requirements for 2014 amount to $4,447,000 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for the continuation of 12 positions to provide substantive and administrative support to the members of the Monitoring Team and to the Office of the Ombudsperson ($1,438,200); general temporary assistance ($38,700); fees ($1,757,400) and official travel ($638,400) of the eight members of the Team and of the Ombudsperson; official travel of staff ($96,700); rental of premises and office equipment and maintenance ($341,000); communications ($21,500); information technology equipment and maintenance ($87,700); and other supplies and services ($27,400). 156. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. 157. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable to the cost of entitlements for the incumbents of the positions being higher than budgeted in 2013; an increase in the average fees of the experts as the composition of the Monitoring Team changes; and an increase in the cost of rental of premises. This is offset in part by a reduction under travel of staff owing to the removal of the provision for travel of the Chair and other members of the Committee. This provision would be funded under "travel of the representative of the Security Council" in section 3, Political affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015, ensuring consistency among the groups and panels. 158. No extrabudgetary resources were available in 2013 or are projected for the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson for 2014. J. Support to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction 159. By its resolution 1540 (2004), the Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, decided that all States should refrain from providing any form of support to non-State actors that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery. All States, in accordance with their national procedures, are requested to adopt and enforce appropriate effective laws that prohibit any non-State actor from engaging in such activities, in particular for terrorist purposes, and to take and enforce effective measures to establish domestic controls to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery, including by establishing appropriate controls over related materials. 160. The Security Council established a Committee consisting of all members of the Council, to report to it on the implementation of the resolution. In accordance with resolution 1540 (2004), the Committee was provided with the assistance of experts. The Security Council extended the mandate of the Committee in 2006 (resolution 1673) and in 2008 (resolution 1810). By its resolution 1977 (2011), the Council extended the mandate of the Committee until 25 April 2021. In paragraph 5 (a) of the resolution, the Council requested the Secretary-General to establish, in consultation with the Committee, a group of up to eight experts, acting under the direction and purview of the Committee, composed of individuals with the appropriate experience and knowledge to provide the Committee with expertise, to assist the Committee in carrying out its mandate. In its resolution 2055 (2012), the Council increased the size of the group of experts to up to nine experts. 161. In its resolution 1977 (2011), the Security Council endorsed the existing administrative and logistical support to the Committee from the Office for Disarmament Affairs and called upon the Secretariat to provide and maintain sufficient expertise to support activities of the Committee. The Council also encouraged States that are able to do so to provide resources to the Office for Disarmament Affairs to assist States in implementing their obligations in respect of resolution 1540 (2004). 162. The Office for Disarmament Affairs provides support to the Committee and its group of experts, particularly in the following three key areas: facilitating national implementation activities, including through regionally coordinated approaches; strengthening cooperation between international and regional organizations; and promoting effective partnerships with civil society and the private sector. In these areas, the Office supports the outreach activities of the Committee through the organization of regional and subregional workshops on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and through country-specific missions and activities; by strengthening the cooperation between international, regional and subregional bodies through the organization of working meetings on cooperation in promoting the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004); by facilitating effective partnerships with civil society and the private sector through the organization of outreach events with these stakeholders, such as the first Civil Society Forum in support of resolution 1540 (2004), in January 2013, and the first Conference of International, Regional and Subregional Industry Associations on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in April 2012. The Office also provides information technology support for the experts and maintains the official website of the Committee with the aim of enhancing transparency in the work of the Committee and providing wider public access to information on its activities. 163. The Committee continued to cooperate with international, regional and subregional organizations and other intergovernmental institutions and arrangements, in particular those possessing non-proliferation expertise. This cooperation contributes to the effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) through the exchange of information, the sharing of implementation experiences and lessons learned, and coordination in facilitating assistance to Member States. Regional and subregional organizations also provide valuable insights into the common needs and priorities of their Member States and help to deliver assistance. The Committee continued to cooperate with the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) concerning the Taliban and associated individuals and entities and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and their experts. The three Committees have continued to provide joint briefings to the Council, outlining the areas of continued cooperation and coordination. 164. In providing support to the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the Office for Disarmament Affairs promotes closer cooperation with and between international, regional and subregional organizations, including organizations of the United Nations system and other entities. This is achieved through a synergistic approach of respective efforts so as to avoid duplication, especially in areas dealing with capacity-building and assistance facilitation. The Office will continue its joint country-specific activities and regional approaches, which are implemented together with the OSCE Conflict Prevention Centre. Such activities are conducted within the 2011 memorandum of understanding on the joint implementation of projects relating to resolution 1540 (2004) between the Office for Disarmament Affairs and the OSCE secretariat. Based on the memorandum of understanding, the Office undertakes cost-sharing initiatives with OSCE in organizing and conducting regional workshops, training courses and country-specific activities. The Office and OSCE have jointly organized country-specific activities with Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Uzbekistan. As a result of this cooperation and such activities, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and Serbia have submitted to the Committee their national implementation action plans. 165. The Committee continues its efforts to advance the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and has made progress in enhancing its engagement with Member States, guided by the established principles of transparency, equal treatment, cooperation and consistency in its approach. Progress has been recorded by the Committee on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by States and considerable progress was made in enhancing the transparency of the work and achievements of the Committee. The Committee also acknowledged progress made in fostering cooperation with international, regional and subregional organizations and other entities, and in developing a working relationship with non-governmental organizations to facilitate the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by States. Table 44 (a) Fuller implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) :: National reporting remains the main source of information for the Security Council's examination of the implementation of requirements of resolution 1540 (2004). A total of 169 Member States have already submitted their first report. More than 20 Member States submitted additional information to the Committee :: The Committee matrices represent a valuable tool for the general examination of information on the status of implementation by States of resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee, with the assistance of its experts, updated the matrices. During the reporting period, all country examination sheets have been reviewed by experts :: The number of States adopting additional measures in 2013 is expected to be 30, and the total number of measures taken by States in implementation of the resolution is expected to reach 31,450 (b) Enhanced capacity of States to implement resolution 1540 (2004) :: The Committee continued to strengthen its role in facilitating assistance for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Relevant developments during the reporting period focused on the implementation of revised guidelines on processing assistance requests, the facilitation of "match-making" between assistance requests and offers, and the continued development and refining of assistance guidelines. The consolidated list of 47 States and international and regional organizations requesting assistance was updated by the Committee as well as the technical assistance database :: In resolution 1977 (2011) the Security Council encouraged the Committee to actively engage in dialogue with States on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including through visits to States at their invitation. During the reporting period, the Committee conducted visits to Trinidad and Tobago and Grenada :: States are encouraged to prepare, on a voluntary basis, national implementation action plans, mapping out their priorities and plans for implementing the key provisions of resolution 1540 (2004). During the year, the Committee worked bilaterally with a number of interested Member States to facilitate the preparation of national implementation- or capacity-building action plans. Ten Member States adopted or are in a process of adopting such plans :: Regional cooperation remains an effective tool for enhancing national efforts to implement key requirements of resolution 1540 (2004). In the time period under review, the Office for Disarmament Affairs organized or supported the following regional workshops: for members of the Commonwealth of Independent States Secretariat (Belarus, January 2013); and for South Eastern European countries (Serbia, May 2013) :: In resolution 1977 (2011) the Council encouraged the Committee to draw on relevant expertise, including, civil society and the private sector. The Office for Disarmament Affairs organized the first Civil Society Forum in support of resolution 1540 (2004), hosted by the Government of Austria in January 2013. The Forum served to increase civil society knowledge about activities of the Committee and activities of other relevant actors, including international and regional organizations. The Office also co-organized a special session on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during the International Arab Banking Summit, held in June 2013. :: The 2013 calendar year target numbers for requests from States for technical assistance (110) and for identified best practices, experiences shared and lessons learned (83) are expected to be achieved. (c) Improved interaction with and among Member States, including by enhancing synergies of relevant United Nations system entities and cooperation with other international organizations :: During the reporting period, over 15 international, regional and subregional organizations participated in workshops organized or supported by the Office for Disarmament Affairs :: The 2013 target number of 20 cooperative activities of the three Security Council Committees is expected to be achieved :: The 2013 target numbers of outreach events (45) and activities involving international organizations and other entities (55) are expected to be met 166. The Security Council, by its resolution 1977 (2011), extended the mandate of the Committee until 25 April 2021. On the basis of the provisions of the resolution, it is expected that the activities of the Committee will continue to intensify to facilitate the implementation of the requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) by Member States, in particular through country-specific activities, the facilitation of assistance and enhanced cooperation with international, regional and subregional organizations. 167. The Committee bases its work on an annual programme of work. The twelfth programme of work, which covers the period from 1 June 2013 to 31 May 2014, focuses its attention on five main areas of work: (a) monitoring and national implementation; (b) assistance; (c) cooperation with international organizations, including the Security Council Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) and pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001); (d) transparency and media outreach; and (e) administration and resources. The Committee will continue to work with Member States on the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions, guided by the principles of transparency, equal treatment, cooperation and consistency in its approach. In order to implement the programme of work more efficiently, the Committee will continue to operate a system of four working groups, open to all members of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The working groups will focus on important and recurring issues. 168. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the support to the Committee are set out in table 45 below. Objective: To prevent non-State actors from developing, acquiring, manufacturing, possessing, transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their means of delivery (a) (i) Number of States adopting measures to implement key requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) (ii) Number of country examination sheets (reviewed matrices) Estimate 2013: 193 Target 2014: 193 (iii) Increased number of measures taken by States in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) Estimate 2013: 31,450 Target 2014: 31,600 :: Reports of the Chair of the Committee to the Security Council (4) :: Updated legislative database on national implementation measures (1) :: Reports on international, regional and national conferences (100) :: Substantive servicing of meetings of the Committee (15) (b) (i) Increased number of requests from States for technical assistance in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) Estimate 2013: 110 Target 2014: 115 (ii) Increased number of sets of identified best practices, experiences shared and lessons learned Estimate 2013: 83 Target 2014: 86 :: Updated technical assistance database containing requests for assistance (1) :: Match-making facilitation of technical assistance in response to requests (20) :: Country-specific missions (8) :: Regional capacity-building workshops and other outreach events organized or supported by the Office for Disarmament Affairs (3) (c) (i) Number of outreach events Estimate 2013: 65 Target 2014: 75 (ii) Number of joint activities of the three Security Council Committees (established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), resolution 1373 (2001) and resolution 1540 (2004)) (iii) Number of activities involving international organizations and other entities in promoting the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) Estimate 2013: 75 :: Presentations at events organized by international and regional organizations dealing with issues related to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and presentations at workshops and other outreach events organized or supported by the Office for Disarmament Affairs (80) 169. The objectives would be achieved on the assumption that Member States continue to implement the requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) and in particular respond to specific requirements of resolution 1977 (2011). Table 46 Table 47 170. The anticipated unencumbered balance for 2012-2013 is attributable mainly to the departure of some experts during the biennium and the delay in replacing them. 171. The mandate of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on the non-proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction has been extended until 25 April 2021. The estimated requirements for supporting the Committee in 2014 amount to $3,112,000 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs ($719,600) for the continuation of five positions to provide substantive and administrative support to the Committee; fees ($1,757,200) and official travel ($158,700) of the nine experts; official travel of the members of the Committee and staff ($212,700); and other requirements, such as the rental of premises ($165,500), communications ($11,900) and information technology equipment and maintenance ($86,400). 172. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions in the support to the Committee. 173. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is attributable to: (a) a reduction in travel of the members of the Committee, experts and staff, as explained in table 48 below; and (b) the discontinuation of a one-time provision for the development of a knowledge/information management system to process, manage, exchange, access, store and archive the documents of the Committee and for the production of video clips for its website. 174. Resource changes of $66,900 and related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 48 below. Table 48 Travel of experts, members of the Committee and staff Reduction in travel through increased use of videoconference and attendance of multiple events per trip Total reduction: $66,900 Extensive use of videoconferencing would reduce the number of trips and increased efforts to attend multiple events per trip would result in reduced requirements per event. Other sources of funding would be used to support travel to external events, if necessary. The use of videoconferencing would reduce the depth of interaction between experts, members of the Committee, staff and Member States 175. In its resolution 1977 (2011), the Security Council urged the Committee to encourage and take full advantage of voluntary financial contributions to assist States in identifying and addressing their needs for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Most of the support from the Office for Disarmament Affairs for substantive activities of the Committee, including capacity-building workshops and implementation or assistance-facilitation missions, are funded from extrabudgetary resources. The 1540-related voluntary contributions and grants to the Trust Fund for Global and Regional Disarmament Activities, which is used to support the activities relating to resolution 1540 (2004), currently exceeds $4.2 million. Those grants have been used to support the implementation and assistance-facilitation activities of the Committee through the conduct of regional workshops and country-specific missions, national capacity-building and the facilitation of cooperation with international, regional and subregional organizations for the implementation of key requirements of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as to enhance transparency of the Committee's activities and contributions by civil society. 176. In 2013, the extrabudgetary resources in the amount of $604,470 are being used to support the Committee's country visits, including to facilitate the preparation of national action plans and related country-specific activities; to facilitate Member States' participation in 1540-related events; to conduct the first "peer review", between Croatia and Poland, in order for these interested Member States to bilaterally exchange practical implementation experiences, applicable effective practices and compare national procedures, regulations and laws related to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004); to facilitate national capacity-building in cooperation with OAS by supporting the implementation of specific requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) in the Americas, including in Colombia and Mexico; to promote the coordination of activities relating to resolution 1540 (2004) by international and regional organizations; to organize a regional workshop, in cooperation with the African Union, for States Members of the United Nations in Africa; to enhance cooperation with civil society and the private sector by organizing follow-up events to the Civil Society Forum in support of resolution 1540 (2004), held in 2013, and the Conference of International, Regional and Subregional Industry Associations on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), held in 2012 in Germany; and to continue the support for the publication 1540 Compass. 177. In 2014, extrabudgetary funds in the amount of $1.1 million will be used to organize or support a number of activities relating to resolution 1540 (2004), including country visits; the facilitation of Member States' participation in events relating to the resolution, including in regional workshops; the preparation of national action plans and related country-specific activities; support for national capacity-building through training; the facilitation of national capacity-building in implementing specific requirements of resolution 1540 (2004); and continued support for the publication 1540 Compass. K. Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate 178. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate was established by the Security Council in its resolution 1535 (2004) to assist the Counter-Terrorism Committee in its work of monitoring and promoting the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and, subsequently, resolution 1624 (2005). By its resolution 1963 (2010), the Council extended the mandate of the Executive Directorate until 31 December 2013. 179. In resolution 1373 (2001), the Security Council requested Member States to introduce measures to enhance their legal and institutional capacity to counter terrorist activities, including measures to criminalize the financing of terrorism; freeze without delay any funds related to persons involved in acts of terrorism; deny all forms of financial support for terrorist groups; suppress the provision of safe haven, sustenance or support for terrorists; share information with other Governments on any groups planning terrorist acts; cooperate with other Governments in the investigation, detection, arrest, extradition and prosecution of those involved in such acts; and criminalize active and passive assistance for terrorism in domestic law and bring violators to justice. The Council also called on States to become parties, as soon as possible, to the international counter-terrorism instruments. 180. In its resolution 1624 (2005), the Security Council called on Member States to prohibit by law and prevent incitement to commit acts of terrorism and to deny safe haven to anyone with respect to whom there is credible and relevant information giving serious reasons for considering that they have been guilty of such conduct. In the resolution, the Council also called on States to continue international efforts to enhance dialogue and broaden understanding among civilizations. 181. Over the years, the Council has amended both the operational terms of reference and the internal structure of the Executive Directorate to respond to the ever-evolving global terrorist threat. By its resolution 1805 (2008), the Council established five internal thematic working groups and introduced a more flexible approach to the country assessment visits conducted by the Executive Directorate on behalf of the Committee. By the same resolution, the Council also mandated the Executive Directorate to assume the additional role of engaging in capacity-building activities aimed at enhancing institutions and strengthening the rule of law. 182. In its resolution 1963 (2010), the Council reaffirmed the core objectives and tasks of the Executive Directorate and underlined its crucial role in supporting the Committee to ensure the full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The resolution also assigned to the Executive Directorate a number of new tasks, including: (a) addressing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism; (b) focusing increased attention on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005); (c) advising, as appropriate, on the development of comprehensive and integrated national counter-terrorism strategies and the mechanisms to implement them; (d) interacting, as appropriate, with civil society and other relevant non-governmental actors; (e) facilitating the provision of technical assistance aimed at assisting Member States to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005); (f) preparing an updated global survey of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States and a survey of the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005); (g) organizing a special meeting, open to the wider membership, to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of Committee; (h) undertaking new initiatives on the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes and on the victims of terrorism; and (i) taking actions, in accordance with a focused, regional and subregional approach, to prevent terrorism and strengthen the capacity of Member States to deal with terrorism. 183. The Committee and Executive Directorate are also mandated, pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1377 (2001), 1456 (2003) and 1566 (2004) and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to continue to work closely with, and expand cooperation with international, regional and subregional organizations, which serve as force-multipliers in its work. In this regard, the Executive Directorate, acting pursuant to Council resolution 2017 (2011), joined a United Nations assessment mission to the Sahel, conducted in December 2011, aimed at assessing the potential impact on the subregion of the Libya crisis and the resulting proliferation of smuggled weapons, in particular man-portable air defence systems. 184. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted on 20 September 2006 (General Assembly resolution 60/288), also assigned a number of tasks to the Executive Directorate, including (a) assisting relevant regional and subregional organizations to create or strengthen counter-terrorism mechanisms or centres; (b) facilitating the adoption of legislation and administrative measures to combat terrorism; (c) identifying counter-terrorism good practices, together with relevant international organizations; and (d) facilitating technical assistance. 185. By adopting the Committee's report on the work of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (S/2010/616), the Security Council mandated the Executive Directorate to become a core entity within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, contributing in particular to the deliberations and functions of its Working Group on Tackling the Financing of Terrorism; the Working Group on Preventing and Resolving Conflicts; the Working Group on Protecting Human Rights while Countering Terrorism; the Working Group on Countering the Use of the Internet for Terrorist Purposes; the Working Group on Dialogue, Understanding and Countering the Appeal of Terrorism; the Working Group on Border Management relating to Counter-Terrorism; and the Working Group on National and Regional Counter-Terrorism Strategies. The Executive Directorate is Chair of the Working Group on Border Management relating to Counter-Terrorism, co-Chair of the Working Group on National and Regional Counter-Terrorism Strategies and co-Chair of the Working Group on Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism. 186. Country visits are a key element of the Committee's efforts to engage in dialogue with Member States; to monitor and promote the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005); and to facilitate the delivery of technical assistance to States to help them in addressing the challenges encountered in the implementation of counter-terrorism strategies. 187. Expert assessment of Member States' implementation efforts is also central to the work of the Committee and the Executive Directorate. In this regard, the Committee recently approved two new tools developed by the Executive Directorate for assessing the status of Member States' implementation of the two resolutions and for conducting a thorough, consistent, transparent and even-handed analysis of their efforts. The new tools (the overview of implementation assessment and the detailed implementation survey) were introduced to replace the preliminary implementation assessment. 188. Another critical task of the Executive Directorate is to facilitate the delivery of technical assistance to States with a view to enhancing their capacities to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). The Executive Directorate has been particularly active in this area, drawing upon the revised technical assistance strategy approved by the Committee in 2008 and other related Committee guidelines that give priority in this regard to States visited by the Committee and to follow-up requests for assistance. In accordance with the Committee's guidelines, the Executive Directorate pursues regional and thematic approaches to facilitating technical assistance that maximize its comparative advantage as a supporting entity of a Security Council subsidiary body. 189. The Executive Directorate is also required, pursuant to the common strategy approved jointly by the Committee and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), to work with the expert groups of those two committees to enhance and systematize information-sharing, coordination of country visits and participation in workshops, facilitation of technical assistance delivery, and relations with international and regional organizations and agencies. 190. International, regional and subregional organizations are important partners of the Committee and the Executive Directorate in their efforts to monitor and promote the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). The Executive Directorate also works closely with those partner organizations to achieve the objectives of resolution 1963 (2010) and the Global Strategy. The Executive Directorate also continued to work closely with other United Nations entities; agencies; and international, regional and subregional organizations in areas of mutual concern. This work has notably involved cooperation with the following: (a) the Department of Political Affairs, the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism and the African Union, on country visits and on the situation in the Horn of Africa and the Sahel, and the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, to facilitate support for the road map for counter-terrorism in Central Africa; (b) the United Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms, on the promotion of the International Small Arms Control Standards, and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, on the implementation of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol in the context of counter-terrorism; (c) the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism and OSCE, on country assessment visits; (d) ICAO, IMO, INTERPOL, the International Organization for Migration and the World Customs Organization, on the identification and promotion of good practices; (e) the Terrorism Prevention Branch of UNODC, on promoting the ratification and implementation of the international counter-terrorism instruments; (f) the Financial Action Task Force, on raising awareness of the revised standards of the Task Force for the suppression of terrorist financing, and the Task Force-style regional bodies, on activities aimed at enhancing Member States' capacities in the area of anti-money-laundering and the counter-financing of terrorism; (g) the Alliance of Civilizations and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and regional organizations (notably including the Council of Europe, the European Union, the Gulf Cooperation Council, the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation), on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005); (h) the working groups of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, on thematic issues and on the facilitation of capacity-building to pilot States (in particular Burkina Faso and Nigeria); (i) the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, on a series of multi-year thematic projects; (j) the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on information-sharing, country visits and the facilitation of technical assistance delivery; (k) the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, on the implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (including work on its security/counter-terrorism pillar and work with UNSMIL), on weapons trafficking, including man-portable air defence systems; (l) the Global Counterterrorism Forum and its various regional and thematic groups (on the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, South-East Asia, criminal justice and the rule of law, and countering violence and extremism), on the identification of challenges, the facilitation of technical assistance and the promotion of good practices in countering terrorism; (m) academic institutions (including the Center on Global Counterterrorism Cooperation), on protecting non-profit organizations from abuse for the purposes of terrorism financing, and the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism, on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). 191. The Executive Directorate has also worked to strengthen its cooperation with OHCHR, providing information about human rights and technical assistance needs relating to the rule of law and that are identified during country visits. In all its technical assistance referrals, the Executive Directorate works to ensure that relevant human-rights and rule-of-law aspects are integrated directly into assistance delivery. 192. The Executive Directorate, acting on the Committee's behalf, conducted country assessment visits to 10 States, with a view to discussing progress, shortfalls and technical assistance needs or strengths relating to the effective implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions. A new area of focus in this regard was promoting the introduction by States of comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorism strategies that address conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. 193. The Executive Directorate assisted the Committee in organizing a special event on 25 May 2013 on the topic "Effectively countering the threat of terrorism through the use of new communications and information technology to prevent the threat from materializing". The event raised Member States' awareness of the need not only to remain up to date with such technologies and methodologies, but also to develop and utilize sophisticated technologies and methodologies of their own in order to combat terrorism. 194. The Executive Directorate continued to assist the Committee and its subcommittees in the consideration and approval of the updated preliminary implementation assessment (as part of the Committee's "stocktaking" process) and the preliminary implementation assessment not yet approved by the Committee. The Executive Directorate submitted 15 files to the subcommittees, on the basis of information submitted by States and other research conducted by the Directorate, and prepared the updated preliminary implementation assessment and cover letters for those States, with a view to ensuring that each State received the most up-to-date assessment of its implementation status. 195. The Executive Directorate continued to facilitate the delivery of technical assistance to enhance Member States' capacity to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). In this regard, the Directorate made 56 new technical assistance referrals. Donors agreed to follow up on 38 referrals and, in 32 cases, the recipient State subsequently agreed to the specific modalities of assistance delivery proposed by the donor(s) and/or the Directorate. 196. The Executive Directorate continued to participate actively in the activities of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, notably by serving as co-Chair of its recently established Working Group on National and Regional Strategies. The Executive Directorate also worked with other Task Force entities, within the framework of the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism initiative, to assist Nigeria by identifying the challenges encountered by Nigerian law enforcement, immigration, customs and security agencies in using INTERPOL tools and recommending solutions. 197. The Executive Directorate continued to participate in the activities of the Global Counterterrorism Forum and its various regional and thematic groups in identifying and promoting good practices when combating terrorism and countering violent extremism. 198. The Executive Directorate continued to share with OHCHR information about Member States' technical assistance needs in relation to human rights and the rule of law. In all its referrals, the Directorate continued to help to ensure that relevant human rights and rule-of-law aspects were integrated into assistance delivery, in accordance with the relevant provisions of resolution 1963 (2010). 199. Within the framework of the Committee's country visits, the Executive Directorate also continued to engage with States on their efforts to implement the provisions of resolution 1624 (2005) on the prohibition of incitement to terrorism and the promotion of dialogue among civilizations, and to urge States that had not yet reported to the Committee on their implementation of the resolution to do so. Three further States submitted reports on their implementation of the resolution. 200. As part of the interaction between the Committee and the wider membership of the United Nations, the Executive Directorate continued to arrange briefings for Member States on key thematic and regional counter-terrorism issues. Table 49 (a) Improved capacity of Member States to implement Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) :: In 2010, the Committee agreed on a new list of Member States to be visited over the course of the three-year mandate (2011-2013) conferred on the Executive Directorate by resolution 1963 (2010). As at the end of May 2013, the Executive Directorate had conducted assessment missions to 24 of those States, bringing the total number visited since 2005 to 83 (including 8 States that have now been visited twice). In addition, the Executive Directorate has taken advantage of its presence at meetings in many other Member States to discuss their counter-terrorism policies and approaches as well as challenges they face. The Executive Directorate also seizes every opportunity to deepen its dialogue with Member States regarding further ratification of the 18 international counter-terrorism instruments and the adoption of domestic legislation to implement them, as well as to take steps to further implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). For those resolutions, the Executive Directorate focuses on helping Member States or their regional and/or subregional organizations to implement best practices, codes and standards originating with the Directorate or with other international bodies working on counter-terrorism :: The Executive Directorate facilitates technical assistance to Member States when gaps or vulnerabilities in their capability to prevent terrorism are identified. The Directorate contacts appropriate donors or providers who are committed to work directly with a Member State to implement steps to eliminate the vulnerabilities identified. The Directorate subsequently visits these Member States to determine whether the gaps in their capabilities have been adequately addressed and organizes action programmes, if needed, to further assist Member States in closing any existing gaps. The Directorate also engages with those donor/providers that took steps to help a Member State to consider if additional approaches were merited (b) More comprehensive guidance to Member States on the implementation of relevant Security Council and General Assembly counter-terrorism resolutions :: The Executive Directorate continued to focus on the implementation of the outcome document of the Special Meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on the tenth anniversary of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), with a view to developing comprehensive and integrated national strategies on counter-terrorism and to fostering strategies on addressing the conditions conducive to radicalization and recruitment for terrorism. The Executive Directorate conducted a joint event with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force on national and regional strategies (Bogota, 31 January and 1 February) :: The Executive Directorate continued to take a regional or thematic approach to the facilitation of technical assistance in order to maximize its comparative advantage as a Security Council body. The Executive Directorate organized the Sixth Regional Workshop for Police Officers, Prosecutors, and Judges in South Asia on Effectively Countering Terrorism, in Kathmandu in March 2013. The meeting featured the launch of a three-year project to enhance the capacity of judges in South Asia to adjudicate terrorism cases and the introduction of a two-year project on the protection of witnesses, law enforcement personnel and victims of terrorism :: During the first half of 2013, the Executive Directorate worked on the first phase of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force global initiative on preventing terrorist financing through non-profit organizations. The Executive Directorate organized the last in a series of regional workshops in Qatar (January) and a global regional expert meeting in New York (March). The Executive Directorate launched jointly with UNODC a three-year project on building effective central authorities for international judicial cooperation in terrorism cases. The project will consist of three global meetings and nine regional workshops. The project will serve as an important step in assisting Member States in the establishment of an effective system to improve international cooperation in criminal matters and thus assist with the prosecution and adjudication of terrorism cases. The fourth seminar for prosecutors on the policy challenges in the prosecution and prevention of terrorism was held in Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania, in February. A number of spin-off events have emerged from the practitioners' seminars, aiming at addressing specific challenges in a particular region. In 2013, the Executive Directorate developed and launched a series of five regional workshops for law enforcement officers and prosecutors in East Africa. In the context of the initiative on helping States comply with the asset-freezing requirements pertaining to resolution 1373 (2001), the Executive Directorate organized the second regional workshop for East African countries with the participation of Southern African countries, which took place in Dar es Salaam, in June (c) Enhanced knowledge and understanding by Member States and civil society of the activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) :: The Executive Directorate actively publicized aspects of its work through press releases and statements, the preparation of academic articles and op-ed pieces for media outlets, briefings to high-level visitors and speeches at conferences and major national institutions around the world. Documents issued at workshops and declarations of the Committee or statements by the Chair of the Committee and the Executive Director are routinely posted on the website of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The Chair of the Committee also presided over regular briefings to the wider membership of the United Nations on the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Executive Directorate. These briefings regularly included a technical briefing by the Executive Directorate on a specified aspect of its work or on an area of counter-terrorism efforts that would be of broad interest to Member States 201. The mandate of the Executive Directorate will be subject to review before the end of 2013. Should the Security Council decide to renew the mandate at its current strength and structure for a further three years, the Executive Directorate would undertake a number of activities and projects, including: (a) the stocktaking of the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) by Member States using the new assessment tools; (b) the updating of the Global Implementation Survey on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States; (c) the revision of the Committee's technical guide to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001); (d) the updating of the Committee's directory of good practices for the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001); (e) the strengthening of the role of the Executive Directorate in assisting Member States to develop comprehensive and integrated counter-terrorism strategies and their implementing mechanisms within the framework of the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force; (f) the organization of further special meetings of the Committee with international, regional and subregional organizations on counter-terrorism-related issues; (g) the strengthening of the work of the Executive Directorate to promote respect for human rights and the rule of law in countering terrorism; (h) the consideration of ways and means to enhance coordination among relevant counter-terrorism entities; and (i) other additional areas. 202. The objective, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate are set out in table 50 below. Table 50 Objective: To ensure the comprehensive implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), mandated parts of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and other relevant counter-terrorism resolutions (a) (i) Number of additional ratifications by Member States of 1 or more of the 18 international counter-terrorism instruments Estimate 2013: 22 (ii) Number of additional domestic laws required for the implementation of the provisions of the international counter-terrorism instruments elaborated, revised or enacted Estimate 2013: 47 Target 2014: 47 (iii) Number of Member States receiving technical assistance from donors and providers as a result of the determination by the Executive Directorate of vulnerabilities and its facilitation of programmes that result in concrete actions to implement relevant resolutions Estimate 2013: 105 Target 2014: 90 :: Detailed implementation surveys completed for review and approval by the Counter-Terrorism Committee (80) :: Assessment mission reports approved by the Committee following comprehensive, focused or follow-up visits to Member States (9) :: Survey on the status of implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) for the Committee and the Security Council (1) :: Survey on the status of implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) for the Committee and the Security Council (1) :: Updated technical guide to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) for Member States (b) (i) Number of Member States hosting assessment missions led by the Executive Directorate with experts from the Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) and pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), UNODC, the secretariat of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and other counter-terrorism bodies or organizations (ii) Number of Member States participating in workshops hosted by the Executive Directorate with United Nations entities and international, regional or subregional organizations to develop national or regional counter-terrorism capacities Estimate 2013: 95 Target 2014: 95 (iii) Number of donors/providers or counter-terrorism organizations facilitating the provision of technical assistance to Member States or their regional organizations to help them to implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Estimate 2013: 72 Target 2014: 72 :: Briefings to the Committee, the Security Council and the Member States on overall findings with respect to the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) and other relevant resolutions (15) :: Outcome document from the special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (1) :: Reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee on areas of cooperation and coordination with international, regional and subregional organizations (15) :: Regional and national workshops hosted or co-hosted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate with other entities and donors that promote integrated approaches to the implementation of all relevant United Nations counter-terrorism resolutions (12) (c) Better engagement by Member States and the civil society in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Executive Directorate to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) (c) (i) Number of visits on the Committee's website Estimate 2013: 80,000 Target 2014: 85,000 (ii) Number of civil society entities, including multinational corporations, private donor organizations, non-governmental organizations, academic groups and other entities working with the Executive Directorate :: Regular updates and feature enhancements of the Committee's website in the six official languages of the United Nations (20) :: Briefings to regional organizations, non-governmental organizations, academic groups and other entities to explain the counter-terrorism activities of the Committee and the Executive Directorate (60) :: Counter-Terrorism Committee and Executive Directorate media conferences, press statements and press releases (25) :: Press kits distributed to Member States, the media, civil society and non-governmental organizations promoting the work of the Committee and the Executive Directorate (3,500) 203. The objective would be achieved on the assumption that Member States implement the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and provided that the collection and analysis of information for the Counter-Terrorism Committee are not hindered. Table 51 Table 52 204. The anticipated overrun for 2012-2013 is attributable to a lower vacancy rate than budgeted in 2013. 205. Should the Security Council extend the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate beyond 31 December 2013, the estimated requirements for 2014 would amount to $10,718,200 (net of staff assessment). That amount would provide for salaries and common staff costs for the continuation of 41 positions (1 Assistant Secretary-General, 1 D-2, 2 D-1, 9 P-5, 12 P-4, 4 P-3, 4 P-2, 1 General Service (Principal level) and 7 General Service (Other level)) ($6,694,700); official travel of staff of the Executive Directorate ($831,600); the rental of office space and stationeries ($1,017,000); a one-time provision for relocation ($1,983,400); communications, including public information services ($88,900); information technology ($91,200); and other supplies and services ($11,400). 206. In 2014, there will be no change to the proposed number of positions for the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate. 207. The variance between the 2014 requirements and the 2013 approved budget is the net effect of: (a) a decrease in travel of staff as explained in table 53 below; and (b) the inclusion of a one-time provision for the relocation from the Chrysler Building to a new office space. 208. Resource changes of $220,200 and related impact are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 53 below. Table 53 Travel of staff Reduction in travel of staff Total reduction: $220,200 The reduction in travel would entail the postponement of one country visit aimed at monitoring and assessing the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) In order to minimize the impact on capacity-building and technical assistance activities related to the postponement of two workshops organized by the Executive Directorate, the matrix of workshops and seminars would be adjusted in a way to ensure that the level of participation by Member States remains unchanged Cancellation of participation by staff of the Executive Directorate in 11 meetings and conferences with partner organizations would affect the capacity of the Directorate to (a) Second output: assessment mission reports approved by the Committee following comprehensive, focused or follow-up visits to Member States (from 10 in 2013 to 9 in 2014) (b) (i) Number of Member States hosting assessment missions led by the Executive Directorate contribute to international counter-terrorism activities, the development and promotion of counter-terrorism standards, norms and recommended practices 209. In 2013, extrabudgetary funds in the amount of $850,000 have been used to organize capacity-building workshops and other events on a variety of counter-terrorism themes in various regions of the world with a view to enhancing the capacity of Member States to implement Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Under the guidance of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Executive Directorate is organizing eight such workshops, focusing on the following areas: effectively countering terrorism (for police, prosecutors and judges in South Asia); international joint investigations (in South-East Asia); the implementation of the freezing mechanism required by resolution 1373 (2001) (for West and East Africa); controlling the cross-border movement of cash and bearer negotiable instruments; the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) (for States of the Maghreb and North Africa); border-control cooperation (for States of the Sahel and the Maghreb); and counter-terrorism capacity-building within the framework of the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism initiative. 210. In 2014, the Executive Directorate will continue to use extrabudgetary funds in an estimated amount of $850,000 to organize several new and follow-up workshops in various regions of the world in accordance with the work programme as approved by the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The Executive Directorate will also organize follow-up workshops and relevant capacity-building initiatives for national law enforcement officers, prosecutors and judges on bringing terrorists to justice, asset-freezing, addressing the illicit movement of cash and bearer negotiable instruments across borders, and the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). The Executive Directorate will also organize new workshops on border management and control, including an initiative to develop a framework for a coordinated border-management approach by Member States aimed at responding to Member States' respective needs and helping their respective central authorities comply with the requirements of the relevant Security Council resolutions. 