%%%OBSERVER STATUS|

Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 173 Observer status for the Global Green Growth Institute in the General Assembly Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Tofig Musayev (Azerbaijan) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled "Observer status for the Global Green Growth Institute in the General Assembly" was included in the agenda of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly at the request of Cambodia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ethiopia, Guyana, Mongolia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam. 2. At its 2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee. 3. The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 11th and 22nd meetings, on 16 October and 1 November 2013. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.6/68/SR.11 and 22). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it a letter dated 16 August 2013 from the representatives of Cambodia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ethiopia, Guyana, Mongolia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (A/68/191). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/68/L.8 5. At the 11th meeting, on 16 October, the representative of the Republic of Korea, on behalf of Australia, Cambodia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ethiopia, Guyana, Indonesia, Ireland, Kiribati, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Samoa, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Viet Nam, introduced a draft resolution entitled "Observer status for the Global Green Growth Institute in the General Assembly" (A/C.6/68/L.8). Subsequently, Cameroon, Croatia, France, Kazakhstan, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Micronesia (Federated States of) and Uzbekistan joined in sponsoring the draft resolution. 6. At its 22nd meeting, on 1 November, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/68/L.8 without a vote (see para. 7). III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee 7. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Observer status for the Global Green Growth Institute in the General Assembly The General Assembly, Wishing to promote cooperation between the United Nations and the Global Green Growth Institute, 1. Decides to invite the Global Green Growth Institute to participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer; 2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the action necessary to implement the present resolution. 