%%%FOREIGN RELATIONS|PACIFIC OCEAN|EASEMENT|

Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 8 General debate * Reissued for technical reasons on 30 October 2013. Letter dated 26 September 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Chile to the United Nations addressed to the President of the General Assembly I have the honour to transmit herewith a written statement from the delegation of Chile (see annex) in exercise of the right of reply to the statement made on 25 September 2013 by the President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Evo Morales, at the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly. I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly. (Signed) Octavio Errázuriz Ambassador Permanent Representative Reply of Chile to the statement made on 25 September 2013 by the President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Evo Morales, at the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly In his statement at the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly, the President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia referred to bilateral relations with Chile and his aspiration to gain sovereign access to the Pacific Ocean through Chilean territory. Chile categorically rejects the selective, misrepresented or spurious quotations which the President of Bolivia sought to attribute to the President of the Republic of Chile. It deplores such forms of manipulation. There are no pending territorial issues between Chile and Bolivia; these were definitively resolved by the 1904 Treaty of Peace and Friendship between the two countries. The Treaty was freely negotiated over 20 years after the end of the conflict. It was approved by the Chilean and Bolivian parliaments, was ratified by both Governments and is fully in force. On 24 April 2013, the Government of the Plurinational State of Bolivia brought the matter to the attention of the International Court of Justice, invoking the alleged obligation of Chile to negotiate with Bolivia in order to conclude an agreement granting it fully sovereign access to the Pacific Ocean, thereby relinquishing part of our national territory. The Government of Chile reiterates its deep regret that Bolivia initiated that action, which is without basis in fact, in law or in any agreement between the two countries, and which belies the dialogue that they have developed in the context of a wide-ranging agenda of cooperation and collaboration. The Government of Chile will continue to act on the basis of the firm convictions and legal values that underpin its foreign policy. The latter is grounded in unconditional respect for boundary treaties and its territorial integrity as guaranteed by the 1904 Treaty of Peace and Friendship. Our country has fully complied with the Treaty and will continue to do so. The Government of Chile considers it pointless to refer to a matter that has been raised before the main legal body of the United Nations, thereby distracting the General Assembly from its genuine areas of competence under the Charter of the United Nations. Lastly, as the action taken by Bolivia could affect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Chile, it is a strictly bilateral matter, and neither the United Nations General Assembly nor any other international forum has the competence to consider or take a position on matters regarding the territorial integrity of Member States. 