%%%SANCTIONS|TRADE BOYCOTTS|CUBA|FOREIGN RELATIONS|UNITED STATES|

Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 40 Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba Letter dated 23 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith the Final Declaration of the tenth Cuban Civil Society Forum against the Embargo, adopted in Havana on 18 October 2013 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have this declaration circulated as a document of the General Assembly under agenda item 40. (Signed) Rodolfo Reyes Rodríguez Final Declaration of the tenth Forum against the Embargo, adopted by Cuban civil society organizations and regional and international organizations based in Cuba The tenth Forum against the Embargo, consisting of Cuban civil society organizations and regional and international organizations based in Cuba, reiterates its denunciation and condemnation of the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the Government of the United States of America against Cuba for more than 50 years. In accordance with the positions adopted at previous Forums, we, the participating organizations, hereby state that: 1. We demand that the Government of the United States of America and its President, Mr. Barack Obama, put an end to this policy against Cuba, as it is illegal, unjust and genocidal and represents one of the main obstacles to the economic and social development of our country; 2. The embargo constitutes a gross, massive and systematic violation of the human rights of the Cuban people. It continues to be a criminal, inhuman, absurd, illegal and morally indefensible policy, with a significant humanitarian impact, which has not and will not accomplish the aim of breaking the patriotic will of the Cuban people to preserve their sovereignty, independence and right to self-determination. The embargo generates deprivation and suffering for the population, limits and delays the country's development and violates our fundamental rights, as well as the human rights of the people of the United States; 3. The embargo against Cuba is the longest, cruellest and most unjust embargo in human history. It is an illegal act that violates key norms and principles of international law and is tantamount to the crime of genocide, as provided in the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 9 December 1948. It ignores the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and other international treaties, which condemn these acts as being contrary to peace, peaceful coexistence and cooperation between nations; 4. The embargo policy is not a bilateral issue; it is extraterritorial in nature and violates international law and international trade regulations, despite the categorical international rejection of that policy. It is noteworthy that the embargo has been tightened over the past year, as shown by the strengthening of sanctions and persecution against third-country citizens, institutions and companies that have established or intend to establish economic, commercial, financial or scientific and technical relations with Cuba; 5. The intensified disruption of Cuba's international financial transactions, including cooperation funding from multilateral agencies, is an outrage that undermines international cooperation. The Office of Foreign Assets Control of the United States Department of the Treasury has continued to step up these actions by increasing the imposition of fines and other sanctions on foreign companies and banking institutions for carrying out commercial or financial operations that are related in some way to Cuba; 6. We unanimously support the submission by our country of a draft resolution entitled "Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of America against Cuba", which will be considered by the United Nations General Assembly on 29 October 2013; 7. The fact that the overwhelming majority of States Members of the United Nations have voted in favour of the Cuban resolution, which has been submitted annually to the General Assembly for more than 20 straight years and calls on the United States Government to lift the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed against our country, is a convincing testament to the isolation of the United States Government's embargo policy against Cuba. We, the participants in the tenth Forum against the Embargo, acknowledge and appreciate the extensive and effective solidarity shown towards our country by thousands of civil society organizations across the world, especially those that represent the noblest impulses of the United States people, and we highly value their support and solidarity in the struggle to end the unjust and immoral policy implemented by the United States Government against our people. We, as representatives of civil society, reaffirm our determination to strengthen the work of the revolution and to continue to build an independent, united and just homeland that preserves the gains achieved thus far. Havana, 18 October 2013 