%%%BUDGET PERFORMANCE|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TRUCE SUPERVISION|MIDDLE EAST|

Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 159 (a) Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East: United Nations Disengagement Observer Force Budget performance of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013 Report of the Secretary-General Contents Page Introduction Mandate performance Overall Budget implementation Mission support initiatives Regional mission cooperation Results-based-budgeting frameworks Resource performance Financial resources Summary information on redeployments across groups Monthly expenditure pattern Other income and adjustments Expenditure for contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment Value of non-budgeted contributions Analysis of variances Actions to be taken by the General Assembly Summary of follow-up action taken to implement the requests and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions endorsed by the General Assembly Summary The total expenditure for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013 has been linked to the Force's objective through a number of results-based-budgeting frameworks grouped by components, namely, operations and support. In 2012/13, the security situation in the Syrian Arab Republic further deteriorated. The evolving situation on the ground significantly affected the ability of the Force to implement its mandate of maintaining the ceasefire and ensuring that it is observed, as prescribed in the Protocol to the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces and in accordance with Security Council resolution 350 (1974). The total expenditure of the Force for 2012/13 amounted to $53.5 million, representing a resource utilization rate of almost 100 per cent, compared with $48.2 million in expenditure and a related utilization rate of 95.5 per cent in 2011/12. The unencumbered balance of $4,500 resulted mainly from: (a) the rationalization of requirements for rations and the higher actual vacancy rate of 5.5 per cent for military contingent personnel, compared with the assumption of full deployment in the budget; (b) reduced requirements for danger pay for international staff resulting from the relocation of staff from the Bravo side to the Alpha side; and (c) the encumbrance of two international temporary positions for two of the six months for which the positions were authorized. The unspent balances were offset in part by additional requirements for: (a) the acquisition of additional armoured personnel carriers to transport personnel through hazardous zones in the mission area; (b) the acquisition of spare parts to maintain the fleet of vehicles; (c) the acquisition of a mobile generator workshop; and (d) the deployment of staff on temporary duty assignment in view of the security situation. Performance of financial resources (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013. Category Apportionment Expenditure Variance Amount Percentage Military and police personnel Civilian personnel Operational costs Gross requirements a Staff assessment income Net requirements Voluntary contributions in kind (budgeted) Total requirements a Denotes zero or less than 0.1 per cent. Human resources incumbency performance Approveda Actual (average) Vacancy rate (percentage)b Military contingents International staff National staff Temporary positionsc a Represents the highest level of authorized strength. b Based on monthly incumbency and monthly strength. c Funded under general temporary assistance for the period from January to June 2013. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly are set out in section V of the present report. 1. The budget for the maintenance of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013 was set out in the report of the Secretary-General of 2 February 2012 (A/66/683 and Corr.1) and amounted to $46,238,700 gross ($45,059,900 net). It provided for 1,047 military contingent personnel, 46 international staff and 110 national staff. 2. In its related report of 12 April 2012 (A/66/718/Add.10), the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions recommended that the General Assembly should appropriate the amount of $45,499,800 gross for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013. 3. The General Assembly, by its resolution 66/276, appropriated the amount of $45,992,000 gross ($44,929,300 net) for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013. 4. Subsequently, in view of the impact of the prevailing security situation in the Syrian Arab Republic on the operations of the Force, the Secretary-General, in his note of 3 May 2013 (A/67/857), set out the projected revised requirements for the maintenance of UNDOF, which amounted to $53,965,200 gross ($52,716,400 net) for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013, representing an increase of $7,973,200 gross ($7,787,100 net) over the appropriation of $45,992,000 gross ($44,929,300 net) approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 66/276. 5. In its related report of 23 May 2013 (A/67/874), the Advisory Committee recommended that the General Assembly should appropriate and assess the amount of $7,503,200 gross for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013, in addition to the amount of $45,992,000 already appropriated and assessed under the provisions of Assembly resolution 66/276. 6. The General Assembly, by its resolution 67/278, appropriated the additional amount of $7,503,200 gross, resulting in a total appropriation of $53,495,200 gross ($52,252,100 net) for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013. The total amount has been assessed on Member States. II. Mandate performance A. Overall 7. The mandate of the Force, as established by the Security Council in its resolution 350 (1974), is to maintain an area of separation located in the Syrian Arab Republic and to supervise the implementation of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces. The mandate has been extended in subsequent resolutions of the Council, including, for the reporting period, resolutions 2052 (2012) and 2084 (2012). 8. The Force is mandated to help the Security Council to achieve an overall objective, namely, to maintain international peace and security. 9. Within this overall objective, the Force has contributed to a number of accomplishments by delivering related key outputs, shown in the frameworks below, which are grouped under the operations and support components. 10. The present report assesses actual performance against the planned results-based-budgeting frameworks set out in the 2012/13 budget. In particular, the performance report compares the actual indicators of achievement, that is, the extent to which actual progress has been made during the period against the expected accomplishments, with the planned indicators of achievement, and the actual completed outputs with the planned outputs. B. Budget implementation 11. The Force continued to fulfil its mandate through the maintenance of the ceasefire in the area of separation by manning static positions to ensure that the military forces of both parties were excluded therefrom, albeit in an increasingly volatile environment attributable to the continuing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. The situation continued to significantly affect the UNDOF area of operations. 12. A number of incidents occurred in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side, placing the safety and security of UNDOF personnel and assets at substantial risk. Consequently, the Force temporarily adjusted its operations with a view to ensuring its ability to implement its mandate safely and securely. As such, UNDOF continued to shift its focus from mobile to static activities in an effort to reduce the exposure of Force personnel to risk, while focusing on enhancing situational analysis, reporting and liaison with the parties to prevent an escalation of the situation. 13. In March 2013, a contributing country withdrew its military contingent personnel from UNDOF. Subsequently, another contributing country began the withdrawal of its contingent from UNDOF in June 2013, while a new contributing country deployed its contingent of 182 military personnel in the same month. In addition, the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) continued to assist the Force in carrying out its tasks by deploying some 80 military observers to UNDOF. 14. Most of the recommendations arising from the military capability study conducted in January 2013 have been implemented. A military staff officer position of Deputy Force Commander was established in UNDOF. The Force continued to adopt and update mitigation measures in response to new threats in its operational environment. In addition, the Force maintained efforts to ensure its necessary strategic reserve and its self-sustainment capability. It provided troops to guard the observation posts of Observer Group Golan on the Bravo side and conducted regular rehearsals of evacuation operations. Moreover, the Force continuously reviewed its contingency plans, taking into account the evolving situation in the area of operations. Furthermore, it continued to implement the rehabilitation programme to refurbish and upgrade its equipment and infrastructure, in an effort to maintain its operational and security capacity. A total of 67 additional armoured vehicles were transferred from other missions and 12 armoured buses were externally acquired with a view to enhancing protection. Advanced night-vision equipment with long range and remote operation capability was acquired in order to improve the Force's capability to monitor any violations of the disengagement agreement without exposing personnel to crossfire. All UNDOF personnel were equipped with chemical protection kits and trained on their use. Information and communication systems were improved through the enhancement of the VHF radio networks and videoconferencing systems, in addition to the acquisition of analysis software to support the activities of the Force's military information cell in providing high-level security situation analysis of the region and area of responsibility to the Force Commander. With a view to providing safe and secure troop rotations and as a result of the closure of the airport in Damascus, UNDOF was required to use Tel Aviv and Beirut as alternative ports of entry and departure for Force personnel. 15. Continued efforts were made to enhance the Force's capacity to undertake security and threat analysis and assessments in connection with the security situation. Since March 2013, the Security Office of UNDOF has been strengthened by two additional security officers temporarily assigned to the Force. A number of UNDOF national staff have had to work from home because they were unable to report for work regularly owing to the security situation, while some national administrative and security staff have been accommodated in converted offices in the representational office in Damascus. In addition, civilian personnel were relocated from Damascus to Camp Faouar, resulting in the construction of additional office and residential accommodation and the upgrading and enhancement of existing security infrastructure in the Camp Faouar compound. Furthermore, the offices of some international staff were relocated from Camp Faouar to Camp Ziouani on the Alpha side in accordance with the business continuity plan. 16. In view of the security situation, additional resources were required in connection with the introduction of danger pay as from 1 June 2012, the reclassification of the duty station from category C to category E as from 1 January 2013, the introduction of special measures for national staff for the period from May to July 2012 and the denomination of national salary scales in United States dollars as from 1 August 2012, based on the United Nations operational exchange rate of 49.30 Syrian pounds per United States dollar. 17. The actual average vacancy rate for national staff in 2012/13 was 8.2 per cent, compared with the budgeted rate of 6 per cent, and was mainly attributable to the fact that national staff took special leave without pay owing to the security situation. Their functions were performed by temporary staff recruited on the Alpha side and by staff on temporary duty assignment from other missions. The Force was able to achieve a vacancy rate for international staff of 8.7 per cent, lower than the budgeted rate of 10 per cent, through an extensive recruitment outreach programme. 18. The prevailing security situation significantly affected the implementation of the budget, in particular the Force's execution of planned construction, alteration and renovation projects in all positions, given that the sites and locations were no longer safe to access and vendors were not available in the market to carry out the projects. The Force also had to adopt additional measures to enhance the security and safety of personnel, which were not taken into account at the time of the preparation of the initial budget. C. Mission support initiatives 19. The support component provided effective support to the Force by reprioritizing its resources to meet challenges arising from the security situation, most significantly deploying additional security and support personnel, software, additional armoured vehicles and night vision and chemical protection equipment. 20. The Force successfully implemented the new global systems contract for rations and water, which eliminated its use of eight local contracts and resulted in a more streamlined rations management process. 21. In addition, the establishment of Camp Ziouani as an alternate Force headquarters from which international staff could work on a daily basis resulted in reduced requirements for danger pay, given that Camp Ziouani is in a safe location and not subject to the entitlement to danger pay. 22. The support component continued its efforts to reduce generator fuel costs through the acquisition of new generators with hybrid power (using a photovoltaic system combining solar energy and diesel fuel) and synchronizing capability to automatically distribute the power load between various generators in order to reduce fuel consumption. In addition, the support component continued to connect to the local electrical grid, which reduced reliance on generators. 23. UNDOF also decommissioned the satellite earth stations to eliminate requirements for satellite transponder charges. In addition, it reduced its fleet of light passenger vehicles from 344 to 260. D. Regional mission cooperation 24. The Force carried out significant inter-mission cooperation at various levels, most notably providing support to the start-up and liquidation of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic and to the deployment of the Office of the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria in Damascus. UNDOF provided gateway connectivity for voice, video and data services for the Office, with connectivity to the Organization-wide area network, enabling enhanced exchange of information and coordination between the Force and the Office. 25. The delivery of information technology and communications services continued to be based on regional management and governance structures. UNDOF, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and UNTSO continued to focus on removing disparity in services, eliminating duplication of effort and creating economies of scale. 26. UNDOF participated in various coordination meetings conducted among the regional United Nations entities (the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic and the World Food Programme) in the light of the security situation. The Force also continued to facilitate the crossing of the area of separation by civilians, supervised by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), for humanitarian purposes. The Force collaborated with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to undertake security enhancements to the shared office premises of the Agency and the Force in Damascus on a cost-sharing arrangement. E. Results-based-budgeting frameworks Component 1: operations 27. The Force continued to maintain the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic and to supervise the area of separation. To do so, it reconfigured its operations with a view to ensuring its continued ability to implement its mandate safely and securely. Its mobile and night patrols on the Bravo side decreased because that side of the area of limitation was declared as beyond the limits prescribed by the Force for security reasons. The Force experienced numerous restrictions of movement during patrols, especially on the Bravo side. There were three incidents of abductions of peacekeepers involving armed members of the opposition. In addition, the Force temporarily vacated 2 of 21 positions and 2 of 10 outposts owing to intense fighting between the Syrian national armed forces and armed members of the opposition. Those challenges notwithstanding, the Force continued to monitor the ceasefire by enhancing its static observation, reporting and situational analysis and upgrading its equipment to enhance protection in carrying out mobile patrols and observation tasks. In addition, the Force enhanced its liaison with the parties to the disengagement agreement by continuously maintaining a constructive channel of communication and mediation between both parties in order to manage the conflict situation. The Force continued to conduct civil affairs activities on the Bravo side, which comprised meetings with local and security authorities and engagement with local communities in the area of separation to explain the Force's mandate and activities as part of efforts to ensure the safety and security of Force personnel when delivering the mandate. The Force also continued to support ICRC. It continued to provide medical treatment, including emergency medical treatment, to civilians on a strictly humanitarian basis. It also continued to carry out operational mine clearance in the area of separation to ensure the safety of its personnel during patrols and that of local inhabitants. Expected accomplishment 1.1: The parties act in accordance with and comply with the disengagement agreement Planned indicators of achievement Actual indicators of achievement Maintenance of the separation of forces and areas of limitation 1,400 violations in the UNDOF area of responsibility protested to the relevant parties Planned outputs Completed (number or yes/no) Remarks Weekly high-level meetings with Syrian authorities and with local Syrian officials, as needed, to address issues related to the implementation of the UNDOF mandate Meetings The lower output resulted from unforeseen difficulties in scheduling the meetings owing to the security situation Weekly high-level meetings with Israeli authorities to address issues related to implementation of the UNDOF mandate and to improve cooperation Biweekly liaison meetings with the Israel Defense Forces liaison officers Regular liaison with civilian authorities and engagement with local communities in the area of separation through the relevant Syrian authorities to improve the understanding of the mandate, role and activities of UNDOF Yes Regular meetings, liaison and engagement activities conducted, except when security considerations did not allow Weekly meetings with the relevant civilian and security authorities to coordinate civil affairs and local liaison activities 51,100 special task person/mobile patrol days comprising 20,440 special task person-days (28 troops x 2 platoons x 365 days) conducted by Force Headquarters Company and 30,660 mobile patrol days (3 troops x 28 patrols x 365 days) on armoured personnel carriers, performing mobile operations, patrols, temporary checkpoints and security tasks, such as convoy security, and the provision of support to other United Nations agencies Special task person/mobile patrol days comprising 38,318 special task person-days and 1,649 mobile patrol days The lower output resulted from the repatriation of two contingent units from the Force 28,203 patrols, consisting of 24,148 day and 4,055 night patrols Patrols, consisting of 18,273 day and 1,772 night patrols The lower output resulted from the temporary suspension of mobile patrols in the area of operations owing to the deteriorating security situation and the withdrawal of 2 contingent units 21,900 troop-manned observation outpost and position person-days (2 troops x 30 observation outposts and positions x 365 days) Troop-manned observation outposts and position person-days The higher output resulted from reinforcements of positions and observation outposts during situations in which Observer Group Golan personnel were threatened 10,950 ready (rapid) reaction patrol person-days (2 troops x 15 patrol teams x 365 days) Ready (rapid) reaction patrol person-days The lower output resulted from the temporary suspension of patrols because troops were held on standby to react to security incidents or were redeployed to protect United Nations personnel and assets, in addition to the operational requirement to reinforce observation posts 32,850 ready (rapid) reaction group person-days (10 troops x 9 groups x 365 days) Ready (rapid) reaction group person-days 730 special fact-finding team person-days (2 troops x 1 team x 365 days) Special fact-finding team person-days Biweekly inspections of the areas of limitation Inspections, comprising 26 on the Alpha side and 19 on the Bravo side The lower output resulted from the evolving security situation that led to restrictions on the movement of inspection teams Protests of all violations of the disengagement agreement Protests 2 reports of the Secretary-General to the Security Council Reports Immediate communications with the parties during crisis situations Through teleconferences and meetings in which each party demonstrated a high degree of cooperation Provision of 50 periodic escorts for the secure passage of persons across the area of separation for humanitarian purposes, supervised by ICRC Escorts The lower output was attributable to the strict control on crossings imposed by authorities on the Alpha side Expected accomplishment 1.2: Reduced threat of mines in the area of separation No persons killed or injured by mines and unexploded ordnance (2010/11: no casualties; 2011/12: 5 casualties; 2012/13: no casualties) Achieved; no persons killed or injured by mines and unexploded ordnance Clearance of mines and unexploded ordnance in the area of separation and continuous checking and clearance of patrol paths, as required for operational safety 229 anti-tank mines, 128 anti-personnel mines and 1 item of unexploded ordnance Support to mine awareness action in Quneitra Governorate, led by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent in coordination with ICRC, by briefing local residents, community leaders, local authorities and schoolchildren on mine threats in the area of separation and removing and destroying mines identified by civilians No The non-completion of the output resulted from the temporary suspension of the mine awareness programme owing to the increasingly volatile security situation in the area of responsibility Expected accomplishment 1.3: Increased awareness of the UNDOF mandate by the civilian population No incidents of inadvertent crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians in the area of separation (2010/11: 2 incidents; 2011/12: 0 incidents; 2012/13: 0 incidents) Achieved Monthly meetings with civilian and security authorities in the area of separation on the implementation of the UNDOF mandate and on the coordination of activities on the Alpha line, including incident prevention In addition to the planned meetings, ad hoc meetings were held to deal with specific security incidents Periodic liaison with the relevant local authorities on civilian developments in the area of separation Through meetings with local Syrian authorities on humanitarian issues and the provision of medical assistance to local civilians who had temporarily moved from their homes to around UNDOF positions Regular meetings with local residents in the area of separation to increase awareness of the UNDOF mandate and to prevent the inadvertent crossing of the ceasefire line Meetings with the mayors of all the villages in the area of separation Component 2: support 28. The Force's support component continued to provide logistical, administrative and security services to the average strength of 989 military contingent personnel, 43 international staff, including 1 temporary staff member, and 101 national staff. The Force was able to provide efficient support to respond to the changes in operational requirements owing to the security situation in the Syrian Arab Republic; continued to implement a conduct and discipline programme for military and civilian personnel; continued the improvement, maintenance and repair of its facilities and equipment to comply with United Nations security standards; maintained mission support functions in three locations (Camp Faouar, Camp Ziouani and Damascus) to ensure business continuity and mitigate safety risks from the daily commute of personnel; and provided additional maps to stakeholders in order to support policy decisions, situational awareness and operational purposes. The Force also continued to strengthen its capacity in the provision of security services, risk management, training and investigation of security incidents. Expected accomplishment 2.1: Efficient and effective logistical, administrative and security support to the Force Reduction in overall fuel consumption by 5 per cent (2010/11: 6 per cent; 2011/12: 3 per cent; 2012/13: 5 per cent) Overall consumption decreased by 18.5 per cent owing to: (a) lower generator fuel consumption resulting from the connection to the national power grid; (b) the withdrawal of the Force from 2 positions and 2 outposts; and (c) fewer mobile patrols conducted by contingents in the light of the security situation in the mission area Increase in vehicle utilization (km per vehicle per year) through a reduction in the vehicle fleet (2010/11: 0 per cent; 2011/12: 1 per cent; 2012/13: 1 per cent) No increase in vehicle utilization owing to fewer mobile patrols and personnel movements resulting from the prevailing security situation Reduction in non-expendable property inventory (2010/11: 0 per cent; 2011/12: 1 per cent; 2012/13: 1 per cent) Achieved; the non-expendable property inventory was reduced by 1.2 per cent Completed number or yes/no) Service improvements Reduced reliance on generators by connecting six military positions to the local electric power grids, resulting in a reduction in the number of generators from 69 to 55 Military positions; 4 of 6 planned positions were connected to the local power grid because the Syrian electricity company was not, in the light of the prevailing security situation, able to implement the required projects to connect additional positions to the local power grid. The reduction in the number of generators from 69 to 63 resulted from the enhancement of the lighting systems in UNDOF premises, again as a result of the security situation Reduced vehicle fleet and increased vehicle utilization While the vehicle fleet was increased by 81 vehicles (67 armoured vehicles, 12 armoured buses and 2 over-snow vehicles) in order to enhance the safety and security of personnel movements, the number of light passenger vehicles decreased by 84 vehicles from 344 to 260, resulting in a net decrease of 3 vehicles in the total fleet Reduced inventory through the disposal of obsolete equipment 184 items were written off Military, police and civilian personnel Emplacement, rotation and repatriation of an average of 1,047 military contingent personnel Military contingent personnel (average strength) Verification, monitoring and inspection of contingent-owned equipment in respect of an average of 1,047 military contingent personnel For a total of 29 verification reports Supply and storage of rations at 2 camps and 22 positions for an average of 1,006 military contingent personnel (excluding staff officers) Provision of rations and water to all military personnel in a more streamlined process through the implementation of a new systems contract for rations Administration of 46 international and 110 national staff International staff, including 1 temporary staff member (average strength) National staff (average strength) Implementation of a conduct and discipline programme for all military and civilian personnel, including training, prevention, monitoring and recommendations for remedial action where misconduct has occurred Through 75 training sessions for a total of 2,273 personnel (2,250 military and 23 civilian) Facilities and infrastructure Maintenance and repair of facilities at Camp Faouar, Camp Ziouani and the representational office in Damascus, as well as at military police detachment "C", 22 positions and 8 outposts in the area of separation A total of 952 service requests completed Maintenance of 14 water wells and filtration systems Water wells and filtration systems Operation and maintenance of 55 generators in 29 locations Generators in 27 locations The higher output resulted from the requirement for additional units for the enhancement of the lighting systems in UNDOF premises owing to the security situation Repair and maintenance of 10 km of roads Km of patrol tracks The higher output resulted from additional roads that required repairs and the availability of equipment and materials in the local market near the areas or positions to support the activity Provision of approximately 2,500 geographic information system operational and thematic maps to support policy decisions and situational awareness and for operational purposes Maps The higher output resulted from increased operational requirements owing to the security situation in the mission area Ground transportation Operation and maintenance of 370 vehicles, including 25 United Nations-owned armoured personnel carriers Vehicles The lower output resulted from the write-off of old/damaged vehicles, the transfer of vehicles to other missions and the reduction in the light passenger fleet, which was offset in part by the acquisition and transfer of armoured vehicles owing to the security situation Communications Support and maintenance of 9 private automatic branch exchanges, 1,100 telephone extensions, 2 satellite earth stations, 565 two-way radios, 380 handy-talkies, 68 network routers, 22 repeater stations and 33 microwave links Private automatic branch exchanges Telephone extensions Satellite earth stations Two-way radios Handy-talkies Network routers Repeater stations Microwave links Information technology Support and maintenance of a wide-area network, 30 servers, 430 desktop computers, 65 laptop computers, 102 printers and 38 digital senders in 26 locations Servers Desktop computers Laptop computers Printers Digital senders Locations Support and maintenance of 495 e-mail accounts E-mail accounts Medical Operation and maintenance of two level I medical centres for personnel of UNDOF and UNTSO and the local civilian population in emergency cases Level I medical centres Operation and maintenance of voluntary confidential HIV counselling and testing facilities for all personnel Voluntary counselling and testing conducted upon request HIV sensitization programme for all mission personnel, including peer education Through inclusion in the induction training programme for new military and civilian personnel Security Provision of security services, including threat assessment and risk management for Camp Faouar, Camp Ziouani and the representational office in Damascus, as well as military police detachment "C", in the area of separation and 22 positions Through the dissemination of daily security situation updates and threat assessment reports; conduct of weekly security briefings to UNDOF key staff; meetings of the security cell in Damascus with other country team members to discuss security issues; weekly security management team meetings; provision of induction security briefings to mission personnel; security management of convoy movements and escorts; database and tracking system of mission personnel; recommendations for security enhancements to the Force's infrastructure; safe and secure approaches in field environments training; and security contingency and relocation plan Investigation of security incidents and provision of advice to UNDOF personnel and personnel of 10 United Nations agencies 176 incidents investigated (traffic accidents, loss of property, theft, death claims, missing person, wounded person, breach of regulations) A. Financial resources (Thousands of United States dollars. Budget year is from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013.) Military observers United Nations police Formed police units Subtotal United Nations Volunteers General temporary assistance Government-provided personnel Civilian electoral observers Consultants Official travel Air transportation Naval transportation Special equipment Other supplies, services and equipment Quick-impact projects B. Summary information on redeployments across groups (Thousands of United States dollars) Group Appropriation Original distribution Additional appropriation Redeployment Revised distribution I. Military and police personnel II. Civilian personnel III. Operational costs Total Percentage of redeployment to total appropriation 29. Funds were redeployed to meet additional requirements for: (a) the acquisition of armoured vehicles to transport personnel through hazardous zones in the mission area and of over-snow vehicles to support troop movements in mountainous areas; (b) the acquisition of spare parts to maintain the fleet of armoured vehicles; (c) the acquisition of more energy-efficient generators and related spare parts to improve the power supply at all mission facilities and to establish a mobile generator workshop; (d) travel and related costs for the deployment of staff on temporary duty assignment and the hiring of individual contractors to support critical requirements stemming from the security situation; (e) the acquisition of a more advanced observation system with long-range and remotely operated capability to support the monitoring of the ceasefire lines safely and securely; (f) the acquisition of nuclear, biological and chemical protection equipment to improve personnel protection; and (g) the acquisition of additional video-teleconferencing equipment and of analyst software in order to enhance the information and technology system in view of the security situation in the area of operations. The additional requirements were offset by reduced requirements resulting from: (a) the rationalization of food requirements for troops and from the higher vacancy rate for military contingent personnel in the light of the repatriation of two contingents; (b) the relocation of international staff from the Bravo side to the Alpha side, resulting in lower requirements for danger pay; (c) a higher vacancy rate than planned for national staff and the incumbency of two international temporary positions for only two of the six months for which those positions were authorized; (d) lower fuel consumption resulting from an increased connection to the national power grid, the temporary withdrawal from two positions and two outposts and fewer mobile patrols owing to the security situation on the Bravo side; and (e) the completion of fewer construction, renovation and alteration projects than planned owing to the security situation. 30. Higher expenditures for the months of September 2012 and March, May, and June 2013 were related to reimbursements to troop-contributing Governments for troop costs, contingent-owned equipment and self-sustainment. D. Other income and adjustments Interest income Other/miscellaneous income Prior-period adjustments Cancellation of prior-period obligations E. Expenditure for contingent-owned equipment: major equipment and self-sustainment Major equipment Self-sustainment Mission factors Effective date Last review date A. Applicable to mission area Extreme environmental condition factor 1 July 1996 Intensified operational condition factor Hostile action/forced abandonment factor B. Applicable to home country Incremental transportation factor F. Value of non-budgeted contributions Actual value Status-of-forces agreementa Voluntary contributions in kind (non-budgeted)b a Inclusive of the rental value of land ($879,500) and value-added tax refunds ($216,500). b Relates to engineering equipment provided by the Government of Japan for which budgetary provision had not been made. IV. Analysis of variances 31. The unspent balance was mainly attributable to reduced requirements for: (a) the rationalization of food requirements; and (b) reduced reimbursements to contributing Governments for troop costs owing to the vacancy rate of 5.5 per cent, compared with the assumption of full deployment, in the light of the early withdrawal of two contingent units. The variance was partly offset by additional requirements for the emplacement travel of one contingent unit as a replacement for a repatriated contingent unit. 32. The unspent balance was mainly attributable to the incumbency of two international temporary positions for two of the six months for which the positions were authorized. 33. The unspent balance was attributable to the non-implementation of consultancy services for training on soft-skills development owing to the prevailing security situation in the mission area. 34. The additional requirements were attributable to the deployment of international staff on temporary duty assignment to enhance the security management and situation analysis of the Force and to provide critical support to changes in operational support requirements resulting from the security situation. The variance was partly offset by reduced requirements for training-related travel resulting from the non-participation in some training programmes by UNDOF personnel owing to the security situation in the mission area. 35. The unspent balance was mainly attributable to: (a) the unavailability of local contractors to undertake planned construction, alteration and renovation projects and the fact that the sites for the projects were no longer safe to access owing to the security situation; (b) reduced fuel consumption as a result of increased reliance on the national power grid and the relinquishment of two positions and two outposts owing to the security situation; and (c) reduced requirements for utilities resulting from the withdrawal of the Force from two positions and two outposts in the light of the security situation. The variance was partly offset by additional requirements for: (a) the acquisition of more energy-efficient generators and related spare parts for the establishment of a mobile generator workshop; (b) the acquisition of materials to upgrade the security infrastructure of the Force; and (c) the acquisition of field defence supplies. 36. The additional requirements were mainly attributable to the acquisition of vehicles (2 over-snow vehicles and 12 armoured buses) to transport personnel through hazardous zones in the mission area and troop movements in mountainous areas, as well as to the acquisition of spare parts to maintain the fleet of vehicles. The variance was partly offset by reduced requirements for fuel consumption owing to the lower number of trips between Camp Faouar and Damascus and the lower number of mobile patrols as a result of the security situation. 37. The additional requirements were mainly attributable to the enhancement of video-teleconferencing facilities and the acquisition of software for the military information cell in the light of the prevailing security situation in the region. 38. The unspent balance was mainly attributable to: (a) reduced requirements for reimbursements to contributing Governments for self-sustainment; and (b) the nonacquisition of new equipment because the existing equipment remained in operational order. 39. The additional requirements were mainly attributable to the acquisition of six units of long-range observation systems to enhance the Force's observation capabilities. The variance was partly offset by reduced requirements resulting from the non-acquisition of two new items of mine detection and mine-clearing equipment because the existing equipment remained in operational order. 40. The additional requirements were mainly attributable to: (a) the acquisition of nuclear, biological and chemical protection equipment; (b) losses on exchange rates; and (c) the employment of additional contractors to perform the functions of the Force on the Alpha and Bravo sides owing to the inability of national staff to travel to work regularly and to perform tasks previously undertaken by personnel repatriated from the Force. V. Actions to be taken by the General Assembly 41. The actions to be taken by the General Assembly in connection with the financing of UNDOF are: (a) To decide on the treatment of the unencumbered balance of $4,500 with regard to the period from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2013; (b) To decide on the treatment of other income/adjustments for the period ended 30 June 2013 amounting to $663,700 from interest income ($104,400), other/miscellaneous income ($87,700) and cancellation of prior-period obligations ($664,200) offset by prior-period adjustments ($192,600). (A/66/718/Add.10) Request Response The Advisory Committee takes note of the adoption by UNDOF of a mission support plan and its intended objectives. The Committee expects that subsequent budgets and performance reports will provide information on the efficiencies realized as a result of its implementation (para. 23) Information on the efficiencies realized as a result of the implementation of the Force's mission support plan is provided in section II.C of the present report. In addition, the Force reduced charges for satellite transponder circuits by $183,600 by decommissioning the satellite earth stations in the light of the increased reliability and availability of leased fibre connectivity between UNDOF and the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy. 