%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|INTERNAL SECURITY|SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC|TERRORISM|

General Assembly Sixty-eighth session Security Council Sixty-eighth year Agenda item 110 Measures to eliminate international terrorism Identical letters dated 3 December 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council On instructions from my Government I wish to transmit the following information: In numerous letters, the Syrian Arab Republic has highlighted the barbaric war waged by extremist takfirist gangs against its present, future and cultural and historic heritage. The gangs seek to undermine coexistence among Syrians and the environment of love and peace that Syria has enjoyed for decades. This morning, takfirist terrorist groups attacked the historic town of Ma`lula in Rif Dimashq, the only town in the world whose inhabitants still speak the language of Christ. They vandalized churches and peaceful civilian homes. They raided the convent of Saint Thecla and detained its abbess, Mother Pelagia Sayyaf, along with several nuns who work in the convent. They also targeted an orphanage managed by the convent, which shelters numerous children. The takfirist terrorist groups did not hesitate to intimidate and target civilians around the convent and the town. The terrorist groups that have organizational or ideological links with Al-Qaida hold the holy sites of all religions in contempt. On 30 November 2013, they shelled the Umayyad Mosque in the old city of Damascus, killing 4 civilians, including a woman and child, and injuring 26 others. They have recently destroyed several shrines and tombs of religious figures in the city of Aleppo. We bring those facts to your attention today in order to call on the Security Council to condemn those terrorist acts in the strongest terms possible. The international community must shoulder its responsibilities and prevail on State sponsors of takfirist terrorist groups to desist from all forms of logistical and material support. By failing to end terrorist attacks on civilians and Islamic and Christian places of worship in Syria, the Security Council has endangered its own credibility at a time when it is calling for joint international efforts to combat terrorism and bring terrorist sponsors to justice. I should be grateful if the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 110, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Bashar Ja'afari Ambassador Permanent Representative 