%%%NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES|INFORMATION EXCHANGE|PERIODIC REPORTS|

Sixty-eighth session * A/68/50. Item 55 of the preliminary list* Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report, mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 67/125, pertains to the transmittal of information from the administering Powers called for under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations. e of the Charter of the United Nations, States Members of the United Nations that have or assume responsibilities for the administration of Territories whose peoples have not yet attained a full measure of self-government undertake to transmit regularly to the Secretary-General information relating to the economic, social and educational conditions in the Territories for which they are respectively responsible, other than those Territories to which Chapters XII and XIII apply. In addition, the General Assembly, in several resolutions, the most recent of which was resolution 67/125, has requested the administering Powers concerned to transmit or continue to transmit to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned. 2. The table annexed to the present report provides the dates on which information called for under Article 73 e of the Charter was transmitted to the Secretary-General for 2012. 3. The information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter generally follows the standard form approved by the General Assembly and includes information on geography, history and population and economic, social and educational conditions. The annual reports of the Territories also include information on constitutional matters, as appropriate. Additional information on political and constitutional developments in Tokelau is provided by the representative of New Zealand during meetings of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 4. In compliance with the provisions of paragraph 5 of General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963 and other relevant resolutions of the Assembly, including in particular resolution 66/82, the Secretariat has continued to use the information transmitted in the preparation for the Special Committee of working papers on each Territory. The Special Committee has taken this information into account in formulating its decisions on these Territories, which are set forth in the relevant chapters of the Committee's report to the Assembly (A/67/23). The report also contains an account of the action taken by the Special Committee in implementation of resolution 1970 (XVIII) (see A/67/23, chap. VIII). 5. Recommendation: the information received from the administering Powers on the Non-Self-Governing Territories will be used in the preparation of the working papers of the Secretariat and discussed by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples at its annual session. Dates of transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and period covereda Information received in 2012 Information received in 2013 Date of transmission Period covered France 31 January 2012 11 January 2013 New Caledoniab New Zealand 23 January 2012 10 January 2013 Tokelau Spain Western Saharac United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland All British Non-Self-Governing Territories Anguilla 11 January 2012 21 December 2012 Bermuda British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands (Malvinas)d 30 December 2011 Gibraltar Montserrat Pitcairn Saint Helena Turks and Caicos Islands United States of America American Samoa Guam United States Virgin Islands a For a preliminary list of Territories to which the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)) applies, see A/5446/Rev.1, annex I. b According to its resolution 41/41 A, the General Assembly " considers that, in the light of the provisions of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 1541 (XV), New Caledonia is a Non-Self- Governing Territory within the meaning of the Charter". c On 26 February 1976, the Permanent Representative of Spain to the United Nations informed the Secretary-General that " the Spanish Government, as of today, definitely terminates its presence in the Territory of the Sahara and deems it necessary to place the following on record: ... (a) Spain considers itself henceforth exempt from any responsibility of an international nature in connection with the administration of the said Territory, in view of the cessation of its participation in the temporary administration established for the Territory ..." (A/31/56-S/11997). For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1976. d A dispute exists between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning sovereignty over the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) (see ST/CS/SER.A/42). 