%%%INTERNATIONAL TRADE|PROGRAMME BUDGETING|PROGRAMME PLANNING|STAFFING|FINANCIAL RESOURCES|

Sixty-eighth session Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015* Part IV International cooperation for development Section 13 International Trade Centre (Subprogramme 6 of programme 10 of the biennial programme plan for the period 2014-2015)** Contents Page Overview Programme of work Annexes Organizational structure and post distribution for the biennium 2014-2015 Summary of follow-up action taken to implement relevant recommendations of the oversight bodies Outputs included in the biennium 2012-2013 not to be delivered in 2014-2015 * A summary of the approved programme budget will be issued as A/68/6/Add.1. ** A/67/6/Rev.1. Table 13.1 Financial resources (United States dollars) Approved resources for 2012-2013a Changes in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248 Total resource change Proposal of the Secretary-General for 2014-2015a a At 2012-2013 revised rates. Table 13.2 Post resources Number Level Regular budget Approved for the biennium 2012-2013 1 ASG, 1 D-2, 5 D-1, 20 P-5, 30 P-4, 20 P-3, 14 P-2/1, 71 GS (OL) Abolishment 2 GS (OL) in the Office of the Executive Director and in the Division of Market Development Proposed for the biennium 2014-2015 69 GS (OL) Note: The following abbreviations are used in tables and charts: ASG, Assistant Secretary-General; GS, General Service; LL, Local level; NPO, National Professional Officer; OL, Other level; RB, regular budget; XB, extrabudgetary. Overall orientation 13.1 The International Trade Centre (ITC) is the joint technical cooperation agency of the United Nations and the World Trade Organization (WTO) for business aspects of trade development. Originally created by the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1964, ITC has operated since 1968 under the joint auspices of GATT/WTO and the United Nations, the latter acting through the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). ITC is the focal point for technical assistance and cooperation activities in the trade promotion field within the United Nations system of assistance to developing countries, as affirmed by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1819 (LV). The Centre is responsible for the implementation of subprogramme 6, Operational aspects of trade promotion and export development, of programme 10, Trade and development, of the biennial programme plan for the period 2014-2015. 13.2 The Centre is expressly mandated to foster sustainable economic development and contribute to achieving the Millennium Development Goals in developing countries and countries with economies in transition through trade and international business development. The Centre's interventions concentrate on three strategic objectives: (a) strengthening the integration of the business sector into the global economy through trade intelligence and enhanced support to policymakers; (b) enhancing trade support institutions and policies for the benefit of exporting enterprises; and (c) strengthening the export capacity of enterprises to respond to market opportunities. The critical importance of trade and private sector development, as well as the central role of ITC in the Aid for Trade initiative and its implementation at the country level, continue to gain recognition in development forums. Consequently, ITC is called upon to deliver higher levels of trade-related technical assistance. 13.3 Following recent economic turbulence and financial uncertainties in Europe, growth in world trade slowed to 2 per cent in 2012 and is forecast to reach just 3.3 per cent in 2013. The future remains uncertain in the light of persistent high unemployment, and lower output in developed countries, reducing demand for imported goods. Partly as a result of low demand in developed countries, growth in emerging markets has also decelerated during 2013. 13.4 In this context, Aid for Trade becomes a critical response, helping countries to overcome the consequences of the crisis, to reduce poverty and to move to a sustainable growth pattern through export development. It is concerning to note that in 2011 and 2012 official development assistance (ODA) fell for the first time since 1997. Aid for Trade commitments also fell in 2011, declining 14 per cent to $41.5 billion. However, this decline was mainly in the development of hard infrastructure. Trends suggest a shift towards a greater focus on private sector development, regional integration and value chain promotion. This new focus is entirely in line with the mandate and strategic objectives of ITC. 13.5 The importance of trade as a major contributor to development and the corresponding need for capacity-building activities focused on the private sector have been fully recognized in the outcomes of various United Nations summits and other international forums. The thirteenth ministerial meeting of UNCTAD, held in Doha in April 2012, highlighted the importance of trade promotion and export development as a contributor to development-centred globalization. The Fourth Global Review of Aid for Trade, held in Geneva in July 2012, highlighted that the increasing fragmentation of production processes through the proliferation of global value chains offers developing countries new trading opportunities, but also presents risks and that trade-related programmes should take the broader policy environment into account. 13.6 The Declaration of the Fourth Ministerial Conference of WTO, held in Doha in November 2001, reaffirmed the support of the Conference for the valuable work of ITC and called for its enhancement. The statement adopted at the Sixth Ministerial Conference, held in Hong Kong, China, in December 2005, concluded with a reaffirmation of the role of the Centre, encouraging all members "to cooperate with the International Trade Centre, which complements WTO work by providing a platform for business to interact with trade negotiators, and practical advice for small and medium-sized enterprises to benefit from the multilateral trading system". At the Eighth Ministerial Conference, held in December 2011, ministers reaffirmed the value of the work of the Centre in improving and enhancing trade support institutions and policies for the benefit of exporting efforts, and in strengthening the export capacity of enterprises to respond to market opportunities. ITC continues to work closely with its partners in the lead up to the Ninth Ministerial Conference, to be held in Bali in December 2013. 13.7 All ITC technical assistance projects support the global partnership for development, Millennium Development Goal 8, and, in particular target 12, which calls for developing further an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial system. In addition, specific ITC projects address Millennium Development Goals 1, 3 and 7. During the biennium 2014-2015, the Centre will continue to implement a strategy to ensure that the benefits of trade generated by technical assistance and cooperation activities: (a) target vulnerable groups, in particular poor communities, to assist the eradication of poverty (Goal 1); (b) enhance the economic empowerment of women (Goal 3) and young people; and (c) support the preservation of the environment (Goal 7). The Centre will also keep abreast of developments towards a post-Millennium Development Goals agenda to ensure that its technical assistance addresses future sustainability goals. 13.8 In order to maintain its activities, ITC will continue to rationalize existing regular budget resources to support applied research, tools and product and programme development. Regular budget resources are utilized mainly for the gathering and analysis of market information and commercial opportunities and the development of generic tools for subsequent adaptation and application by individual enterprises or by partner organizations in developing countries and countries with economies in transition. This applied research focus ensures that ITC technical cooperation is of a high standard and that the lead time for and costs of input delivery at the field level are effectively reduced. Increasing use is being made of information and communications technology as a means of supporting research and delivering technical assistance inputs. Demand for ITC technical assistance continues to outpace available resources, thereby leading ITC to find innovative ways to deliver its assistance. 13.9 The programme of work of ITC is reviewed annually by the Joint Advisory Group of the International Trade Centre, the main intergovernmental policy forum of the Centre, which is open to members of UNCTAD and WTO. The WTO General Council and the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board review the report, including recommendations, of the Joint Advisory Group annually. 13.10 At its 46th annual meeting, in May 2012, the Joint Advisory Group endorsed a new strategic plan for 2012-2015 and a new corporate logical framework for 2014-2015. The latter, which was submitted in subprogramme 6 of programme 10 of the biennial programme plan for the period 2014-2015, was reviewed by the Committee for Programme and Coordination at its fifty-third session, in June 2013 (see A/68/16). 13.11 In order to remain relevant in the dynamic arena of international trade and development cooperation, it is important for organizations such as ITC to be aware of changes in the priorities and needs of developing countries and adjust their goals when relevant. Accordingly, the new strategic plan and corporate logical framework builds on previous frameworks in that it maintains the focus on the three client groups of ITC: policymakers, trade support institutions and enterprises. However, it goes one step further by integrating an expected accomplishment related to the provision of trade intelligence, the original motive for the establishment of the Centre; it enables gender-disaggregated monitoring of outcomes to ensure that ITC adequately targets women and women-owned enterprises through its technical assistance; and it outlines the Centre's ambition to gradually move from outcome to impact measurement. 13.12 The strategic plan for 2012-2015 provides the narrative for the Centre's corporate path to achieving its objectives for 2014-2015. In this regard, the plan lays out several key milestones for the period relating to: (a) Preparatory work for the implementation of an impact-oriented corporate logical framework in future bienniums. Key milestones to be achieved in this regard will be to: (i) Deepen methodologies for gender-based analysis of the use and impact of awareness-related activities; (ii) Measure baselines of the trade support institution multiplier effect based on ITC observed activities; (iii) Refine statistical indicators to capture the social (labour and gender) impact of ITC programmes and measure the organization baselines; (b) Corporate efficiency efforts. Key milestones to be achieved in this regard will be to: (i) Complete implementation of the United Nations enterprise resource planning system (Umoja); (ii) Prepare financial statements under the International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS); (c) Corporate investment targets for innovation in new programmes and products. Key milestones to be achieved in this regard will be to: (i) Capitalize on lessons learned from the benchmarking platform to improve the ITC needs assessment methodologies and offer of services to trade support institutions; (ii) Leverage opportunities through new South-South partnerships to promote transfer of specific trade promotion solutions from emerging developing countries to most vulnerable countries; (iii) Pursue new sector niches and fields of competence for trade-related technical assistance activities, especially in trade in services and creative industries; (iv) Increase and mainstream the use of information technology-enabled solutions, namely, e-learning and distance learning, in trade-related technical assistance activities, for instance, to reduce the transaction costs of accessing markets for women-owned enterprises; (v) Encourage new innovative research and programmes to promote inclusiveness in trade promotion policies by, for instance, expanding "ethical trade" and corporate social responsibility initiatives in new sectors and identifying new value zones, sectors and services contributing to development; (d) Direction of the evolution of the trade-related technical assistance portfolio. Key milestones to be achieved in this regard will be to: (i) Increase the reach and impact of ITC advocacy and publication activities through regular public debates and easy-access publications; (ii) Contribute to the Transparency in International Trade partnership with UNCTAD, the African Development Bank and the World Bank in order to maintain global leadership and state-of-the-art delivery of trade intelligence tools; (iii) Capitalize on lessons learned in promoting public-private collaboration in national policies and strategies, including the promotion of a regional integration agenda; (iv) Develop partnerships with other multilateral and bilateral agencies to leverage the Centre's impact in private-sector strengthening programmes; (v) Implement new fundraising and portfolio management strategies. 13.13 In delivering its programmes, ITC will continue in its endeavour to provide client countries with high-quality, low-cost services and programmes, tailor-made to their specific needs and circumstances, and the assurance of the sustainability of its actions for the long term. A key factor in the strategy of ITC is the continuous refinement of its tools and methodologies to ensure that the technical assistance provided is constantly aligned with the rapidly evolving needs of the world trading system. 13.14 In addition to the continued application of quality assurance at the project design phase, ITC will also continue to enhance its approach to needs assessment to frame a dialogue with partners in client countries around the country's or region's main development objectives and trade-related needs, which will guide the Centre's contribution to these objectives in the medium to long term. The approach of ITC to project design will generate, in close consultations with country and regional stakeholders, results-oriented interventions around key impact areas in the form of large projects or programmes. This enhanced approach to needs assessment and project design combines ITC expertise in results-oriented technical assistance with key development objectives identified in partnership with client countries to achieve maximum impact. 13.15 In remaining committed to the support of least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and sub-Saharan Africa, ITC has surpassed its target of spending 50 per cent of its extrabudgetary funds for the benefit of those countries. In 2012, 59 per cent of region- or country-specific technical assistance was focused on those beneficiaries. The needs, priorities and absorption capacities of those countries are specific and ITC technical assistance will be tailored to their unique requirements. In addition, particular emphasis will be placed on regional integration and regional trade opportunities. ITC will maintain regular consultations with regional economic commissions and relevant country groups in this regard. In terms of geographic focus, Africa will continue to be the recipient of the largest share of ITC technical assistance during the biennium 2014-2015. Overview of resources 13.16 In line with the administrative arrangements for the International Trade Centre, endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 59/276, the present report contains resource requirements for ITC in Swiss francs. The overall resources proposed for the biennium 2014-2015 for the present section amount to SwF 73,209,300, before recosting, at an exchange rate of SwF 0.939 to $1.00, reflecting a net decrease of SwF 2,177,000 (or 2.9 per cent) compared with the 2012-2013 budget at revised rates. The change in the level of resources is in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248. 13.17 Miscellaneous income from various sources for the biennium 2014-2015 is projected at SwF 400,000, reflecting a decrease of SwF 100,000 (or 20.0 per cent) compared with income received in the biennium 2012-2013, resulting from lower prevailing interest rates. 13.18 Table 13.4 below shows the requirements for the biennium 2014-2015, expressed in Swiss francs, after recosting, in which it is detailed that the share of each parent organization of the ITC budget is estimated at SwF 36,940,850 (i.e., 50 per cent of SwF 73,881,700), after taking into account miscellaneous income amounting to SwF 400,000, equivalent to $39,340,630. Table 13.3 Financial resources by component (full budget)a (Thousands of Swiss francs) (1) Regular budget (Equal share of the contribution by each parent organization)b Component 2010-2011 expenditurec resources at revised rates Resource change Total before recosting Recostinge 2014-2015 estimate Technical adjustment (delayed impact and non-recurrent) New mandates and inter- component changes In line with resolution 67/248 Reflected in budget outline reportd Percentage Subprogramme 6, Operational aspects of trade promotion and export development Subtotal (2) Extrabudgetary 2010-2011 expenditure 2012-2013 estimate estimate Total (1) and (2) a An exchange rate of SwF 0.939 to $1.00 is used to determine the United States dollar equivalent. b United Nations and World Trade Organization. c Overall level of expenditure incurred in Swiss francs, of which the United Nations share amounts to SwF 34,376,550, equivalent to $36,257,500. d A/67/529 and Corr.1. e Preliminary recosting in Swiss francs equivalent to $1,142,000 at the rate of SwF 0.939 to $1.00, of which the United Nations share (50 per cent) has been presented in A/68/6 (Sect. 13), table 13.3. Table 13.4 Estimated resource requirements (full budget and equal contribution by each parent organization)a,b Resource changes 2012-2013 resources at revised rates Technical adjustment (delayed impact and non-recurrent) New mandates and inter-component changes In line with resolution 67/248 Reflected in budget outline reportd Total before recosting Posts Non-post Less miscellaneous income Net amount to be shared by parent organizations Contribution by each parent organization a An exchange rate of SwF 0.939 to $1.00 is used to determine the United States dollar equivalency. c Overall level of expenditures incurred in Swiss francs, of which the United Nations share amounts to SwF 34,376,550, equivalent to $36,257,500. e Preliminary recosting in Swiss francs equivalent to $1,142,000 at the rate of SwF 0.939 to $1.00, of which the United Nations share (50 per cent) has been presented in A/68/6 (Sect. 13), table 13.3. The recosting against post resources is indicative and for presentation purposes. Post resources (full budget) Category Established regular budget Temporary posts Extrabudgetarya Professional and higher ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4/3 P-2/1 General Service Other level a The 20 posts are funded from programme support costs. 13.19 Resource changes of SwF 2,177,000 are proposed in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as outlined in table 13.6 below. Table 13.6 Resource changes in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248 Net reductions in inputs Description Reductions in the volume of outputs Reductions in performance targets Abolishment: 1 GS (OL) Administrative Assistant 1 GS (OL) Library Clerk Reduction: Other staff costs Contractual services Supplies and materials Furniture and equipment Reduction in administrative support in the Office of the Executive Director; supplies and materials in the Library; communications and events; and the programme on trade support institution benchmarking Total net reduction: SwF 2,177,000 The proposed abolishment of one General Service (Other level) in the Office of the Executive Director, and a reduction in resource requirements under other staff costs for general temporary assistance to cover for sick leave replacements, will be possible as a result of the continued improvement of administrative support achieved through the use of information and communications technology systems and other efficiency measures. The proposed abolishment of one General Service (Other level) in the Trade Information Services, Division of Market Development, will be possible as a result of efficiencies anticipated as a result of a departure from printed materials to an increasingly digitally based information resource. The proposed reduction under other staff costs reflects decreased engagement of graphic design assistance for communications, events and publications, and for trade support institution benchmarking. However, ITC will endeavour to secure extrabudgetary resources to finance these requirements. All publications of ITC are made available both in hard and soft copy. The proposed reduction under contractual services would reduce the hard copy circulation and require an increased reliance on digital versions, without compromising those that have the means only to access printed versions. The proposed reduction under supplies and materials reflects a twofold decrease of the available library subscriptions. First, a review of subscriptions has been conducted and only key needs of staff will be provided for centrally by ITC, requiring staff to independently search other content should they so require. Secondly, the number of databases available for Trade Map and Market Insider would be reduced to those that source business-critical content. Under furniture and equipment, it is proposed to extend the budgeted life cycle for desktop and laptop equipment by 6 months, from 4 to 4.5 years. Ongoing efficiency measures including a reduction of the ITC vehicle fleet from three to two will further contribute to a reduced consumption of electricity and fuel. Other assessed and extrabudgetary resources 13.20 It is estimated that for the biennium 2014-2015, extrabudgetary resources amounting to approximately $88 million, equivalent to SwF 82,632,000, will be available. This represents an increase of approximately 8.7 per cent, in terms of United States dollars, of the estimated total extrabudgetary expenditure incurred/projected during the biennium 2012-2013. Over the period 2006-2012, the Centre has increased its technical assistance, funded by extrabudgetary resources, by 40 per cent, that is, from $25.3 million to $35.5 million. Extrabudgetary resources complement provisions under the regular budget and enable ITC to implement its technical cooperation projects using the tools and knowledge base developed with regular budget resources. Other information 13.21 Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/269, ITC identified resources for conducting evaluation activities in the biennium 2014-2015 estimated at $2,258,000, including $928,000 under the regular budget and $1,330,000 in extrabudgetary resources. The exact scale of evaluation activities will be determined during the course of the biennium based on the implementation of evaluation plans developed on a yearly basis. 13.22 In terms of lessons learned, the evaluations conducted during the biennium 2012-2013 reveal that, as a subsidiary organ of the United Nations and the World Trade Organization, ITC provides a unique form of technical assistance that is perceived to add value. ITC technical assistance has resulted in positive change to its beneficiaries. The challenge for the biennium 2014-2015 is to increase economies of scale and broaden the impact of interventions, to be achieved by strengthening networks that will facilitate more efficient delivery, improving post-delivery support and the dissemination of both knowledge and capabilities at both country and regional levels. Success will also depend on continuing to instil a culture of performance management within which evaluation is a key tool. 13.23 Building on lessons learned from previous evaluations, the priorities of the evaluation function for the biennium 2014-2015 are: (a) The conclusion of an independent external evaluation of ITC covering the period 2006-2012. The purpose of this evaluation is to review progress made and lessons learned following the previous evaluation of ITC in 2006; support accountability of ITC by demonstrating results and impact of ITC activities; and recommend strategic and operational direction to the Centre for the years ahead; (b) The implementation of annual evaluation workplans covering ITC programmes, work in specific countries or regions, tools and methodologies, policies and strategies and critical internal processes; (c) The enhanced integration of lessons learned from evaluations into project design mechanisms and ensuring the implementation of evaluation recommendations; (d) The launch of a special effort to diffuse the use of self-evaluation in the Centre through training, improvement of templates and a quality control system. 13.24 The ITC publications programme, as part of the Centre's overall technical cooperation programme, is designed to assist the business sector, trade support institutions and policymakers in developing countries to have ready access to information and analysis in support of export development. During the period 2014-2015, the ITC publications programme will provide thought leadership on key issues affecting international trade and will continue to educate and inform a large group of global stakeholders, while also keeping donors and partners aware of ITC projects and expertise. Further, ITC publications will guide policymakers, trade support institutions and businesses on a range of trade topics that aim to achieve "export impact for good", thus contributing to putting trade to work for the Millennium Development Goals. During the biennium 2014-2015, ITC will refresh and maintain its digital library with its most popular reference texts; continue to publish sector- and region-specific publications; and introduce a selection of world class opinion pieces on key issues affecting trade. The Centre will make these public goods more widely available to its clients through its enhanced website and distribution systems. 13.25 It is anticipated that recurrent and non-recurrent publications will be issued as summarized in table 13.7 below. Table 13.7 Summary of publications 2010-2011 actual Publications Print Electronic Print and electronic Recurrent Non-recurrent 13.26 The programme of work will be implemented in accordance with the strategy detailed under subprogramme 6 of programme 10 of the biennial programme plan for the period 2014-2015. The subprogramme will build on results achieved and lessons learned in previous bienniums. 13.27 The executive direction and management function of ITC is under the responsibility of the Office of the Executive Director, while three substantive divisions implement technical assistance activities, namely, the Division of Country Programmes, the Division of Market Development, and the Division of Business and Institutional Support. The Division of Programme Support renders the requisite administrative, logistical and programme support services. 13.28 The Office of the Executive Director provides strategic leadership for the development and management of the Centre. It leads and coordinates the corporate work programme and is responsible for strategic planning, risk management, resource mobilization and partnerships, communications and the key functions of evaluation, monitoring and quality assurance. The Office represents the Centre at the executive level vis-à-vis Governments, United Nations bodies, WTO and other organizations. The Office of the Deputy Executive Director is responsible for ensuring the smooth functioning of the trade-related technical assistance operational activities and the alignment between the work of the two technical divisions and the Division of Country Programmes. 13.29 The Division of Country Programmes ensures country ownership, coherence and impact of the Aid for Trade offering of ITC; coordinates ITC activities in programme countries with key stakeholders and development partners; develops the ITC pipeline based on improved needs assessment and project design methodology; and achieves synergies and coherence in project and programme implementation. The Division comprises the five geographic/regional offices; the Export Strategy; and the Business in Trade Policy sections. 13.30 The Division of Market Development provides developing countries and economies in transition with leading trade intelligence and sector development services to strengthen private sector competitiveness and to take advantage of evolving market opportunities. The Division will build on and expand successful projects and programmes to increase impact and sustainability in line with the Centre's overall emphasis on larger, longer-term projects; and will continue to adapt to global structural changes such as the increasing importance of trade in services and global value chains and responding to market demands for greater environmental sustainability and increasing transparency in trade, including non-tariff measures. The Division follows a fundamentally market-driven approach and will focus its activities on the Centre's three main beneficiary groups: policymakers (support for policy and strategy-making); trade support institutions (primarily as multipliers); and enterprises (which use trade information, sector resources and online tools directly). 13.31 The Division of Business and Institutional Support will continue its efforts to provide integrated, demand-driven solutions to trade support institutions and enterprises in developing countries and economies in transition to contribute to improved exporter competitiveness, strengthened trade support institutions and the establishment of an enabling business environment. The Division will work in close collaboration with the Centre's geographical/regional offices and market development experts to ensure that solutions are appropriate and coherent. During the biennium 2014-2015, the Division will further develop tools and methodologies to facilitate dissemination and replication in programme countries and contribute to ITC partnerships and networking initiatives to promote peer-to-peer learning. 13.32 The Division of Programme Support is responsible for assisting the programme management of ITC in ensuring efficient and effective management and utilization of the Centre's human, financial, material and other resources available to implement its programme of work. The Division provides logistical and administrative support to ITC within delegated authorities and the accountability framework of the Organization. The Division is also responsible for the accurate recording, timely reporting and effective monitoring of all regular and extrabudgetary expenditures of the Centre, in compliance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, and for the effective use of the financial resources available to ITC. The Division is responsible for supporting the implementation of IPSAS at ITC, scheduled for January 2014, as well as the new enterprise resource planning system, Umoja. The Division provides legal advice, logistical support, liaison regarding security issues both at ITC headquarters in Geneva and in the field, management of the physical assets of the Centre and control of inventory supplies. 13.33 The Centre recognizes that stakeholder engagement and building solid partnerships are necessary to achieve its programme of work and related development results. Accordingly, ITC attaches great importance to partnerships, carrying out its technical cooperation activities in coordination with its founding bodies, UNCTAD and WTO, and with a variety of agencies both within and outside the United Nations system. The Centre will continue to play an active role in the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) Inter-agency Cluster on Trade and Productive Capacities and to work closely with other agencies under the One United Nations umbrella. Further, cooperation with aid agencies under the Enhanced Integrated Framework and Aid for Trade initiatives will continue. Partnerships with existing partners and trade-related capacity-building providers, such as the Commonwealth Secretariat, the International Organization for Standardization, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the World Intellectual Property Organization, the regional economic commissions and the regional development banks, will be strengthened. Direct collaboration with bilateral technical cooperation agencies, primarily from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development countries, in the design and implementation of field-level activities will be reinforced. Opportunities for partnerships with nontraditional donors, including in the private sector, will be systematically explored. 13.34 In terms of measuring and being accountable to its stakeholders, results-based management approaches will continue to be a priority in ITC in strengthening accountability. Since 2011, ITC has worked on developing an integrated development results system linking the outputs and outcomes of all technical assistance projects to its corporate strategic framework. In July 2013, ITC made 2012 results information available to the public on its website. Stakeholders are able to assess the Centre's actual and planned results by project and country. This level of transparency was welcomed by member States at the 47th annual meeting of the Joint Advisory Group, held in 2013. During the biennium 2014-2015, ITC will continue its efforts to strengthen accountability, including through the further development of its efforts to measure impact. To this effect, an impact assessment framework is being put in place and relevant methodologies for impact measurement are being finalized. Table 13.8 Objectives for the biennium, expected accomplishments, indicators of achievement and performance measures Objective of the Organization: To foster sustainable economic development and contribute to achieving the Millennium Development Goals in developing countries and countries with economies in transition through trade and international business development Expected accomplishments of the Secretariat Indicators of achievement (a) Strengthened integration of the business sector into the global economy through trade intelligence and enhanced support to policymakers (a) (i) Increased number of male and female users of trade-related intelligence, including cases in which a gender perspective in trade is integrated into national development strategies, as a result of ITC support to enable decision makers to prepare and/or design effective trade development programmes and policies Performance measures 2010-2011: not applicable Estimate 2012-2013: not applicable Target 2014-2015: 153,000 (ii) Increased number of male and female clients expressing awareness of trading system-related activities through the support of ITC to enable decision makers to understand business needs and create an environment conducive to business Target 2014-2015: 2,000 (iii) Increased number of cases in which country negotiating positions have been enriched through analytical input and business sector participation, with the support of ITC, to enable decision makers to integrate business dimensions into trade negotiations (Number of negotiating positions) Estimate 2012-2013: 100 Target 2014-2015: 125 (b) Enhanced trade support institutions and policies for the benefit of exporting enterprises (b) (i) Number of institutions reporting improvements in their managerial performance and/or services to small and medium-sized enterprises as a result of ITC assistance Estimate 2012-2013: 139 Target 2014-2015: 120 (ii) Number of institutions reporting improvements as a result of their membership in networks supported by ITC Target 2014-2015: 85 (iii) Number of institutions reporting improvements in their country's trade promotion and export development policies as a result of ITC assistance (c) Strengthened export capacity of enterprises to respond to market opportunities (c) (i) Increased number of enterprises enabled to formulate sound international business strategies through ITC training on export management issues, delivered directly or indirectly Estimate 2012-2013: 1,182 Target 2014-2015: 1,300 (ii) Increased number of enterprises enabled to become export-ready through ITC training activities focusing on export-readiness, delivered directly or indirectly Estimate 2012-2013: 2,000 Target 2014-2015: 1,900 (iii) Increased number of enterprises having met potential buyers and, as a result, having transacted business through ITC support Estimate 2012-2013: 1,279 Target 2014-2015: 1,600 (iv) Increased share of women-owned enterprises that report improved competency in export-related operations and that are exposed to new markets or market contacts as a result of ITC assistance Target 2014-2015: 700 External factors 13.35 The subprogramme will achieve its objectives and expected accomplishments on the assumption that (a) the international community and other stakeholders remain fully engaged and committed to work with ITC; (b) there are no significant shortfalls in actual receipt of extrabudgetary funding; (c) the political capacity and geographical conditions in recipient countries remain stable for the implementation of programme activities; (d) the mandates of the United Nations and other international organizations that impact ITC remain the same; and (e) the enabling environment in the form of fiscal and monetary policies and other measures, including physical infrastructure in recipient countries, does not deteriorate. Outputs 13.36 During the biennium 2014-2015, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental and expert bodies (regular budget and extrabudgetary): (i) Substantive servicing: annual meetings of the Joint Advisory Group (6); meetings of the Consultative Committee of the ITC Trust Fund (4); (ii) Parliamentary documentation: annual report on the activities of ITC and annexes (2); reports of the Joint Advisory Group (2); reports of the Consultative Committee of the ITC Trust Fund (4); (b) Other substantive activities (regular budget and extrabudgetary): (i) Recurrent publications: magazines (8); recurrent books (6); recurrent papers (2); (ii) Non-recurrent publications: non-recurrent books (15); non-recurrent papers (37); (iii) Recurrent newsletters (180); non-recurrent newsletters (32); recurrent guidebooks (4); non-recurrent guidebooks (68); recurrent fact sheets (20); non-recurrent fact sheets (9); miscellaneous materials (36); (iv) Audiovisual resources (2); (v) Press releases (60); press conferences (6); (vi) Special events (5); (vii) Technical material for outside users (databases, websites) (22); (viii) An enquiry reply service will also be regularly available to the ITC network of trade support institutions, handling approximately 270 substantive enquiries; (c) Technical cooperation: (i) Advisory services (regular budget and extrabudgetary): approximately 1,600 short-term missions will be organized in response to requests from Governments and institutions at the regional, subregional and national levels to assess, design, formulate and implement specific technical cooperation projects or components of programmes. Specific technical areas covered by the advisory services will include needs assessments, export strategy, business and trade policy, trade intelligence, trade support institution strengthening, and exporter competitiveness; (ii) Group training (extrabudgetary): approximately 700 training and awareness-building events (approximately 21,100 participants) on selected topics; (iii) Field projects (extrabudgetary): 135 (91 national, 25 regional and 19 interregional projects). Table 13.9 Resource requirements (full budget) Resources estimates Post Extrabudgetary 13.37 The overall resources required for the biennium 2014-2015 for this section amount to SwF 73,209,300, before recosting, at an exchange rate of SwF 0.939 to $1.00, reflecting a net decrease of SwF 2,177,000 (or 2.9 per cent). The decrease is in line with General Assembly resolution 67/248, as reflected in table 13.6 above. The proposed overall requirements for section 13 for the biennium 2014-2015 would comprise: (a) An amount of SwF 59,839,900, under post resources, for 160 posts (91 Professional, 69 General Service), reflecting a net decrease of SwF 469,100 owing to the proposed abolishment of two General Service (Other level) posts in the Office of the Executive Director and in the Division of Market Development; (b) An amount of SwF 13,369,400, under non-post resources, reflecting a decrease of SwF 1,707,900, to cover operational requirements. 13.38 The extrabudgetary resources for the biennium 2014-2015 are estimated at SwF 82,632,000, reflecting an increase of 8.7 per cent over the previous biennium. a Funded under programme support. Summary of follow-up action taken to implement outstanding recommendations of the oversight bodies Brief description of the recommendation Action taken to implement the recommendation Board of Auditors (A/67/5 (Vol. III), chap. II) The Board recommends that ITC maintains an up-to-date database of consultants and their performance and follows the recommended United Nations policies for the appointment of consultants (para. 19). An automated workflow for the recruitment of consultants has been developed and will be operational by the end of 2013. An e-appraisal module for consultants will then be developed and introduced to complete the Consultants' Management Suite. ITC also confirms that the policies and processes in relation to consultant recruitment are aligned to United Nations norms and are consistent with delegated authority of ITC for human resources matters. The Board recommends that ITC: (a) manage its accounts receivable by regularly pursuing such significant outstanding debts and, where necessary, regularly seeking agreement on significant balances; and (b) actively consider the need to impair assets where no positive confirmation has been obtained (para. 21). Further follow-up actions have been taken in respect to accounts receivable with UNDP offices. The long-outstanding balances are being reviewed/followed up, and for those which are irrecoverable, a request for write-off of items over $2,500 will be submitted to the United Nations Controller. The write-off of small irrecoverable items under $2,500 has been approved by the ITC Director, Division of Programme Support, and accounts have been cleared accordingly. The Board recommends that ITC develop robust and documented quality control procedures to validate the integrity of the data supplied to its actuaries concerning staff end-of-service liabilities (para. 26). The data supplied to ITC by United Nations Headquarters is validated and checked by ITC Human Resources. ITC is confident that the data subsequently returned to United Nations Headquarters are correct and that the ITC Human Resources internal monitoring system is robust. The Board recommends that ITC should fully align its disclosures regarding end-of-service liabilities with IPSAS 25 for 2012-2013 (including, for example, by providing more information in its note disclosures of the impact of changes in discount rates on its stated liabilities) (para. 29). Within the overall IPSAS implementation strategy, this will be developed in consultation with United Nations Headquarters. ITC agreed with the Board's recommendation that it review the methodology for charging programme support and ensure that the full costs of staff are charged to all projects. ITC will review the amount accrued and consider increasing the rate to include the funding of end-of-service liabilities (para. 31). Programme support cost has been established to cover all the administrative costs, including staff costs, relating to the implementation/management of projects. The percentage rate is approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 35/217. An element of 8 per cent charge for repatriation grant accrual is currently applied to all technical cooperation funds. ITC will review the amount accrued and consider increasing it to include the funding of end-of-service liabilities. The Board recommends that ITC continually review its risks and IPSAS gap analysis and identify alternative mitigating solutions within the control of ITC management for the outstanding issues (para. 39). ITC reviews and updates the risk register monthly along with the IPSAS team from United Nations Headquarters. Gap analysis reports are reviewed and updated on a regular basis until the end of the project. The Board recommends that ITC develop a set of pro forma IPSAS financial statements which are internally reviewed, using an appropriate disclosure guide prior to the discussion with the Board (para. 45). The 2011 financial statements simulation exercise has been completed. The statement and notes have been sent to the IPSAS team at Headquarters for their review and feedback and will be revised where necessary. The same simulation exercise is being carried out on the 2012 financial statements. The Board recommends that ITC clearly identify the objectives and envisaged benefits of the IPSAS project and develop a methodology to track and manage benefits realization (para. 50). ITC has identified and is tracking the benefits of the IPSAS project in a separate report entitled "IPSAS dividend report", which has been submitted to the Task Force on accounting standards through the IPSAS team at Headquarters. ITC will continue to identify, track and manage these benefits. It should be noted that this is a longer-term objective. ITC consults with the United Nations and follows its lead in this project. IPSAS benefit and dividend reports are ongoing projects and are continuously being updated. The Board recommends that ITC enhance its organization-wide change management programme for IPSAS by specifying how senior management in each business unit must take ownership of and drive the delivery of the intended benefits during and after IPSAS implementation (para. 51). ITC senior management will be engaged in developing the benefits realization plans and will take ownership after the United Nations has developed its plan. The Board recommends that ITC: (a) when reporting its achievement indicators, provide accompanying commentary and data which illustrates the extent to which the number of entities reporting improvements attributable to ITC are located in priority or less developed countries, (b) integrate its selected performance indicators with published synthesis reporting of its periodic detailed evaluation of programmes, to provide deeper insight and assurance on the existence of improvements and their attribution to ITC input (para. 59). ITC has published a new online portal to access data on its indicators of achievement and related data on development results. The data are structured in such a way that actual measures for indicators of achievement can be traced back to projects and countries where ITC is active, including priority countries. This provides open and full access to ITC results data, including priority countries. In addition, particular attention has been given to presenting ITC development results in least developed countries, sub-Saharan Africa and other priority countries more clearly in the ITC submission to the interim programme performance report of the United Nations for the biennium 2012-2013. ITC also plans to use the evaluation function to assess performance related to the achievement of indicators through published synthesis reporting. The Board recommends that ITC consult with its stakeholders and other trade promotion agencies to ensure harmonization of reporting, and that the burdens implied by its own requirements are sustainable (para. 60). ITC will continue to pursue harmonization of reporting with its stakeholders and other trade promotion agencies. The Board reiterates its recommendation to establish a link between achievements and the resources allocated, and to use data on underachievement to inform the reallocation of funds (para. 65). ITC is currently conducting a pilot assessment of the cost for delivery of standard outputs. A pilot project to determine the unit costs of some trade-related technical assistance activities has been completed and it covered 16 per cent of the technical assistance expenditure, which produced data on the variability of costs of outputs that are being incorporated into future planning decisions. Further development of this approach is planned for 2014. Upon refinement of the data collected from this exercise, it is expected that the results will serve to facilitate the launch of the Umoja system in the organization. The Board recommends that ITC engage with the implementation team of the United Nations enterprise resource planning project (Umoja) to secure the adoption of human resources time capture (para. 66). ITC agrees to engage with the Umoja team to explore how best to reflect human resources input cost into projects. The Board recommends that ITC consider the case for moving to a recognized project management code or standard within three years (para. 73). ITC is currently identifying and diffusing good practices in project and programme management. It is expected that this first phase will constitute the basis to progress towards the adoption of a recognized management code. ITC is further developing project management standards and codes as an integral part of its approach to improved management across the whole project and programme life cycle. The Board recommends that appropriate arrangements are in place to track project outcomes in terms of the achieved effects on beneficiaries, beyond the actual delivery of the project (para. 78). ITC has developed a new impact assessment methodology to be rolled out in 2013, which will complement existing evaluation activities. Full implementation of this approach is planned for next biennium. The Board recommends that ITC, with immediate effect, require both peer reviews and senior management to seek evidence of detailed planning for at least the early phases of work following initiation (para. 80). ITC is committed to establishing a system ensuring due accountability to verify the existence of detailed planning for projects during the inception phase. ITC has implemented: (a) an inception phase training; (b) detailed planning of projects; and (c) a design phase portal. (A/65/5 (Vol. III) and Corr.1) The Board recommends that ITC, in conjunction with the United Nations, consider a review of its policy for the valuation of leave liability in its implementation of IPSAS (para. 63). The Administration notes that the treatment of annual leave under IPSAS 25 mirrors that under International Accounting Standard (IAS) 19, and following the recent review of IAS 19, the International Accounting Standards Board has provided additional guidance. The Board reiterates its previous recommendation that ITC, in conjunction with the United Nations, develop a funding plan for the end-of-service liabilities for the consideration of and approval by the General Assembly and the General Council of WTO (para. 67). Addressing the recommendation is dependent on a decision by the General Assembly on a funding policy. Once a decision is made, ITC will submit a proposal to the United Nations and WTO for review and approval. For its extrabudgetary operations, ITC will also consider a funding policy in line with that of the United Nations. ITC agreed with the Board's recommendation to refine its indicators of achievement and associated targets with a view to better assessing the qualitative impact of its projects (para. 76). The key features of the new framework include a gradual move from outcome to impact measurement. Beyond the monitoring of outcomes, the new proposal intends to gradually move to capturing economic and social indicators of the impact of ITC activities on countries' export and growth performance. ITC is working on improving the outcome indicators and the impact measurement methods. Office of Internal Oversight Services Audit of ITC Netherlands Trust Fund, Phase II NTF II project, entitled "Creating sustainable exporter competitiveness in the coffee sector in Uganda" (AE2011/350/01) OIOS recommends that ITC should strengthen programme management and supervision to ensure that it is able to implement programmes in a timely manner to avoid reductions in available funding resulting from restrictions placed by the donor for funding its future programmes and projects (recommendation 1). A programme management team has been fully in place since 2011, with clear project management responsibility for each country, and a programme manager and programme officer for coordinating and monitoring at the overall programme level. Improvements have been made in three areas, namely: (a) in negotiations for the follow-up NTF III programme; (b) specific to the NTF II programme and, in addition, in general programme and project management. More specifically, ITC signed NTF III with the Centre for the Promotion of Imports from Developing Countries in July 2013 with significant improvements, including the areas identified by OIOS such as the flexibility to move contributions across years and a clarified pre-agreed governance structure for NTF III, which was not in place at the outset of NTF II. OIOS recommends that ITC should formalize a corporate level procedure for the assessment, selection and performance evaluation of its implementing partners, including a mechanism to share partners' performance information within ITC (recommendation 2). There will be pragmatic guidance regarding the selection of partners, that is, a checklist and a mechanism whereby partners' performance is rated and shared internally, in addition to the donor's partner selection criteria. OIOS recommends that ITC should ensure that its work is incorporated in the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for Uganda, in order to realize its commitment to the "One United Nations" initiative and improve scope for collaboration with other United Nations agencies (recommendation 3). The NTF II team visited the United Nations Country Manager to exchange information on the content and progress of the project supported by ITC in Uganda and to explore ways in which the work of ITC could be included under the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF). In addition, consultations were held on how to better link ITC work with UNDP Uganda; and working towards the inclusion of ITC initiatives under the Uganda UNDAF by the end of December 2013. OIOS recommends that ITC should align its internal guidelines on the administration of consultants with the United Nations administrative instruction on consultants and individual contractors (ST/AI/1999/7) to ensure competition (recommendation 9). This recommendation is related to the recommendation of the Board of Auditors (A/67/5 (Vol. II), para. 19, cited above). In this connection, a consultants database is operational. A roster of more than 2,600 consultants is now the sole source of the Centre's cadre of consultants. The automated recruitment workflow has been introduced, requiring the hiring manager to confirm, in accordance with United Nations administrative instructions, that selection of consultants is based on a competitive recruitment process. Paragraph Output Quantity Reason for discontinuation 13.40 (b) (i) Foreign trade representation manual The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, information about foreign trade representation will be included in other publications and other substantive activities related to strengthening trade support institutions. The Global Enabling Trade Report This is a publication of a partner institution to which ITC contributes inputs but where ITC does not appear as co-publisher. Accordingly, this output will be recategorized as miscellaneous material. Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution: How to Settle International Business Disputes (revised edition) The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, ITC will shift the focus away from trade law towards other focus areas. Online Market Research (revised edition) The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, this output will be adapted in favour of more targeted substantive activities, including databases and other online resources. World Directory of Trade Promotion Organizations and Other Trade Support Institutions (revised edition) The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, this output will be recategorized as technical material to better reflect the mode of delivery by which the information is being provided to end users. World Directory of Importers' Associations (revised edition) Taxing health -- relevance of tariff and tax revenue from anti-malaria commodities in selected pilot countries -- 2012 The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, ITC will shift the focus away from health-related issues towards other focus areas. Simulate the current state of negotiations regarding market access, domestic support, export subsidies, trade in services and trade facilitation, 2012 A new series on current topics in international trade will compensate for this change and respond in a more flexible manner to subject matters such as market access. Impact of a trade liberalization within countries of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation in a context of a Doha multilateral liberalization, 2012 A new series on current topics in international trade will compensate for this change and respond in a more flexible manner to subject matters like trade liberalization and south-south trade. Leveraging social media to increase exports: the small and medium-sized enterprises perspective The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, this output will be adapted in favour of more targeted substantive activities, including customized guidebooks and fact sheets. Mobile business solutions for export-driven supply chains Business generation methodology Foreign trade representatives methodology and training pack The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, information about foreign trade representation will be included in other publications and other substantive activities related to the strengthening of trade support institutions. 13.40 (b) (vi) Biodiversity-based products The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, information on biodiversity will be provided through a new series of publications on trade and environment. Climate change and trade The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, information on climate change and trade will be provided through a new series of publications on trade and environment. Organic products The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, information on organic products and trade will be provided through a new series of publications on trade and environment. Spice products development The needs of the trade information environment in which users operate have changed. Accordingly, ITC will shift the focus away from market news on spices towards other focus areas. 13.40 (b) (iii) ITC Office for Africa newsletter Information to relevant stakeholders will be provided through other more customized substantive activities, including targeted region- and project-specific newsletters and fact sheets. "Researching and analysing export markets -- A guide book for new exporters" Selected sources of the month 