%%%OUTER SPACE|INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION|

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Legal Subcommittee Fifty-second session Vienna, 8-19 April 2013 Item 12 of the provisional agenda* * A/AC.105/C.2/L.288. Review of international mechanisms for cooperation in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space Review of international mechanisms for cooperation in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space: information received from Member States Note by the Secretariat Contents Page Introduction Information received from Member States Australia Kazakhstan Portugal 1. At its fifty-first session, in 2012, the Legal Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space agreed to include "Review of international mechanisms for cooperation in the peaceful exploration and use of outer space" as an item under a five-year workplan. In accordance with the recommendation of the Subcommittee (A/AC.105/1003, para. 179), Member States of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space were invited to provide information on the range of bilateral and multilateral mechanisms they utilize for space cooperation. 2. The present document has been prepared by the Secretariat on the basis of replies received by 11 January 2013 from the following Member States: Australia, Kazakhstan and Portugal. II. Information received from Member States [Original: English] [24 December 2012] Australia is a signatory to five space treaties (the 1967 Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, the 1968 Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space, the 1972 Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects, the 1975 Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space and the 1979 Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies). Australia also has in place a range of bilateral treaty-level agreements and other administrative-level memorandums of understanding. These agreements are used to strengthen cooperative approaches to the peaceful exploration and use of outer space. Examples of these include: :: Exchange of notes constituting an agreement to amend the Agreement between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of Australia concerning Space Vehicle Tracking and Communication Facilities of 29 May 1980, as amended :: Agreement between the Government of Australia and the European Space Agency for a Cooperative Space Vehicle Tracking Program :: Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the Russian Federation on Cooperation in the Field of the Exploration and User of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. Further details are available from the Australian Treaties Database: www.info.dfat.gov.au/treaties. Australia also supports appropriate international arms control and transparency and confidence-building measures, giving careful consideration to proposals to establish further international norms for space activities, including the European Union's proposal for an international code of conduct for outer space activities. [Original: Russian] [14 January 2013] With the aim of effectively developing a national space sector and attracting world-class cutting-edge technologies, Kazakhstan is actively engaging in international cooperation with foreign countries and international organizations. Kazakhstan has established partnerships and signed international agreements on cooperation in research and the peaceful uses of outer space with a number of States. Agreements have been concluded with the Governments of the Russian Federation, Ukraine, France and Israel. Agreements and memorandums have also been signed between the National Space Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan and space agencies and organizations in India, the Republic of Korea, Germany, China, Saudi Arabia, Japan, the United Arab Emirates and Thailand. On the basis of these agreements, Kazakhstan is in the process of setting up a national space communications and information system (KazSat), an Earth remote sensing system, the ground control infrastructure of a high-speed satellite navigation system and a satellite assembly and test facility, which will carry out joint scientific space research. [3 December 2012] The Space Office of the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology is currently carrying out a survey with a view to gathering information and data concerning bilateral and multilateral mechanisms for cooperation in space activities presently in progress involving Portuguese universities or private entities. We expect to be able to convey the preliminary results of this survey with the responses to the questionnaire requested by 25 January 2013. 