%%%SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|DECOLONIZATION|NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|GIBRALTAR QUESTION|NEW CALEDONIA QUESTION|WESTERN SAHARA QUESTION|AMERICAN SAMOA QUESTION|ANGUILLA QUESTION|BERMUDA QUESTION|BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS QUESTION|CAYMAN ISLANDS QUESTION|GUAM QUESTION|MONTSERRAT QUESTION|TURKS AND CAICOS ISLANDS QUESTION|UNITED STATES VIRGIN ISLANDS QUESTION|TOKELAU QUESTION|FALKLAND ISLANDS (MALVINAS) QUESTION|

Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) Summary record of the 8th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Monday, 14 October 2013, at 10 a.m. Chair: Mr. García González . (El Salvador) Contents Agenda item 56: Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (continued)* Agenda item 57: Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories (continued)* Agenda item 58: Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (continued)* Agenda item 59: Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories (continued)* Agenda item 60: Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Territories not covered under other agenda items) (continued)* * Items which the Committee has decided to consider together. The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m. Agenda item 56: Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations (continued) (A/68/23 (chaps. VII and XIII), A/68/64 and Add.1) Agenda item 57: Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories (continued) (A/68/23 (chaps. V and XIII)) Agenda item 58: Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations (continued) (A/68/23 (chaps. VI and XIII) and A/68/62) Agenda item 59: Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories (continued) (A/68/66 and Add.1; A/C.4/68/L.4) Agenda item 60: Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples (Territories not covered under other agenda items) (continued) (A/68/23 (chaps. VIII-XI and XIII) and A/68/330; A/C.4/68/L.5) 1. Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) said that his Government regretted the fact that decolonization efforts had become stagnated, despite the launch of the Third International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism. The United Nations had an obvious responsibility to hold firm against any form of colonialist ideology and to ensure that the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories exercised their right to self determination; and administering Powers must not be allowed to stop them from enjoying that inalienable right. Algeria, having emerged from its own independence struggle, stood in solidarity with all those still subject to colonial domination. 2. The United Nations had a duty to bring peace to Western Sahara, the last colony in Africa, so that the Territory's brave inhabitants could attain their national aspirations and finally exercise their right to self determination under internationally guaranteed conditions. The question must not be taken out of its correct decolonization context, which would only delay settlement. In January 2013, the Executive Council of the African Union (AU) had adopted a decision requesting the AU Commission to take all necessary measures for the organization of a referendum for self-determination of the people of Western Sahara, in compliance with the relevant Organization of African Unity (OAU) decisions and United Nations resolutions; and in May 2013, the AU had called for an end to the illegal occupation of the Territory. 3. His Government welcomed the responsible attitude of the Frente Popular para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro (Frente Polisario), acknowledged by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2013/220, paras. 61 and 62), which had kept Western Sahara safe from the turbulence affecting the Sahel. Algeria would continue to try to help the two parties to the conflict bridge their differences regarding the terms of their negotiations on a just, lasting and mutually acceptable solution based on self-determination; and it would support and where possible assist the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara as they sought to bring about the decolonization of the Territory. 4. Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa) said that self-determination was extremely important to his Government, which would be celebrating 20 years of freedom and democracy in 2014. The path his country had successfully taken was now being followed by the people of Palestine and Western Sahara, and the United Nations should assist them in their struggle for self-determination as it had assisted South Africa. 5. Just as the OAU had spearheaded the decolonization drive on the African continent, the liberation of the one remaining colony in Africa was a priority for the African Union. The Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic was a full AU member, and the Sahrawi people, like those of all other African States, should be able to exercise their right to self-determination. The United Nations must provide the Sahrawi people, who had waited so patiently, with the means to choose their political destiny by organizing a referendum under international supervision. The Frente Polisario had itself endorsed that peaceful route. Both parties to the dispute should now support the efforts of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara. 6. In the face of human rights abuses in both Western Sahara and the Tindouf camps, the Security Council should include a human rights monitoring mechanism in the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), something it had repeatedly failed to do, even though only MINURSO could have such jurisdiction in the Non-Self-Governing Territory. South Africa also was concerned by the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of Western Sahara, which should instead be used for the benefit of its people and in consultation with them. The Special Committee should send a visiting mission to the Territory to clarify how natural resources were being managed and how United Nations activities there were being conducted. 7. Mr. Do Van Minh (Viet Nam), endorsing the work done by the Special Committee over the decades, said that his Government supported constructive dialogue between the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories and the administering Powers aimed at reaching agreements that best served the peoples' fundamental interests,. The administering Powers should also do whatever was necessary to hasten decolonization and provide assistance to the inhabitants of the Territories. 8. Mr. Otto (Palau) said that his Government had recently celebrated 19 years of independence and it believed that free, fair and credible elections were the most important tool in a democratic process of self-determination. The integrity of elections must therefore be safeguarded. Palau supported the desires and aspirations of the people of New Caledonia for an election process that would be free, transparent and credible at every stage from voter registration through verification of results. 9. The approach taken by New Zealand to the self-determination of Tokelau should be emulated by all administering Powers engaged in the decolonization process. 10. Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) said that the consideration of the question of the Sahara had become bogged down in preconceived ideas, and that the Committee had lost sight of the most important aspects. A small minority had sometimes even made false statements as it failed to recognize the facts and the course of history. When the former Great Powers had divided Africa, Morocco had lost a great deal of its territory to colonial domination, despite its resistance. However, an international agreement had achieved the decolonization of what had been a Spanish colony until 1975. Unfortunately, in a holdover from the Cold War, the restitution of that Saharan part of Morocco had become embroiled in a regional dispute intended to prevent the Maghreb becoming a centre of stability, entente and shared prosperity. Despite the difficulties encountered, Morocco had for 37 years been willing to find a realistic compromise acceptable to the Saharan people that would solve that artificial regional dispute peacefully while promoting better relations with Algeria and Mauritania. 11. His Government's autonomy proposal of 2007 had been called credible by the Security Council. It represented an historic compromise and was the most viable solution, allowing the population to have broad powers through democratically elected bodies, while guaranteeing respect for Morocco's territorial integrity and national unity. The initiative remained on the table. It was up to the other parties to take a realistic and pragmatic stance and show true political will to settle the dispute they had created and sustained. Thus far, they had favoured a status quo that entailed the risks of regional instability, terrorism and separatism. 12. Only the United Nations was in a position to use its good offices to break the dangerous impasse. The Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General was travelling to Algeria, Morocco and Mauritania to relaunch talks that would help the parties and neighbouring States reach a political solution through a new diplomatic approach centred on compromise. Morocco supported his approach. The other parties should show the necessary willingness to break the current deadlock and to give the inhabitants of the Tindouf camps the dignity and liberty of a life in a modern and democratic Morocco. 13. In the meantime, Morocco would continue to assume all its responsibilities for the security and well-being of the populations of the Sahara region, whose development was based on economic and social advancement and good governance, pursuant to instructions from the King himself, and was spurred on by heavy investment by the central Government in local infrastructure and public services. Statements made in exercise of the right of reply 14. Ms. Grimwood (United Kingdom), replying to comments made at the previous meeting by the representatives of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Honduras, Nicaragua and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, and expressing disagreement with the arguments they had advanced, said that her Government's position regarding the Falkland Islands was well known, and had been outlined in the statements her delegation had made in exercise of the right of reply at the Committee's 3rd and 6th meetings. With regard to nuclear weapons specifically, the United Kingdom fully respected the obligations placed on it under the Protocols to the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, which it had ratified in 1969. The United Kingdom would not use, or threaten to use, nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States parties to, and in compliance with, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. 15. Mr. Arias (Spain) said that the current situation in Gibraltar was the result of the local authorities' confrontational approach to regional cooperation. They had blocked Spanish fishing by dumping concrete blocks and not kept their commitments in counter-smuggling efforts, forcing Spain to step up its own security in the region, pursuant to domestic and European legislation. However, his Government was willing to continue discussing the terms of ad hoc meetings between Spain and the United Kingdom, with the participation of local and regional authorities from both sides of the line, to re-establish regional cooperation. 16. Regarding sovereignty over Gibraltar, the United Nations mandate was very clear: the United Kingdom and Spain should negotiate. Any colonial situation that partially or totally destroyed the national unity and territorial integrity of any country was incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. 17. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), replying to the statements made by the United Kingdom at the current meeting and at the Committee's 7th meeting, said that the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas were an integral part of Argentine territory and that, having been illegally occupied by the United Kingdom, they were the subject of a sovereignty dispute between the two countries, as had been recognized repeatedly in successive Assembly resolutions, all of which had urged the two Governments to resume negotiations in order to find a peaceful, lasting solution to the dispute. The resolutions of the Special Committee on decolonization and the declarations of the Organization of American States on the question had also been worded in similar terms. 18. The Argentine Government rejected all the false allegations and distortions of history contained in the so-called white paper relating to the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands, as well as any British attempt to introduce unilateral modifications in the situation in those archipelagos and the surrounding maritime areas while the sovereignty dispute was unresolved. It continued to reject any reference by the United Kingdom to those Argentine territories as "British Overseas Territories", as well as its inclusion of the so-called "British Antarctic Territory" among its Overseas Territories. 19. The principle of self-determination of peoples, the sole element on which the United Kingdom based its position on the Malvinas Islands, did not apply to the dispute between the two countries concerning sovereignty over them. 20. Together with South American regional organizations, Argentina reiterated that the illegitimate referendum held in the Malvinas Islands -- another unilateral act -- in which subjects of the British Crown had expressed their wish to continue to be British, did not alter in any way the essence of the question of the Malvinas lslands and did not put an end to the sovereignty dispute. Self-determination was not relevant to the Malvinas Islands because the British inhabitants were not a people subject to colonial domination, nor could they be made arbiters of a sovereignty dispute to which their Government was a party. 21. Likewise, Argentina deplored the United Kingdom's growing militarization of the South Atlantic and the illicit appropriation of Argentine renewable and non-renewable natural resources in open violation of international law. 22. Mr. Chenneerappa (India), replying to comments made at the previous meeting by the representative of Pakistan with reference to Jammu and Kashmir, said that they were unwarranted and irrelevant. The State of Jammu and Kashmir was an integral part of India, whose Constitution protected the fundamental rights of all its citizens. The people of Jammu and Kashmir had chosen their destiny peacefully, in accordance with universally accepted democratic principles. 23. Mr. Munir (Pakistan) replied that his own comments about Jammu and Kashmir were hardly irrelevant. For 65 years, the people of Jammu and Kashmir, which was not and never had been an integral part of India, had been denied the right to self-determination. In accordance with several United Nations resolutions, binding on both India and Pakistan but yet to be implemented, Jammu and Kashmir was a disputed territory whose final disposition was to be made in accordance with the will of its people. No electoral exercise conducted by India could replace an expression of the people's will through a free and impartial plebiscite conducted under the auspices of the United Nations. 24. The Chair invited the Committee to take action on the draft resolutions under agenda items 56, 57, 58, 59 and 60, none of which had any programme budget implications. Draft resolution I: Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations, submitted under item 56 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 25. A recorded vote was taken. In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Abstaining: Israel, Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 26. Draft resolution I was adopted by 149 votes to none, with 4 abstentions. 27. Mr. Meek (United Kingdom) said that, as in previous years, the United Kingdom had abstained in the vote on the draft resolution. His Government did not take issue with the main objective of the draft resolution, which was to seek compliance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations, and would continue to meet its obligations fully in that regard in respect of the United Kingdom Overseas Territories. It believed, however, that the decision as to whether a Non-Self-Governing Territory had reached a level of self-government sufficient to relieve the administering Power of the obligation to submit information under Article 73 e of the Charter ultimately fell to the government of the Territory and the administering Power concerned, and not to the General Assembly. Draft resolution II: Economic and other activities which affect the interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, submitted under item 57 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 28. A recorded vote was taken. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Against: Israel, United States of America. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 29. Draft resolution II was adopted by 153 votes to 2, with 2 abstentions. 30. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that he had voted in favour of draft resolution II on the understanding that the references in the text to the right to self-determination, which, according to resolution 1514 (XV), presupposed the existence of a people subject to alien subjugation, domination and exploitation, were in no way applicable to the question of the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas, because the United Kingdom, in its illegal occupation of the Islands, had expelled their local population and replaced it with its own population. The General Assembly itself had expressly ruled out the applicability of the principle of self-determination to the question of the Malvinas Islands in 1985 when it had rejected by a large majority two proposals by the United Kingdom seeking to incorporate that principle into a draft resolution on that specific question. All General Assembly resolutions subsequent to resolution 2065 (XX) and all subsequent Special Committee resolutions on the issue had expressly established that the way to put an end to that special and particular colonial situation, in which sovereignty over the Islands and the surrounding maritime areas was disputed, was not through self-determination but rather through a negotiated settlement of the sovereignty dispute between the two parties involved: Argentina and the United Kingdom. Furthermore, the General Assembly, in resolution 31/49, had called upon Argentina and the United Kingdom to refrain from taking decisions that would imply introducing unilateral modifications in the situation during such negotiations. The unilateral and illegal exploration and exploitation by the United Kingdom of the renewable and non-renewable natural resources of Argentina in the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas were in open violation of that specific United Nations pronouncement. Draft resolution III: Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations, submitted under item 58 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 31. A recorded vote was taken. Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. None. Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 32. Draft resolution III was adopted by 107 votes to none, with 51 abstentions. 33. Mr. Meek (United Kingdom) said that, while his delegation supported assistance by the specialized agencies to Non-Self-Governing Territories in humanitarian, technical and educational fields, it considered that the agency mandates must be scrupulously observed, and for that reason it had abstained in the vote. 34. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that his delegation had abstained in the vote because the draft resolution had to be implemented in accordance with the resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Special Committee relating to specific Territories. Draft resolution A/C.4/68/L.4: Offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, submitted under item 59 35. The Chair announced that Ghana and Thailand had become sponsors of the draft resolution. 36. Draft resolution A/C.4/68/L.4 was adopted. Draft resolution IV: Question of New Caledonia, submitted under item 60 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 37. Draft resolution IV was adopted. Draft resolution V: Question of French Polynesia, submitted under item 60 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 38. Draft resolution V was adopted. Draft resolution VI: Question of Tokelau, submitted under item 60 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 39. Draft resolution VI was adopted. Draft resolution VII: Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands, submitted under item 60 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 40. Draft resolution VII was adopted. 41. Mr. Gutiérrez Blanco Navarrete (Spain) said that his delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution because it supported the principle of self-determination for the Territories it covered. It recalled, however, that it was not the only principle relevant to decolonization. In certain cases the principle of territorial integrity applied, as in Gibraltar. As mandated by the General Assembly, Spain was ready to settle the dispute over Gibraltar once and for all. That could be done only through direct negotiations with the United Kingdom, in which the interests and aspirations of Gibraltar would be heard. 42. Mr. Meek (United Kingdom) said that since his Government supported the right to self-determination it had joined the consensus on draft resolution VII. However, it found some of the wording in the draft resolution unacceptable in that it failed to reflect the modernization of the relationship between the United Kingdom and its Overseas Territories, all of which had a large measure of self-government and had chosen to retain their link to the United Kingdom. It was a mutually acceptable relationship, based on partnership, shared values and recognition of the right to self-determination. The United Kingdom did not accept the assertion that the people of Gibraltar did not have the right of self-determination. 43. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina), expressing his country's support for the right to self-determination of the peoples in all 11 Territories considered in draft resolution VII, said that the United Nations, the administering Powers and the governments of those Territories must ensure that their populations were made aware of that right through civic education. However, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), self-determination was not the only principle applicable to decolonization; the principle of territorial integrity also applied in certain cases, such as that of the Malvinas Islands, explicitly defined in all resolutions on the question as a special and particular colonial situation. In that context, Argentina reiterated its willingness to resume negotiations with the United Kingdom to settle the sovereignty dispute over the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas. Draft resolution VIII: Dissemination of information on decolonization, submitted under item 60 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 44. A recorded vote was taken. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Israel, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. 45. Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 156 votes to 3. 46. Mr. Meek (United Kingdom) said that his delegation had voted against the draft resolution because it considered that the obligation placed on the Secretariat to publicize decolonization issues represented an unwarranted drain on the scarce resources of the United Nations. 47. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that Argentina, while fully supporting the right to self-determination of colonized peoples under resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625 (XXV), had voted in favour of draft resolution VIII on the understanding that it would be interpreted and implemented in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Special Committee, all of which subsequent to resolution 2065 (XX) had defined the question of the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding maritime areas explicitly as a special and particular colonial situation in that it involved a sovereignty dispute between two parties, Argentina and the United Kingdom, which had been requested to conduct negotiations in order to find as soon as possible a peaceful solution to the problem, bearing in mind the interests of the population of the Islands. Draft resolution IX: Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, submitted under item 60 (A/68/23 (chap. XIII)) 48. A recorded vote was taken. Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 49. Draft resolution IX was adopted by 158 votes to 3. 50. Mr. Gutiérrez Blanco Navarrete (Spain) said that his delegation had voted in favour of the draft resolution because it supported the principle of self-determination. It recalled, however, that self-determination was not the only principle relevant to decolonization. In certain cases the principle of territorial integrity applied, as in Gibraltar. Spain also emphasized that visiting missions could be dispatched only to Territories to which the principle of self-determination applied, and not to Territories in respect of which there was a sovereignty dispute. That requirement was fully in line with the practice of the Special Committee and with General Assembly resolution 850 (IX), which also established the requirement that any visiting mission must be approved by the General Assembly. 51. Mr. Meek (United Kingdom) said that his delegation continued to find some elements of the draft resolution unacceptable, and had therefore voted against it. Nevertheless, the United Kingdom remained committed to modernizing its relationship with its Overseas Territories, while fully taking into account the views of the peoples of those Territories. 52. Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) said that visiting missions could be sent only to Territories to which the right of self-determination applied, meaning Territories where there was no dispute over sovereignty. That requirement was fully in line with General Assembly resolution 850 (IX), which also established the requirement that any visiting mission must be approved by the General Assembly. Draft resolution A/C.4/68/L.5: Question of Western Sahara, submitted under item 60 53. The Chair said that the draft resolution before the Committee had been reissued as a draft resolution submitted by the Chair. Although it not been issued a full 24 hours before it was to be considered, he took it that the Committee was willing to waive the 24-hour rule under rule 120 of the rules of procedure and to take action on the draft resolution. 54. It was so decided. 55. Mr. Vanden Bulcke (Observer for the European Union), speaking also on behalf of the candidate countries Iceland, Montenegro, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey; the stabilization and association process countries Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; and, in addition, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine, and making a general statement on the question of Western Sahara, said that the European Union supported the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for Western Sahara to achieve a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution that provided for the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. Encouraging the parties and neighbouring States to cooperate with the Personal Envoy, it welcomed the parties' commitment to step up the negotiations, which should be held in good faith and without preconditions, taking note of developments since 2006, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2099 (2013) and other recent Council resolutions. The European Union fully supported the new methodology of shuttle diplomacy, which had been proposed by the Personal Envoy and accepted by the parties, for it remained concerned about the implications of the Western Sahara conflict for security and cooperation in the region. 56. The parties were encouraged to continue their cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in implementing confidence-building measures, which would help further the political process. Welcome progress had been made in that area, particularly the increase in the number of beneficiaries of family visits by air as well as the parties' readiness to begin to allow family visits by land, and also the meetings held to assess the implementation of the updated Plan of Action on Confidence-Building Measures. UNHCR should also continue to consider conducting a registration of the refugees in the Tindouf camps. 57. Draft resolution A/C.4/68/L.5 was adopted. The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m. 