%%%BUDGET CONTRIBUTIONS|HUMAN RESOURCES|

Sixty-eighth session Fifth Committee Agenda items 134 and 139 Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015 Human resources management Letter dated 22 October 2013 from the President of the General Assembly addressed to the Chair of the Fifth Committee I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a self-explanatory letter dated 18 October 2013 from the Secretary-General (see annex). (Signed) John W. Ashe Letter dated 18 October 2013 from the Secretary-General to the President of the General Assembly As the Fifth Committee embarks on its pivotal role at this session, I wish to reiterate my commitment to support the Committee during its consideration of the many important agenda items that have been tabled. In particular, I would like to highlight a number of self-reinforcing components that constitute the framework for achieving the positive transformation of the Organization that the General Assembly has envisaged. The first is the programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015. This proposal reflects a thorough review of our business to reduce overlap, embrace innovation, build synergies and, ultimately, meet the expectations of the General Assembly regarding the budget outline level. Though this has been a difficult balance to achieve, the proposal before Member States reflects an Organization-wide effort to achieve efficient and prudent management of resources while ensuring the effective implementation of existing mandates. Our shared goal of strengthening the ability of the United Nations to deliver on its mandates worldwide requires, however, other transformational measures that go beyond the proposals in the programme budget. In this regard, key decisions will be made at this session that will, going forward, shape the Organization and its ability to meet the growing challenges it faces. Several foundational efforts have already been undertaken. I am pleased to be able to report that the implementation of two transformational initiatives, the Umoja enterprise resource planning system and the International Public Sector Accounting Standards, is successfully under way. In combination, these initiatives will dramatically enhance our ability to manage operations globally while also enhancing transparency and accountability. The benefits of these investments by Member States will not, however, be fully realized unless we are also able to establish a truly global, adaptable and dynamic workforce that is equipped to meet the challenges of the future and that can be deployed in accordance with the Organization's needs and mandates. In this regard, it is recalled that the General Assembly welcomed, in its resolution 67/255, my commitment to develop a managed mobility policy for internationally recruited staff and requested a refined version of my original proposal. I am pleased to present that proposal, which represents a fundamental pillar of my reform agenda. This more structured approach to career development and mobility will ensure that staff obtain greater diversity of experience and are better equipped to meet the evolving needs of the Organization. It will also lead to a fairer sharing of the burden of service in difficult duty stations. I am also pleased to inform you that the refined proposal I have put forward responds to the priorities and concerns expressed by the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session. I look forward to Member States' consideration of these critical issues and trust that I can count on their continued support as we move forward. I should be grateful if you would arrange to have the present letter circulated to all Member States as a document of the General Assembly. (Signed) BAN Ki-moon 