%%%COUNTER-TERRORISM|TERRORISM|INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS|CAPACITY BUILDING|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|

Sixth Committee Summary record of the 4th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Tuesday, 8 October 2013, at 10 a.m. Chair: Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka) later: Mr. Silva (Vice-Chair) (Brazil) later: Mr. Kohona (Chair) (Sri Lanka) Contents Agenda item 110: Measures to eliminate international terrorism (continued) The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m. Agenda item 110: Measures to eliminate international terrorism (continued) (A/68/37 and A/68/180) 1. Mr. Salem (Egypt), speaking on behalf of the African Group, said that African States condemned terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations, as well as all acts, methods and practices of terrorism, including State terrorism, wherever, by whomever, against whomever committed; no cause or grievance could justify it. The Group strongly condemned the recent attack in Nairobi, which had offered ample evidence of the anxiety and distress that terrorism caused the international community as a whole, and called for enhanced cooperation and a coherent response at the regional and international level. All States, whether they were directly or indirectly affected, shared a common interest in being more proactive and adopting a preventive approach against terrorist acts. 2. The African Group welcomed the efforts of the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly 51/210 of 17 December 1996 to prepare a draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism. It attached great importance to the conclusion of a comprehensive convention and called on all States to resolve the outstanding issues in that regard. African States were willing to cooperate in order to refine the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and seek consensus on the draft convention, which should in no way deny people their right to self-determination. The proposal to convene a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations to formulate an international response to terrorism should also be given serious consideration. 3. African Member States, many of which were victims of terrorism, had demonstrated their commitment to addressing terrorism at the international and regional level, as seen from the 1999 Organization of African Unity (OAU) Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism in 1999, which came into force in 2002, the plan of action prepared at the Inter-Governmental High Level Meeting on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism in Africa, held in September 2002, and the establishment of the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism (ACSRT) in Algiers in 2004. 4. The rise in incidences of kidnapping and hostage-taking, which were one of the main sources of terrorism financing, was a matter of grave concern. He urged Member States to cooperate to address that issue. In addition, States should expand the assistance available to apprehend terrorists and investigate and prevent terrorist acts. The Group welcomed efforts to facilitate cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations, together with initiatives to strengthen the capacity of African countries to implement coordinated counter-terrorism strategies, such as the Trans-Sahara Counterterrorism Partnership developed by ACSRT and the United States Government Africa Center for Strategic Studies, and the Madrid Declaration and Plan of Action on strengthening the legal regime against terrorism in West and Central Africa. 5. Measures should be taken to ensure more effective implementation of the counter-terrorism conventions and related United Nations resolutions, as well as to step up capacity-building in developing countries. The African States were endeavouring to meet their international counter-terrorism obligations, but their resources and capacity were often inadequate for the task; he therefore appealed for assistance from the international community. 6. Mr. Sinjaree (Iraq) said that his Government condemned terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations, including State terrorism. There was no justification for terrorist acts, which violated the rights to stability and security, hampered the social, economic and political development of States and threatened international peace and security. The fight against terrorism therefore was not a localized effort, but involved the international community as a whole. His Government was prepared to take all necessary measures to eliminate the threat. In particular, it would seek to enhance cooperation between States at the bilateral, regional and international level, including through the United Nations and regional organizations, in order to punish perpetrators and ensure they were prosecuted in the States where terrorist acts had been committed, in accordance with international agreements. 7. Iraq had ratified several important instruments, including the Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism, the Organization of the Islamic Conference Treaty on Combating International Terrorism and the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. The Iraqi Government remained firm in its commitment to combat and suppress terrorism, as the country continued to suffer the effects of terrorist attacks, which targeted religious and civil institutions, including schools. 8. Despite the efforts made by the United Nations over the years, including the development of international treaties, terrorist acts continued to increase in number and severity. Analysis was needed to determine the appropriate objectives and adequate steps consummate with the challenge. Counter-terrorism efforts were not enough; if factors such as poverty, unemployment, human rights violations, the defamation of religion, foreign occupation and the use of double standards were not also addressed, Member States would continue to suffer from the impact of terrorism on national stability and international security. Lastly, any measures taken to combat terrorism must be implemented within the framework of human rights and humanitarian law. Any actions conducted outside of that framework would undermine and raise questions about the international community's belief in the values it claimed to defend when fighting terrorism. 9. Mr. Holovka (Serbia) said that the Government of Serbia unequivocally condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes. Serbia was a party to 14 of the 18 universal counter-terrorism instruments and was doing its utmost to fully implement the relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard, his Government had hosted a visit from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) (the "Counter-Terrorism Committee") from 18 to 21 March 2013. The Government had presented the visiting delegation with an overview of its political and operational counter-terrorism activities, stressing that violent extremism and organized crime constituted the major regional security threat. At the national level, the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure had been amended to ensure compliance with international human rights standards, refugee and humanitarian law, and international counter-terrorism instruments that had been ratified. The legal definition of terrorism had also been made more clear and precise. 10. The visiting delegation had also been briefed on criminal investigative procedures, border management and migration control strategies and the inter-agency approach to coordinating counter-terrorism efforts, which emphasized preventive measures and procedures to identify individuals linked to terrorist organizations. The Government remained committed to working with the United Nations and was in the process of preparing a comprehensive and integrated national counter-terrorism strategy and action plan. Those efforts would also bolster the Government's position in preparation for the negotiation process for Serbia's accession to the European Union. 11. The visit had also provided an opportunity to assess the ways in which the Government's national, regional and international counter-terrorism efforts could be enhanced and to determine its technical assistance needs in the area of national capacity-building. With regard to regional cooperation, the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) National Central Bureau for Serbia in Belgrade facilitated the exchange of information among police agencies in the Balkan States and participated in counter-terrorist and other crime-fighting activities in the region. The Government was also increasing its cooperation with regional and national organizations to better exchange information on the movements of terrorist suspects. Serbia had established more than 60 bilateral agreements with other States on law enforcement cooperation. 12. The Counter-Terrorism Committee had assessed the effectiveness of Serbia's national mechanisms to counter the financing of terrorism, including the role played by the financial intelligence unit. Within the framework of the joint European Union and Council of Europe Project against Money-Laundering and Terrorist Financing in Serbia (MOLI-Serbia), the Government had conducted a risk assessment study using a methodology developed by the World Bank on risks and threats of terrorist financing; the final report would be issued shortly. A law on the freezing of assets was also being drafted. 13. Technical assistance was needed from the United Nations to train prosecutors and judges to handle counter-terrorism cases while ensuring respect for international human rights law and due process; to establish a permanent training facility; and to offer training on methods to advance international cooperation. The Government also stood ready to provide assistance to other States in the region on areas of national expertise that had been recognized by the visiting delegation, such as the provision of witness protection. 14. His Government remained fully committed to implementing all United Nations counter-terrorism resolutions and supported the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (the Global Strategy), which offered critical guidelines with regard to strengthening international cooperation. His delegation hoped that the proposal to establish a working group during the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly would help to conclude the comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 15. Ms. Cabello de Daboin (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) said that her Government condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including State terrorism. In particular, her delegation strongly condemned the recent terrorist acts committed in Kenya, Pakistan, Iraq and Afghanistan, and against the people and Government of Syria, and expressed its condolences and solidarity with those countries. The fight against the terrorist threat to international peace and security was the responsibility of all States. Counter-terrorism efforts must be conducted within the framework of international cooperation, on the basis of respect for the principles and instruments of international human rights and humanitarian law. They should also respect the principles of self-determination, sovereignty and non-interference in the affairs of States, in line with the Charter of the United Nations. An effective response to terrorism must include measures that addressed the root causes of terrorism, which included poverty, social and economic inequities, political, racial, religious and cultural intolerance, the violation of human rights and foreign occupation. 16. Her Government had ratified the key counter-terrorism conventions and strove to fulfil its obligations under those instruments, including through the requisite amendment of domestic legislation. Her Government was firmly committed to the principle of sovereignty and would never provide financial support to or allow the use of national territory by persons planning or committing terrorist acts. Nor would it promote activities that incited violence or the violation of the constitutional order of States, which would represent an act of incitement to commit terrorism. In that regard, her delegation urged Member States to firmly condemn such acts of interference in order to build a world of peace, tolerance, respect and solidarity. 17. Member States must make progress towards the adoption of an international legal instrument that would offer a framework to effectively combat all terrorist acts, methods and practices while maintaining full respect for international law. In that regard, finding consensus on the definition of terrorism remained a challenge. Actions carried out by peoples in exercise of their right to self-determination must not be designated as terrorism. The international community must recognize both the right of peoples to fight against foreign occupation and the promotion of principles of international peace and security as complementary and essential conditions to guarantee peace in the world. 18. Her delegation supported the proposal made by the delegation of Egypt to convene a high-level special session of the General Assembly on cooperation against terrorism. That meeting should be held during the Assembly's sixty-ninth session, without prejudice to any progress made on drafting of the convention. The session could in fact serve as the means to end the impasse in the negotiations on the convention. 19. State terrorism violated State sovereignty and the rules regulating armed conflict and the protection of civilians and prisoners of war, while undermining the peaceful resolution of conflicts as established in the Charter and representing a patent violation of the rule of law and of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. It was wrong to use article 51 of the Charter and to unfairly apply Security Council resolutions to try and justify State terrorism. In that regard, her delegation rejected unilateral practices and assessments based on subjective criteria that were unrelated to the universal approach such issues required. 20. Terrorism was a transnational problem that must be addressed through international cooperation. The United Nations should lead such efforts in order to ensure that all States, without exception, in accordance with international law, complied with their obligations to bring perpetrators of terrorist acts to justice. Member States should detain terrorists in their territories rather than enable their impunity. Her Government called on the Government of the United States of America to fulfil its request for extradition to Venezuela of the international terrorist, Luis Posada Carriles, who had caused the explosion of a Cubana de Aviación airliner on 6 October 1976, killing 76 innocent people. Lastly, her Government reiterated the call for the release of the five Cuban heroes, four of whom were unjustly incarcerated in the United States for fighting against terrorism. 21. Ms. Grignon (Kenya) thanked the delegations that had expressed their solidarity with and extended their good will to her country in the wake of the terrorist attack committed at the Westgate Mall in Nairobi on 21 September 2013, for which Al-Shabaab, an extremist group linked to Al-Qaida, had claimed responsibility. She noted that a number of other terrorist attacks had been perpetrated by Al-Shabaab in churches and places of entertainment in north-eastern Kenya before and after the attack of 21 September. While those attacks had also cost lives, caused property damage and been condemned in equal measure by Kenyans, they had not received the same level of international media attention as the attack on Westgate Mall. Although Al-Shabaab had vowed to continue such activities until Kenyan troops left Somalia, the Government had only strengthened its resolve to fight the war against terrorism. It would continue to fulfil its international obligations to ensure peace and security in Somalia and in the region as a whole. 22. Other senseless terrorist acts had been committed recently in Nigeria, Pakistan and Iraq, offering a clear indication that extremist groups the world over were adopting new strategies to spread violent ideologies. Terrorist acts could not be justified in any way, as they constituted flagrant violations of human rights and international law and endangered national, regional and international peace and security. Her Government condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 23. The Horn of Africa and the Great Lakes region were prone to terrorism, owing to factors such as regional instability and humanitarian and refugee crises; the proliferation of small arms and light weapons; piracy off the coast of Somalia; organized crime; human trafficking; money-laundering; and illicit trade in narcotics and ivory. Effectively addressing those challenges would have a direct bearing on the counter-terrorism effort. 24. Her Government remained committed to the implementation of regional international instruments aimed at combating terrorism and violent extremism. Stressing the importance of Security Council resolutions 1624 (2005) and 1373 (2001) she noted that her Government had engaged in constructive dialogue with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED. concerning institutional and capacity-building initiatives. 25. Kenya had been a victim of three major terrorist attacks over the past two decades. Her delegation therefore stressed the need to enhance international cooperation and coordination to expedite the implementation of the Global Strategy. In that regard, the creation of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the work being done by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) were welcome developments. The role played by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in the area of capacity-building was also appreciated. However, coordination between those institutions must be enhanced so as to effectively support regional and national efforts and develop a coherent international strategy to combat terrorism. 26. Her Government's efforts to implement the Global Strategy and ensure regional and international peace and security included the development of counter-terrorism legislation and the creation of a National Counter-Terrorism Centre and an AntiTerrorism Police Unit. On the regional front, Kenya continued to play a vital role as a peacemaker in Somalia through the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and in conflict mediation in the region through the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). Her Government was also working with ACSRT and was a member of the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group. 27. Despite the recent attack in Nairobi, her Government remained committed to working within the AMISOM framework and with other international partners to help the Government of Somalia to find peace and stability. The international community must remain focused on tackling the terrorist threats emanating from Somalia and disrupting terrorist and piracy networks and their illicit financial flows. In that regard, support was required to facilitate the proactive exchange of information among Member States, with a view to bringing to justice the key leaders of those networks. 28. In order to be effective, the fight against terrorism required greater attention from the international community in several areas, including the effective implementation of the relevant conventions and protocols, in particular those promoting inter-religious dialogue among different civilizations. In addition, counter-terrorism measures should focus on preventing the subversion of educational and religious institutions by extremist groups. There was also a need to support capacity-building within national and regional mechanisms. In that regard, more regional institutional frameworks should be created and funded in order to enhance security cooperation. Efforts were also needed to raise awareness of the terrorist threat and find effective responses among local communities, the private sector, civil society and the media. The root causes of terrorism, including religious intolerance, abject poverty, unemployment, political instability and radicalization, must be addressed in tandem with the specific causes, through the promotion of mediation, peace-building and economic empowerment among vulnerable groups, in particular in the developing world. Lastly, her delegation called on all Member States to bridge their differences with a view to finalizing the comprehensive convention on international terrorism. 29. Mr. Sarki (Nigeria) said that the number of terrorist attacks around the world was on the rise, posing a threat to international peace and security. The recent attack in Nairobi had caused the world to recoil with horror. Nigeria was also a victim of terrorism; since 2009, the extremist group, Boko Haram, had embarked on an indiscriminate killing spree of security forces and civilians alike that had cost the country thousands of lives, caused instability in affected regions and resulted in hardship for Nigerians from all economic, religious and ethnic groups. After several attempts to seek a peaceful resolution had proved futile, his Government had embarked on an offensive operation that was yielding positive results in previously volatile areas. The Government was doing its utmost to carry out those security operations with the least possible hardship on civilians and in full observance of the rules of engagement. In addition, law enforcement agents had received the cooperation and support of the local communities. 30. The Government had also taken steps to address socio-economic challenges in regions where Boko Haram was most active. Policies aimed at mitigating poverty, illiteracy and unemployment were being diligently implemented. Additionally, in collaboration with the United Nations and other partners, programmes focused on poverty alleviation and employment generation for unemployed youth had been created. The initial feedback had been encouraging and the Government intended to ensure that those activities were sustained. The strategy to rehabilitate militants and terrorists included the organization of inter-faith religious meetings to foster tolerance and peace. 31. Nigeria had recently acceded to the International Convention Against the Taking of Hostages and the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorism Bombings. The Government remained convinced of the need for a collaborative response to the terrorist threat and its related challenges. The country's experience had shown the viability of establishing fusion centres, sharing intelligence and conducting joint operations and regional actions, including in the area of capacity-building. His Government would continue to partner with friendly countries and international bodies such as CTITF and CTED in identifying and addressing gaps in the national counter-terrorism effort. It would also continue to support the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in its efforts to curtail the movement of arms in the subregion and develop a comprehensive subregional strategy on terrorism, and to participate in the activities of the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF). 32. His delegation appreciated the important role played by the United Nations in galvanizing global efforts towards a successful fight against terrorism and applauded the efforts of CTITF, CTED, UNODC and other agencies in that regard, in particular the efforts made by CTITF to launch the Global Strategy in various parts of the world. The integrated capacity building assistance (I-ACT) initiative was an example of the results that could be achieved through better coordination within the United Nations system to deliver as one. 33. His Government was proud to host the regional seminar for West Africa and the Sahel from 16 to 17 October 2013, and welcomed the participation of all partners in the global fight against terrorism. Those efforts should be reinforced by the elaboration of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism. In that regard, his delegation welcomed the work of the Ad Hoc Committee and wished to stress that its success depended largely on the support and cooperation of Member States. 34. Mr. Al-Hafez (Saudi Arabia) said that the terrorist threat transcended national borders and required a response from the international community as a whole. Saudi Arabia had been a victim of terrorist attacks; its Government was working at the national, regional and international levels to combat terrorism and implement relevant international law and United Nations resolutions, in particular in the areas of preventing incitement to terrorism and impunity of perpetrators. The conclusion of a convention on international terrorism must go hand in hand with the requisite political will to eliminate that scourge. His delegation urged all Member States to condemn all terrorist acts that violated the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and threatened peace and security and relations between States. 35. At the international level, his Government had chaired the Advisory Board of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre for two years and had recently announced a contribution of $100 million to the Centre. He called on Member States to support its work, not only through financial contributions, but also through human resources and strategies to improve its methods of work. His Government also supported other international initiatives, in particular within the framework of the relevant Security Council committees. In that regard, he reiterated the importance of the work of the Ombudsperson of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011). 36. The increase in the number of terrorist acts underlined the need for Member States and the United Nations to address the root causes of terrorism and intensify efforts to implement counter-terrorism strategies that supported development, education and the promotion of the rule of law. In that respect, his Government had established the Mohammed bin Nayef Counselling and Care Centre, which had set a unique precedent in the rehabilitation of individuals influenced by extremist ideologies. The Centre offered an effective response that respected international human rights standards. His delegation had presented the results of that pilot project to the Security Council and the General Assembly. In addition, in cooperation with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, ,his Government had hosted a conference in February 2013 that had brought together regional and international counter-terrorism centres in order to enhance coordination efforts. 37. His Government condemned all forms of terrorism, including State terrorism, and stressed the need for the distinction to be made between criminal acts of terrorism and the struggle of those suffering under foreign occupation who exercised their legitimate right to self-determination, which was enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and other international instruments. 38. As the fourth biennial review of the Global Strategy approached, his delegation stressed the need for Member States agree on a definition of terrorism, make progress towards drafting a convention on international terrorism and enhance strategies and support for the counter-terrorism effort. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre could play a more strategic role in coordinating the efforts of the various United Nations entities involved in counter-terrorism, with a view to avoiding waste and the duplication of efforts. 39. Mr. Troya (Ecuador) said that his Government condemned terrorism in all of its form and manifestations, including State terrorism, whether committed directly or indirectly. All counter-terrorism activities, however, must comply strictly with international law, especially human rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian law, and must respect State sovereignty and the principle of noninterference in internal affairs. A clear distinction should also be drawn between terrorism and the legitimate struggle of people under colonial domination or foreign occupation to seek their independence and defend their sovereignty. 40. The prevention of terrorism was equally important and could be achieved by addressing its root causes, which included political, ethnic, religious and racial intolerance and social and economic inequality. In that regard, his delegation rejected the threat or use of force against any State under the guise of counter-terrorist efforts as well as unilateral determinations against certain States. It also rejected any measures taken outside of the framework of the Charter, including extrajudicial executions, which were illegal. 41. His Government supported the balanced implementation of the four pillars of the Global Strategy, which took into account conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, measures to prevent and combat it, as well as steps to build the capacity of Member States in those areas. The Global Strategy also called on Member States to respect human rights and the rule of law in their counter-terrorism efforts and to recognize respect for national sovereignty as the key to peaceful coexistence. 42. While his delegation appreciated many elements of the draft convention on international terrorism, it believed that the divergences of opinion on the instrument were conceptual rather than semantic in nature and could only be resolved through an open, respectful and transparent discussion aimed at generating consensus based on mutual compromise. It supported the proposal to hold a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations to formulate a joint organized response of the international community to terrorism, without prejudice to any progress made on drafting an convention on international terrorism. While his delegation supported efforts to achieve consensus, it would not accept any sacrifice to the quality of the text in order to simply expedite the conclusion of a convention. 43. Mr. Abulkalam Abdul Momen (Bangladesh) said that his Government unequivocally rejected terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations. Under the leadership of its Prime Minister, it had waged an uncompromising battle to root out the evils of communalism, extremism and terrorism, which constituted a threat to international peace and security, and human security. His Government fully supported the Global Strategy and called for the transparent and comprehensive implementation of its four pillars. In that regard, the establishment of CTITF had been an important step. It also welcomed the key role played by Saudi Arabia's in the establishment of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre as well as its recent contribution of $100 million to support and strengthen the Centre's capacity-building functions. 44. Bangladesh was a party to 14 of the universal counter-terrorism instruments and had ratified the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. The Government was pursuing a counter-radicalization strategy that sought to impart education, empower women, create employment for youth and propagate secular and moderate cultural values in order to foster tolerance, friendliness and love. Efforts had been made to fully implement Security Council resolution 1267 (1999), in particular through banning all terrorist groups that had been identified by the relevant Security Council Committee. On the legislative front, the parliament had passed the Anti-Terrorism Act in 2012, and the country's first money-laundering prevention act had been enacted in 2009 and made more stringent in 2012. 45. In partnership with the CTITF, his Government had organized the Workshop on the Regional Implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in South Asia, held in Dhaka in May 2012. It had also ratified the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism and its Additional Protocol, which facilitated legal cooperation to combat terrorist financing, and had initiated regional counter-terrorism efforts under the framework of the Bay of Bengal Initiative for MultiSectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) Convention on Cooperation in Combating International Terrorism, Transnational Organised Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking. 46. His delegation fully supported the timely conclusion of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, which required a consensus definition of terrorism. The convention should also make a clear distinction between terrorism and the legitimate struggle against colonial domination or foreign occupation. Any attempt to wrongfully associate terrorism with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group should be avoided. The convention should also address the root causes of terrorism, including economic disparity, political subjugation and exclusion, prolonged and unresolved conflicts, neo-colonialism, oppression, injustice and the absence of the rule of law. 47. His Government would continue to uphold a zero tolerance policy towards terrorism and pursue a foreign policy that combated extremism through the promotion of peace, democracy, secularism, freedom, human rights, good governance and social justice. In an increasingly globalized world, fostering a culture of peace and non-violence, inter-faith and intercultural dialogue, and ethnic and religious tolerance was an effective way to fight terrorism. 48. Mr. Kim Yong Song (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that the terrorist acts committed around the world threatened States' sovereignty, social stability and international peace and security. Member States must therefore redouble their efforts to face the terrorist threat. In particular, putting an end to the terrorist acts against sovereign States should be made a major priority. The armed aggression against States and the massacre of civilians being committed under the pretext of the "war on terror" constituted acts of State-sponsored terrorism and a violation of human rights and could not be justified under any circumstances. 49. In Syria, armed forces were killing innocent people and attempting to overthrow the legitimate Government. Actions aimed at changing the regime of State using counter-terrorism as justification, designating others as terrorists and the imposition of sanctions were forms of interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States and must be rejected. In that regard, the comprehensive convention on international terrorism under discussion should take into account the issue of eliminating State-sponsored terrorism. 50. Counter-terrorism efforts must address the root causes of terrorism, which were often terrorist acts of the past. In that respect, his delegation supported the proposal to convene a high-level conference on terrorism, as it would contribute to identifying and remedying the underlying causes. 51. Every State had a critical role to play in the international community's fight against terrorism. His country had endured terrorist threats aimed at overthrowing its socialist system for a long time. Counter-terrorism had therefore become an important issue for the Government, as it sought to safeguard the lives of its citizens and the sovereignty and security of the State. Efforts to strengthen international cooperation included the signing of key international counter-terrorism instruments and, recently, the ratification of the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. The Government was also amending and supplementing its domestic legislation and would join in the international community's efforts to eliminate terrorism and build a peaceful and stable world. 52. Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) said that his Government strongly condemned all forms of terrorism and reiterated its determination to combat it, in cooperation with its regional and international partners. Terrorism was not associated with any specific religion, civilization, culture or nationality. It was also important to make a distinction between the legitimate struggle of people living under colonial and foreign occupation to exercise their inalienable right to selfdetermination. 53. Algeria had pioneered many counter-terrorism initiatives and instruments that continued to play an important role in the African region. In view of the situation in the Sahel region, his Government was particularly focused on supporting forums and mechanisms that facilitated security cooperation between States through border control measures and intelligence sharing. For example, with the Government of Canada, it co-chaired the working group on the Sahel Region Capacity Building Working Group of GCTF, and also participated in the Joint Military Staff Committee of the Sahel Region and the Sahel Fusion and Liaison Unit. While his Government welcomed the liberation of the northern region of Mali from the control of terrorist groups and the restoration of constitutional order, including the holding of presidential elections in that country, it believed, as affirmed in the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, that the root causes behind Mali's instability must still be addressed through a long-term development agenda for the region. 54. For its part, the African Union had demonstrated its commitment to the fight against terrorism through its decision condemning the payment of ransom to terrorist groups, the appointment of a Special Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission for Counter-Terrorism Cooperation and the establishment of a subcommittee on terrorism within its Peace and Security Council. 55. His delegation stressed the urgent need to conclude the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism, which would strengthen the legal framework on counter-terrorism, and called on Member States to work in a constructive manner to overcome the obstacles. The definition of terrorism contained in the convention should be in line with the Charter and international law and should make a distinction between acts of terrorism and the legitimate struggle for the right to self determination, in line with General Assembly resolution 46/51. His delegation supported the proposal to convene a high-level United Nations conference to formulate a common position on eliminating terrorism. Such a conference would greatly contribute to resolving the outstanding disagreements. 56. His Government welcomed the measures adopted during the third biennial review of the Global Strategy, held in June 2012, which aimed to strengthen cooperation between all stakeholders through enhancing the mobilization of resources and exchanging expertise and best practices. CTITF had an important role to play in that regard by coordinating those efforts and providing Member States with technical support in the areas of policy development and capacity-building. 57. In its first year of operation, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre had become one of the key counter-terrorism entities within the United Nations system. As one of the Centre's Advisory Board Members, his Government reiterated its appreciation to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its recent generous donation to the Centre. It also welcomed the efforts at cooperation made by United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, in particular CTED, which had organized a workshop in Algiers in June 2013 for North African countries on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005). 58. Recalling paragraph 8 of General Assembly resolution 67/99, in which the Assembly had expressed concern at the increase in incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking by terrorist groups, his delegation called on Member States to take concrete measures to counter the financing of terrorism, including by refusing and unequivocally rejecting the payment of ransom to terrorist groups. 59. Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that as a victim of terrorism, including State-sponsored terrorism, his country fully understood the untold consequences of such acts for the victims and for society. State terrorism hindered the scientific and technological development of developing countries by destroying their elite human resources; in recent years, professional scientists in Iran had been the targets of several such attacks. Those cases demonstrated that one of the main challenges in countering terrorism was the use of double standards that labelled acts of terrorism as good or bad in accordance with narrow political interests, potentially undermining international trust and cooperation. A selective approach to countering terrorism must be rejected; the preferential treatment given to some terrorist groups, as evidenced by the recent removal from the Al-Qaida Sanctions List of a terrorist group that had killed and injured thousands of Iranians, was unacceptable. 60. Violence and extremism left no space for understanding and moderation, which were the necessary foundations for collective life in human society. It was not enough to learn merely to tolerate others; rather, people should dare to work together to address the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. Terrorism and the destruction of innocent lives represented the ultimate inhumanity of extremism and violence. The suffering of the victims of blind air strikes and indiscriminate bombings could not be glossed over as unfortunate "collateral damage". Terrorism should be countered in full conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and international law, including international human rights and humanitarian law. It should not be equated with the legitimate struggles of peoples under foreign domination or occupation. Attempts to attribute the phenomenon to a particular culture, religion or nationality were deplorable; they led to distrust among nations and gave leeway to terrorists. His delegation welcomed all initiatives designed to promote dialogue among civilizations, cultures and religions. 61. People all over the world were tired of war, violence and extremism and hoped for change. In his recent address to the General Assembly, the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran had proposed, as a first step, a new project entitled "the World Against Violence and Extremism (WAVE)", which all States, international organizations and civil society entities had been invited to join in order to end terrorism by promoting moderation. 62. Mr. Laassel (Morocco) said that terrorism, which targeted its victims blindly and without distinction, could not be associated with any particular religion, civilization, State or nation. His Government condemned terrorism in all its forms; in particular, it deplored the recent terrorist attack in Nairobi and expressed its solidarity with the Government of Kenya. 63. During its presidency of the Security Council in December 2012, his delegation had organized a ministerial meeting on the Sahel and contributed actively to the adoption of Security Council resolution 2085 (2012) on Mali. At the national level, his Government continued to strengthen its legal, institutional and operational framework in order to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime effectively. Among other measures, it had implemented a proactive global strategy aimed both at the suppression of terrorism through strengthened security and judicial services and at its prevention through political, economic, social, cultural, educational and religious reforms. 64. National efforts alone were inadequate to cope with global developments in terrorism. The international community must therefore make a concerted effort to strengthen its counter-terrorism coordination. In that regard, Morocco, which was a party to all the international counter-terrorism instruments, supported the United Nations in its work on finalizing a draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and noted the ongoing efforts of the Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 in that regard. 65. His Government continued to support all international, regional and subregional initiatives aimed at fostering greater cooperation and the exchange of experiences in combating terrorism; Morocco participated actively in the Global Counterterrorism Forum and was currently the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) (the "Counter-Terrorism Committee"). His delegation called for implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and was ready to take an active part in its biennial review. It also welcomed the establishment of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and urged Member States to cooperate fully with it. 66. The Secretary-General's initiative in convening a second high-level meeting on the Sahel, held on 26 September 2013, was to be commended. Although the international community's response had curbed the immediate effects of the security threat posed by terrorist groups for Mali and the broader Sahel region, determined counter-terrorism efforts remained vital in the Sahel and West Africa, along with regional, subregional and intraregional cooperation. The scope of the working group on the Sahel should be expanded to include the Atlantic coast of Africa, in order to better understand the linkages between terrorist networks and transnational organized crime. 67. His Government was seeking to expedite the entry into force of the agreement on judicial cooperation adopted at the Fifth Conference of the Ministers of Justice of Francophone African countries with a view to full implementation of the international counter-terrorism instruments. It also continued to support a number of regional initiatives to strengthen the joint capacities of African States for countering security and terrorism threats. 68. Mr. Jaitley (India) said that his Government condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including State-sponsored cross-border terrorism and other terrorist acts in which States were directly or indirectly involved. No cause or grievance could justify terrorism: a zero-tolerance approach must be taken. His Government strongly supported all efforts to strengthen international and regional cooperation, including the exchange of information; such cooperation was required in order to ensure the effective and balanced implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, supported by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre. 69. The United Nations normative framework should be strengthened in order to counter terrorism effectively. In particular, the scope of the relevant legal instruments should be expanded and enforcement efforts enhanced in order to deny terrorists safe haven, cut off their financial flows and support networks, and bring them to justice. For that reason, his delegation attached importance to the Ad Hoc Committee's work on the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and hoped that all States would consider accepting the text submitted by the Coordinator. The 2007 proposal was viable and delicately balanced. 70. India, and indeed the entire South Asian region, had suffered for over 25 years from the activities of major terrorist groups, which continued to pose a serious challenge to peace, progress and prosperity. His Government had ratified the 1987 SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism, the 2004 Additional Protocol thereto and the 2008 SAARC Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, and was working with fellow SAARC countries to strengthen counter-terrorism cooperation. 71. India was a party to 13 of the international counter-terrorism instruments and had adopted legislation dealing with all aspects of terrorism, including conspiracy and incitement, the financing of terrorism, the harbouring of terrorists and the unauthorized possession or use of explosives and lethal weapons. Other laws had been adopted to prevent weapons of mass destruction from falling into the hands of terrorists and to monitor the foreign contributions received by non-governmental organizations. The State had concluded more than 40 bilateral treaties on extradition and mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and was an active member of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), as well as other global counter-terrorism initiatives. It had established a national agency to investigate and prosecute offences against the country's sovereignty and security and an integrated intelligence grid for constructing actionable intelligence to combat terrorism and internal security threats. Its financial intelligence unit had launched a project aimed at adopting best practices and appropriate technology in order to combat money-laundering and related crimes. 72. Alongside law enforcement aspects, measures to prevent terrorism were also vital; a focus on development, education, social integration, tolerance, the rule of law and respect for human rights were integral components of that approach. 73. Mr. Muhumuza (Uganda) said that in order to combat terrorism successfully, hard decisions must be taken, including the formulation of a comprehensive definition of terrorism. The root causes of terrorism, in particular poverty, must be addressed. In that connection, his Government had established a youth fund providing start-up capital to involve young people in poverty eradication programmes. The absurd tendency to associate terrorism with particular religious beliefs, civilizations or ethnic groups must also be dispelled, through education. In Uganda, a public awareness campaign had been launched to educate the public in that regard, using broadcast media and public billboards. 74. The international community should assist in building the capacity of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to which his Government had contributed troops and funds, so that it could continue pursuing the terrorist groups, including Al-Shabaab, that were operating in Somalia. Assistance should also be provided to the Somali Government in developing institutions capable of dealing with such terrorist organizations. Collective efforts should seek to deny terrorists safe haven, eradicate sources of terrorist financing, reduce State vulnerability and enhance emergency preparedness and response capabilities. To that end, the Bank of Uganda had instituted measures to strictly enforce anti-money-laundering legislation. 75. Uganda had suffered firsthand from extreme acts of terrorism. On 11 July 2010, Al-Shabaab had killed more than 70 civilians in two terrorist bombings in Kampala. His Government therefore stood in solidarity with the Governments and peoples of Kenya and Nigeria, following the recent heinous terrorist attacks in those countries. 76. It was regrettable that calls to address the dumping of toxic waste off the coast of Somalia had gone largely unheeded; there was a risk that such materials could be recycled by terrorists for use as weapons of mass destruction. Such actions must stop and those responsible must be held accountable. 77. Mr. Almakhadi (Yemen) said that his Government rejected terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatever its motivation or purpose. Greater cooperation and coordination among Member States were needed to eliminate terrorism, which must not be associated with any religion, culture or nationality. 78. It was important to conclude the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism, which must contain a clear definition of terrorism that distinguished between acts of terrorism and the right of peoples to self-defence, pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations. Convinced that national and international efforts to combat terrorism were complementary, his Government had ratified most of the international counter-terrorism instruments, including the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. Other recent steps at the national level included the adoption of a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy aimed at eliminating the sources and financing of extremism throughout the country and educating the public on the dangers of extremism and terrorism; adoption of a law on money-laundering and terrorist financing that criminalized terrorist acts, attempts to perpetrate such acts and incitement to and participation in or assistance with them; amendment of the Penal Code to criminalize such participation and incitement; conclusion of a number of bilateral agreements on the exchange of counter-terrorism expertise and information; and media awareness-raising efforts to promote tolerance and moderation. In addition, a draft law on counter-terrorism aimed at supplementing the relevant provisions of the Constitution and taking into account related human rights aspects was currently before the Assembly of Representatives. 79. His delegation was grateful to the Government of Saudi Arabia for its initiative in establishing the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre. He welcomed the generous contribution announced by King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud to support and strengthen the Centre's functions and called on all Member States to contribute to its activities in implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. 80. Recent attacks against the Yemeni armed forces and security forces were an attempt to seek revenge for their success in combating terrorism in many parts of the country. His Government was committed to cooperating with its international partners to eradicate terrorism in Yemen, which was fuelled by low rates of development, poverty, a lack of youth employment opportunities, poor literacy and weak services, in addition to security and political factors, all of which destabilized society and created an environment conducive to extremism. 81. Yemen was determined to uproot terrorist elements and eliminate their sources of support and financing at home and abroad. While it had achieved some major successes in combating extremist groups with the cooperation of the international community, it required material, logistical and technical support for the programmes and plans that would enable it to fully eradicate the phenomenon and address its root causes. In that context, he appealed to the country's international partners to back the Government's rehabilitation programme for extremists, support a number of development projects and provide logistical and technical assistance to the security forces. 82. Mr. Khalili (Afghanistan), underscoring his Government's condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, said that, despite significant improvements in health, education and infrastructure, and advances in democracy and fundamental freedoms, his country remained one of the main victims of terrorism. His Government was more determined than ever to defeat that scourge at the national, regional and international levels and had made counter-terrorism a pillar of its national security strategy. Many terrorists had been killed, captured and brought to justice by the national army and police, which had now taken charge of security responsibilities throughout the country; hundreds of terrorist plots had also been averted. However, concrete efforts were also needed to eliminate terrorist safe havens and support centres outside Afghanistan, which were the main source of terrorist attacks within his country. Since cooperation was vital to eradicate terrorism in the region, his Government was working closely with its neighbours, through bilateral and trilateral agreements as well as such initiatives as the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. The outcome of President Karzai's recent visit to Pakistan, during which discussions had been held on enhancing joint efforts to defeat terrorism and advance the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process, was encouraging. 83. Terrorism and organized crime were mutually reinforcing threats that must be given equal attention. The problem of narcotic drugs could be effectively addressed only through a comprehensive approach covering production, trafficking and consumption. In that regard, enhanced regional efforts to curtail trafficking were essential. 84. All States must fulfil their responsibility to combat international terrorism, including through the implementation of all relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. His Government continued to bring its national counter-terrorism legislation into line with international legal frameworks and was working to implement the 13 international counter-terrorism instruments to which it was a party. Its national counter-terrorism practitioners had taken part in several capacity-building workshops and seminars on combating terrorism; he commended the important work being done by the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in that regard. 85. His Government supported the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which should be implemented in a balanced manner, giving due consideration to all four pillars. It welcomed the outcome of the third biennial review in June 2012, and looked forward to the fourth review. The Organization would be best able to lead international counter-terrorism efforts through increased coordination and coherence within the United Nations system. In that regard, he welcomed the establishment of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and applauded the work of CTITF. At the national level, his Government had stepped up inter-agency coordination to ensure consistent reporting on implementation to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011). 86. He commended the work being done by the Ad Hoc Committee to achieve the early conclusion of the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and urged all States to work to resolve the outstanding issues. 87. Mr. Silva (Brazil), Vice-Chair, took the Chair. 88. Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan), recalling that his country had repeatedly been a target of terrorist attacks, said that his Government strongly condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. All terrorist acts were serious crimes; they were unjustifiable, regardless of motivation, and should be unequivocally condemned and prosecuted. 89. Armed conflicts, especially in territories under foreign military occupation, often created conditions conducive to exploitation by terrorists, separatists and other non-State actors. Furthermore, the accumulation of armaments and munitions in places outside international control, and the danger of weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of non-State actors, posed a serious threat to international peace and security. States were therefore required to comply strictly with their international obligations, including by ensuring that their respective territories were not used for terrorist activities. 90. Priority should be given to the continued implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in an integrated manner. States should also implement the relevant Security Council resolutions, including by promptly and effectively applying the sanctions imposed. His delegation supported close cooperation and effective coordination among the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council that dealt with counter-terrorism and their groups of experts. Enhanced cooperation among States was also crucial, both in direct counter-terrorism efforts and in the provision of capacity-building assistance. The relevant United Nations entities played an important role in facilitating technical assistance to Member States. 91. His delegation would make every effort to reach an agreement on a draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism. The absence of a clear definition of terrorism in international law hampered the international community's efforts to bring to account not only individual terrorists and organizations, but also States that promoted, supported or financed terrorist activities. 92. Azerbaijan had consistently implemented its international obligations and contributed to international counter-terrorism efforts. A central theme of its presidency of the Security Council in 2012 had been strengthening international cooperation in the implementation of counter-terrorism obligations. Furthermore, on 18 and 19 March 2013, his Government had hosted an international conference on "Strengthening cooperation in preventing terrorism", which had been jointly organized with UNODC and the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and had focused on cooperation in measures to address conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism; countering stereotypes and the appeal of terrorism; and the role of international partners in building State capacity to prevent and counter terrorism. 93. The war on terrorism should not be used to target any religion or culture. All States should unite in supporting initiatives for intercultural and interreligious dialogue, such as the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the Culture of Peace Initiative, in order to help prevent misconceptions, defamatory manifestations and deliberate labelling of religions and thereby make counter-terrorism efforts more efficient. 94. Mr. AlAjmi (Kuwait) said that his Government unequivocally condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes. In particular, it deplored the recent terrorist attacks in Iraq and Kenya. All States should take urgent measures to combat terrorism and address its root causes, which included prolonged unresolved conflicts, violations of human rights and lack of good governance. Terrorism should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group. 95. His Government was committed to supporting the work of humanitarian organizations around the world, particularly those helping refugees. Bearing in mind the terrible catastrophe being suffered by the Syrian people, two million of whom were now refugees outside their country, Kuwait, at the request of the United Nations Secretary-General, had hosted a donors conference on 30 January 2013, at which participating countries had pledged more than US$ 1.5 billion in humanitarian aid for the Syrian people. Kuwait itself had contributed US$ 300 million, turning the entire amount over to United Nations agencies. 96. As part of its counter-terrorism efforts, his Government sought to ratify the relevant international instruments on combating terrorism; Kuwait had recently acceded to the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and ratified the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. In that context, it attached great importance to the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism and urged all States to make concerted efforts to finalize it, taking into account the need to provide a clear definition of terrorism, including State terrorism, and distinguish it from the right of peoples to resist aggression and achieve self-determination. 97. The Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) was to be commended for removing Lajnat Al Daawa Al Islamiya, a charitable organization, from the Al-Qaida Sanctions List. It should be reaffirmed that his Government supported only humanitarian endeavours and that all Kuwaiti charitable associations worked in a fully transparent manner. 98. Mr. Desta (Eritrea) said that his Government unequivocally condemned terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed. Terrorist acts constituted a flagrant violation of international law and fundamental freedoms. In order to prevent and control the spread of terrorism, equal emphasis and resources should be devoted to all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, including measures to address the root causes of terrorism, such as long-standing conflicts, and conditions of inequality and poverty. The recent terrorist attack in Nairobi showed that greater cooperation in sharing information and best practices was needed among the countries of the region and other stakeholders. 99. Eritrea, which had long experience of combating terrorism, was a party to the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism and other regional conventions, including the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Security Matters of the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (CEN-SAD). National legislative measures were in place for the prevention and suppression of the financing of terrorism. 100. The role of the United Nations and regional organizations in combating terrorism should extend to ensuring that terrorism was not politicized for particular purposes. It was unacceptable to threaten or use force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State under the pretext of combating terrorism, and any action taken against terrorism must be consistent with international law. Acts of terrorism should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group and due regard should be given to the legitimate struggle for self-determination. Mainstream or social media must not be used to disseminate disinformation. 101. Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka) resumed the Chair. 102. Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) said that the final report on the Counter-Terrorism Committee's visit to Uruguay in November 2012 indicated that his country's counter-terrorism efforts were on track, although it needed to update its legislation, tighten border controls, link its immigration databases with those of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), and strengthen measures to monitor and criminalize the financing of terrorism. His Government welcomed the follow-up visit scheduled to take place in December 2013 to discuss areas where improvement was needed or technical cooperation might be provided. 103. Global criminal proceeds amounted to US$ 2.1 trillion annually, according to UNODC estimates; furthermore, assets from illicit activities were a major source of terrorist financing. Uruguay, which currently held the presidency pro tempore of the South American Financial Action Task Force (GAFISUD), was therefore convinced of the need to combat the financing of terrorism with the greatest determination, in all possible areas and with all tools available. The work of GAFISUD and its development as an FATF-style regional body demonstrated the commitment at regional and subregional levels to combating terrorism and related crimes. 104. His delegation was committed to working constructively with other delegations to strengthen the system for combating international terrorism in all its manifestations, through the implementation of the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The only outstanding issues surrounding the draft comprehensive convention were the definition of international terrorism and the scope of the acts to be covered. While all delegations would need to make further efforts to reach an agreement, it was to be hoped that work on the draft comprehensive convention could be concluded at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly. 105. Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand) said that his Government unequivocally condemned all terrorist acts, which were criminal and totally unjustifiable, and offered its condolences to the victims of recent terrorist attacks in Kenya and elsewhere. It would actively engage in preventing, combating and eliminating terrorism at the domestic, regional and international levels and would bring to justice, on the basis of the principle of extradite or prosecute, all perpetrators of terrorist acts. Member States must commit to and implement all international counter-terrorism instruments, as well as the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. 106. His Government welcomed the partnerships established by the United Nations to address terrorism at the regional and global levels, attaching particular importance to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which engaged not only Member States but also other actors, including non-governmental organizations and civil society. Thailand would participate actively in the fourth biennial review of that Strategy, and would continue to work closely with all United Nations bodies, in particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), in capacity-building and international coordination at the regional level. 107. An effective way to combat terrorism was to eliminate terrorist financing by establishing strict anti-money-laundering laws. His Government had systematically strengthened its anti-money-laundering controls and legislation and, in recognition of its success, FATF had announced at its Plenary in June 2013 that Thailand would no longer be subject to monitoring under the FATF global anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorist financing compliance process. 108. Thailand had been active in interdicting and preventing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction through its participation in the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI) since November 2012. It was also in the process of ratifying the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, and the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and the 2005 Protocol thereto. With the development of new threats, such as the possible use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists; the continuing emergence of home-grown terrorism and self-radicalized individuals; the spread of violent extremist beliefs among young people; and the growing threat of cyberterrorism, the existing counter-terrorism treaty regime needed to be supplemented. His delegation therefore commended the work of the Ad Hoc Committee and welcomed the progress being made towards finalizing the draft comprehensive convention on international terrorism, which should contain a sufficiently clear and precise definition of terrorism, without any reference to "State terrorism". A finalized draft of the convention was a pre-requisite for the convening of a high-level conference under United Nations auspices. 109. The root causes of terrorism must be addressed in parallel with efforts to enhance the international legal regime and law enforcement. Dialogue among civilizations and enhanced interfaith and intercultural understanding should continue to be promoted, and all responses to terrorism must comply with international law, especially international human rights, refugee and humanitarian law. The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 