%%%STAFFING|PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT|PROFESSIONAL STAFF|GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION|STATISTICAL DATA|GENDER STATISTICS|

United Nations A/HRC/22/69 General Assembly Distr.: General 25 January 2013 Original: English Human Rights Council Twenty-second session Agenda item 2 Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General Composition of the staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights* 1. The Human Rights Council, in its resolution 19/3, requested the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to submit a comprehensive and updated report to the Council at its twenty-second session, in accordance with its annual programme of work, following the structure and scope of her report and with a special focus on further measures to correct the imbalance in geographical composition of the staff of the Office of the High Commissioner (OHCHR). The present report addresses the composition of the staff of the Office as at 31 December 2012. 2. Chapter II of the present report includes data on staff members in regular budget posts subject to geographical distribution, as well as data on staff in temporary posts funded from general temporary assistance and extrabudgetary resources or in technical cooperation project posts, neither of which are included in the definition of posts subject to geographical distribution. 3. Chapter III contains a description of the measures for improvement taken by the High Commissioner bearing in mind the issues identified by the Human Rights Council in resolution 19/3, while fully observing United Nations Secretariat human resources policies, in particular, its recruitment and contractual policies. II. Composition of the staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 4. The recruitment of staff members to posts subject to geographical distribution is governed by the system of desirable ranges at the Secretariat level. For that purpose, Member States are grouped into four categories: unrepresented, underrepresented, within range and overrepresented. A Member State is considered unrepresented when none of its nationals, throughout the entire Secretariat, is serving in a post subject to geographical distribution and filled in accordance with the established selection process. It is underrepresented when the number of its nationals appointed to such posts throughout the entire Secretariat is below the lower limit of the desirable range. It is within range when the number of its nationals appointed to such posts is between the upper and lower limits of the desirable range, and it is overrepresented when the number of its nationals appointed to such posts within the entire Secretariat exceeds the upper limit of the desirable range. The representation status of Member States is affected by many factors, in particular the turnover of staff and changes in the scale of assessments. 5. The official report on the composition of the Secretariat is submitted annually by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly in accordance with a number of resolutions, the most recent being Assembly resolutions 57/305, 59/266, 60/238, 61/244, 63/250, 65/247 and 66/234. 6. The latest report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat (A/67/329) covers the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012. OHCHR is part of the Secretariat and the breakdown of its geographical composition has to be seen against the breakdown of the overall distribution within the Secretariat. 7. As stated in the report of the Secretary-General, paragraphs 4 to 6, in August 2011, the Office of Human Resources Management launched an online reporting tool, "HR Insight", available to all permanent missions. The tool is based on the human resources data warehouse and enables users to retrieve information from other human resources systems. The first release of the tool provided permanent missions with reports on desirable ranges, a staff list and staff details for their respective nationals, such as composition by sex or type of appointment. Those online reports are updated on a monthly basis (with an approximate three-month time delay) and may be downloaded; permanent missions thus have convenient, instant access to often-requested data or reports. The full list of staff of the Secretariat is now available exclusively on this platform. Since the first release of the tool, the Office of Human Resources Management has made a number of enhancements, such as adding reports that show Member States the separations, appointments and forecasted retirement of their nationals, as well as the forecasted retirement of all P-5 to D-2 staff members. With HR Insight, Member States therefore have access to information similar to that contained in a Secretariat report (or in the present one), but at the level of staff members, unlike composition reports, which show the information at the aggregated level and are only issued annually. 8. The table in annex I provides a breakdown of all OHCHR staff members in the Professional category and above who have been selected through the established recruitment process ("regular" staff) against both regular budget posts subject to geographical distribution and extrabudgetary posts, by nationality, grade and sex as at 31 December 2012. 9. The table in annex II provides a breakdown of the following categories of additional OHCHR staff in the Professional category and above not included in the table in annex I by nationality, grade and sex as at 31 December 2012: (a) Staff holding appointments of less than one year; (b) Staff charged to general temporary assistance funds; (c) Staff employed as technical cooperation project personnel. 10. In paragraph 14, section IX, of its resolution 63/250, the General Assembly re-emphasized that the system of geographical ranges was designed to apply to countries rather than to regions or groups. This principle was recently reiterated by the Joint Inspection Unit in a comparative analysis and benchmarking framework on staff recruitment in United Nations system organizations, focusing on - gender balance and geographical distribution (JIU/NOTE/2012/3). The data in the present report are therefore provided by country and listed in alphabetical order. 11. As at 31 December 2012, OHCHR had a total of 573 staff members in the Professional category and above, of whom 490 are considered regular staff. Of the Professional staff members, 406 work in Geneva, 18 work in the New York office, while 149 work in 49 different countries in the field. 12. Nationals from 116 countries are represented in the Professional and above workforce, in both geographical and non-geographical posts. The latter comprise extrabudgetary posts that are not included under the system of desirable ranges (see paragraph 4 above). Of these 116 nationalities, 28 are underrepresented, 82 are considered within range, while six nationalities are overrepresented in the Secretariat. OHCHR also has nationals from the State of Palestine on its staff. 13. Despite the confirmation made by the General Assembly that the system of geographical ranges to be applied to the Secretariat is based on individual countries rather than regions, the Human Rights Council has repeatedly requested that statistics on a regional basis be provided. The table below complies with that request, showing the distribution of OHCHR staff by regional group. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights by region (Percentages at 31 December 2012) Region Africa Asia Latin America and Caribbean Eastern Europe Western Europe and others Total III. Efforts made to achieve equitable geographical representation and gender balance 14. Enhancing the geographical diversity of OHCHR staff remains one of the High Commissioner's priorities. In accordance with that objective, OHCHR has continued to vigorously implement the High Commissioner's procedures and framework for improving geographical diversity, in full compliance with Secretariat human resources policies, which were explained in detail to the Commission on Human Rights in February 2006. Current measures have included expanding the pool of qualified candidates from the widest possible range of countries and backgrounds, and developing recruitment outreach activities with United Nations country teams, OHCHR field offices, permanent missions in Geneva, other United Nations entities and local partners in the field. The 2010 National Competitive Recruitment Examination, which included the human rights occupational group, yielded another group of candidates from unrepresented and underrepresented Member States that OHCHR will be able to recruit. 15. While seeking to improve further its geographical distribution, OHCHR will continue to pay special attention to the issue of balance between female and male staff members at all levels, an area in which determination and concerted effort have already brought success. As at 31 December 2012, women accounted for 55 per cent of both regular and non-regular staff at the Professional level. 16. Similarly, OHCHR will continue its commitment to meet the goals and obligations placed upon it under the system of desirable ranges mandated by the General Assembly. This is reflected in the departmental target relating to the recruitment of nationals from unrepresented and underrepresented Member States established in the Secretariat Human Resources Scorecard and in the High Commissioner's Compact. At the end of November 2012, the percentage of recruitments from unrepresented and underrepresented Member States and Member States at risk of becoming underrepresented compared with all geographical appointments in OHCHR, excluding P-2 posts, was 64 per cent, which is more than triple the Secretariat target of 20 per cent for such recruitments. IV. Conclusion 17. The implementation and results to date of the High Commissioner's procedures and framework to improve geographical diversity reflect the priority that the High Commissioner continues to give to this issue. Noticeable and sustained progress has been achieved in increasing the geographical diversity of OHCHR staff through these measures. The Office remains attentive to the need to maintain emphasis on the broadest possible geographical diversity of its staff, and will continue its efforts in this regard. [English only] Regular staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the Professional and higher categories, by nationality, grade and sex (as at 31 December 2012) Total staff USG ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4 P-3 P-2 P-1 Country of nationality All F M Afghanistan Albania Algeria Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bahamas Bangladesh Belgium Benin Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Central African Republic Chile China Colombia Congo Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Ecuador Egypt Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Finland France Gambia Germany Ghana Guatemala Guyana Haiti India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kyrgyzstan Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Lithuania Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria Norway Pakistan Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Republic of Korea Republic of Moldova Russian Federation Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Sierra Leone Singapore Slovenia Solomon Islands South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Sweden Switzerland Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Uganda United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Subtotal State of Palestine Non-regular staff of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the Professional and higher categories, by nationality, grade and sex D-2/L-7 D-1/L-6 P-5/L-5 P-4/L-4 P-3/L-3 P-2/L-2 P-1/L-1 Hungary United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 