%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|JOURNALISTS|RIGHT TO SECURITY OF PERSON|FREEDOM OF THE PRESS|FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION|

United Nations A/HRC/24/G/4 General Assembly Distr.: General 11 September 2013 Original: English Human Rights Council Twenty-fourth session Agenda item 3 Promotion and protection of all human rights, civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right to development Note verbale dated 3 September 2013 from the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to the United Nations Office at Geneva addressed to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to the United Nations Office and other international organizations at Geneva presents its compliments to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and, acting also on behalf of the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Austria and the Permanent Mission of Switzerland, has the honour to convey the recommendations elaborated on the basis of the international conference on the theme "The safety of journalists: current challenges", held in Warsaw on 23 and 24 April 2013. The conference was organized in cooperation by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Poland, the Embassy of Austria to Poland and the Embassy of Switzerland to Poland. It was attended by representatives of international organizations, such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe, national Governments, civil society, the media and academia. The recommendations of the meeting were prepared by the co-hosts of the conference, Austria, Poland and Switzerland, in close cooperation with the conference participants. In this regard, the permanent missions of the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Poland and Switzerland kindly request the secretariat of the Human Rights Council to circulate the present note and the annex thereto* as a document of the twenty-fourth session of the Council under agenda item 3. [English only] Recommendations of the international conference on "The safety of journalists: current challenges", Warsaw, 23 and 24 April 2013 From 23 to 24 April 2013 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Poland, in cooperation with the Embassy of Switzerland and the Embassy of Austria in Warsaw, organized an international conference on the safety of journalists. Among the participants were State representatives, representatives of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), journalists and representatives of non-governmental organizations. The discussions led to the following recommendations to improve the safety of journalists: 1. Governments at the national, regional and local levels should fulfill their duty to ensure the protection of human rights of everyone, without distinction of any kind. They should promote freedom of expression as a cornerstone of democratic societies and recognize the key role of journalists therein. 2. International institutions and Governments should condemn attacks against journalists and violations of their rights. International institutions and Governments should call on all relevant actors to comply with existing standards on the protection of journalists. 3. Governments at the national, regional and local levels, international organizations, civil society and media organizations should foster dialogue and cooperation in order to ensure the protection of the freedom of expression and information and in particular the safety of journalists. In this context, international cooperation between ombudsman institutions and national human rights institutions plays an important role and should be encouraged. 4. Authorities should provide conditions for a safe media environment to enable journalists to perform their work independently and without any interference by, inter alia, strengthening national legal frameworks in this regard and by implementing such frameworks. They should publicly contest attempts to silence critical voices and raise awareness regarding the crucial role of journalists and the media for societies based on the rule of law. 5. Authorities should ensure the necessary protection of journalists and their families. All cases of violence against journalists should be investigated, and the perpetrators of crimes against journalists must be brought to justice. Every effort has to be made to end the impunity of perpetrators. Therefore law enforcement bodies and the judiciary should be trained to effectively and promptly investigate violations of the freedom of the media and to conduct the respective proceedings. 6. The protection of journalists should cover all news providers, both professional and non-professional, as well as journalistic sources and it should not only extend to times of conflict, but also to times of peace. Further consideration should be given to the issue of the definition of a journalist. 7. Further efforts should be made to improve the existing monitoring mechanisms, to encourage their close cooperation and to develop a specific international monitoring mechanism for the safety of journalists. Better cooperation and coordination among various international, regional and local actors, including in effective early warning mechanisms, should be ensured. 8. Governments should ensure full cooperation with existing human rights protection mechanisms, in particular with special rapporteurs and representatives, who play a crucial role in promoting freedom of expression, as well as with UNESCO, which has a leading role within the United Nations system in this regard. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and the United Nations Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions should be encouraged to continue addressing the issue of the safety of journalists in their work. 9. Governments need to work towards improved access to the Internet, particularly in the developing world. Developed countries should continue to support these efforts. Measures to expand Internet access, openness and resilience to address censorship or mass surveillance by communication technology should be promoted. 10. The national legal frameworks on the freedom of expression online and offline should be strengthened. Internet regulatory solutions, reflecting international standards, should be introduced in an open and transparent manner and cover human rights aspects. Internet security should not in any way hamper or adversely affect the realization of the freedom of expression. 11. Special training on all aspects of safety, including on how to obtain assistance nationally and internationally, should be provided for journalists and supported by media organizations and enterprises. The international community should assist in this process, where necessary. 