%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|DOMINICAN REPUBLIC|INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS|TREATY-MONITORING BODIES|SPECIAL PROCEDURES|

United Nations A/HRC/WG.6/18/DOM/2 General Assembly Distr.: General 8 November 2013 English Original: English/Spanish Human Rights Council Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Eighteenth session 27 January - 7 February 2014 Compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21 Dominican Republic The present report is a compilation of the information contained in the reports of treaty bodies and special procedures, including observations and comments by the State concerned, and of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and in other relevant official United Nations documents. It is presented in a summarized manner due to word-limit constraints. For the full text, please refer to the document referenced. This report does not contain any opinions, views or suggestions on the part of OHCHR other than those contained in public reports and statements issued by the Office. It follows the general guidelines adopted by the Human Rights Council in its decision 17/119. Information included herein has been systematically referenced in endnotes. The report has been prepared taking into consideration the periodicity of the review and developments during that period. A. Scope of international obligations International human rights treaties Status during previous cycle Action after review Not ratified/not accepted Ratification, accession or succession ICERD (1983) ICESCR (1978) ICCPR (1978) CEDAW (1982) CRC (1991) OP-CRC-AC (signature only, 2002) OP-CRC-SC (2006) CAT (2012) CRPD (2009) ICCPR-OP 2 OP-CAT ICRMW CPED Reservations, declarations and/or understandings Complaint procedures, inquiry and urgent action Individual complaints: ICCPR-OP 1, art. 1; OP-CEDAW, art. 1; OP-CRPD, art. 1; OP-ICESCR, art. 1; OP-CRC-IC, art.5; ICERD, art. 14; CAT, art. 22; ICRMW, art. 77; and CPED, art. 31. Inquiry procedure: OP-CEDAW, art. 8; CAT, art. 20; CPED, art. 33; OP-CRPD, art. 6; OP-ICESCR, art. 11; and OP-CRC-IC, art. 13. Inter-State complaints: ICCPR, art. 41; ICRMW, art. 76; CPED, art. 32; CAT, art. 21; OP-ICESCR, art. 10; and OP-CRC-IC, art. 12. Urgent action: CPED, art. 30. ICCPR-OP 1 (1978) OP-CEDAW, art. 8 (2001) CAT, art. 20 (2012) OP-CRPD, art. 6 (2009) ICERD, art. 14 OP-ICESCR ICCPR, art. 41 CAT, arts. 21 and 22 OP-CRC-IC Other main relevant international instruments Not ratified Palermo Protocol Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court Convention on refugees 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Additional Protocols thereto Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (First Convention); Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (Second Convention); Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (Third Convention); Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (Fourth Convention); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem (Protocol III). For the official status of ratifications, see Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland, at www.eda.admin.ch/eda/fr/home/topics/ intla/intrea/chdep/warvic.html. ILO fundamental conventions International Labour Organization Convention No. 29 concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour; Convention No. 105 concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour; Convention No. 87 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise; Convention No. 98 concerning the Application of the Principles of the Right to Organise and to Bargain Collectively; Convention No. 100 concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value; Convention No. 111 concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation; Convention No. 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment; Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour. UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide Conventions on stateless persons 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. ILO Conventions Nos. 169 and 189 International Labour Organization Convention No.169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries and Convention No.189 concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers. 1. The Human Rights Committee (HR Committee) and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) urged the Dominican Republic to accede to the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) made a similar recommendation. 2. The United Nations Country Team indicated that, two years after the date of signature, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict had still not been ratified. It specifically recommended ratification of the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure. B. Constitutional and legislative framework 3. CERD was concerned that the Constitution did not prohibit discrimination on grounds of race and that the Criminal Code and its proposed amendment did not provide a definition of racial discrimination in conformity with the Convention. The Committee recommended that the Dominican Republic adopt a specific law on racial discrimination compatible with the Convention. CESCR urged the Dominican Republic to adopt an anti-discrimination law. 4. CERD regretted that the constitutional framework on migration did not fully meet international standards regarding nationality, and that legislation on nationality was being applied retroactively to the detriment of Dominicans of foreign origin and migrants. 5. The HR Committee urged the Dominican Republic to abstain from applying the 2004 General Migration Act retroactively and to maintain Dominican nationality for persons who acquired it at birth. 6. The Country Team mentioned that, as regards laws to protect the rights of women and girls, one such awaiting approval was a draft organic law to prevent, address, punish and eliminate violence against women, as well as bills for a reform of the Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Country Team pointed out that some of the provisions proposed in the draft Criminal Code had been criticized for failing to apply appropriate punishment to the different forms of violence against women. 7. The HR Committee urged the Dominican Republic to ensure that the new Criminal Code provisions fully respect women's rights. C. Institutional and human rights infrastructure and policy measures 8. The Country Team reported that the Ombudsman had been appointed on 16 May 2013. The State budget for 2013 provided resources for the establishment of this institution and it was hoped that it would shortly begin its work. CEDAW called on the Dominican Republic to provide the Office with adequate resources. 9. The HR Committee urged the Dominican Republic to ensure the full independence of the Office of the Ombudsman in accordance with the Paris Principles; CESCR and CERD made similar recommendations. 10. CERD invited the Dominican Republic to draw up a national human rights plan and a national plan of action against racism. 11. CERD recommended that the Dominican Republic implement the national plan for regularizing illegal immigrants, giving priority to those who had resided in its territory for a long period; CESCR recommended further that the State develop viable migration policies. 12. The Country Team recommended that the State party adopt the national migration regularization plan provided for in the Migration Act of 2004 as soon as possible now that there were reliable data on the scale of migration in the country. 13. CEDAW noted the low percentage of the State budget allocated for the National Gender Equality and Equity Plan 2007 - 2017. CESCR encouraged the Dominican Republic to ensure adequate financial and human resources for its implementation. 14. The Country Team indicated that the care system for victims of gender-based violence (GBV) remained limited owing to problems of inadequate infrastructure and resources. The Ministry of Women was one of the two institutions at that level receiving the least resources from the national budget; the Office of the Attorney-General of the Republic was in need of more offices in order to meet demand. The Ministry of Public Health has not yet fully implemented the protocols on care for GBV victims. 15. CESCR noted that the National Development Strategy lacked a human rights-based approach and did not sufficiently address inequalities between women and men. 16. CERD invited the Dominican Republic to implement the policy of the Ministry of Culture for 2008, vindicating the African contribution to the country. II. Cooperation with human rights mechanisms A. Cooperation with treaty bodies 1. Reporting status Treaty body Concluding observations included in previous review Latest report submitted since previous review Latest concluding observations Reporting status CERD March 2008 March 2013 Fifteenth to seventeenth reports due in 2016 CESCR November 1997 November 2010 Fourth report due in 2015 HR Committee April 2001 March 2012 Sixth report due in 2016 CEDAW July 2004 July 2013 Eighth report due in 2017 CAT First report overdue since February 2013 CRC February 2008 Third to fifth reports pending consideration in 2015 Initial OP-CRC-SC report overdue since 2009 CRPD Initial report pending consideration 2. Responses to specific follow-up requests by treaty bodies Concluding observations Due in Subject matter Submitted in Status of refugees; violence against women; and Dominican nationality CCPR/C/DOM/CO/5, para. 27. Legislative measures on racial discrimination; discrimination regarding identity documents and nationality; and deportations CERD/C/DOM/CO/13-14, para. 32. Violence against women; and discrimination in employment CEDAW/C/DOM/CO/6-7, para. 49. 17. CERD invited the Dominican Republic to give due attention to its recommendations and to those of other international mechanisms that had repeatedly expressed concern about racial discrimination, xenophobia and other related forms of intolerance. B. Cooperation with special procedures Current status Standing invitation No Visits undertaken Joint visit: racism and minority issues Visits agreed to in principle Visits requested Summary executions Torture Human rights defenders Responses to letters of allegations and urgent appeals During the period under review six communications were sent. The Government has replied to two of them. C. Cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 18. Since 2011, the Dominican Republic has been covered by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) Regional Office for Central America. The Regional Office has closely engaged with the UNCT and is part of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework 2012 - 2016, contributing in two main areas: strengthening of the technical capacities of the National Human Rights Institution's staff and providing technical support to the Government in the drafting process and implementation of a national human rights strategy. III. Implementation of international human rights obligations A. Equality and non-discrimination 19. CEDAW noted the persistence of a stereotyped division of gender roles in family and society and media attitudes that reinforced discriminatory messages on the sexual objectification of women. It recommended that the Dominican Republic include in the National Gender Equality and Equity Plan 2007 - 2017 long-term strategies to combat traditional stereotypes. It also urged the State to ensure de facto equality of women with men in education, employment and family relations. 20. CEDAW was concerned about the country's denial of multiple forms of discrimination against women of foreign origin, including racial and sex-based discrimination. It regretted that the Dominican Republic had not considered the adoption of measures to protect the rights of these women. 21. As regards the situation of women in rural areas, CEDAW recommended that the Dominican Republic adopt legislative measures to facilitate their access to land ownership; ensure that poverty reduction and income-generating strategies include provisions relating to rural women; and ensure access by rural women and girls to education. 22. In October 2013 OHCHR expressed concern about the ruling of the Dominican Republic Constitutional Court that may deprive tens of thousands of people of nationality, virtually all of them of Haitian descent. The Court ruled that the children of undocumented migrants who have been in the Dominican Republic and registered as Dominicans as far back as 1929 cannot have Dominican nationality, as their parents are considered to be "in transit". In 2010 CESCR had already urged the country to reconsider the regulations relating to the citizenship of foreign children. 23. CERD was concerned about the firm denial by the Dominican Republic that racial discrimination existed, and invited the country to set up a transitional commission to determine the significance of trafficking in persons and slavery in the building of national identity and the persistence of their consequences. 24. CESCR and the HR Committee remained concerned about racial prejudice. CESCR recommended eliminating conditions and attitudes perpetuating formal or de facto discrimination; CCPR further recommended investigating cases of discrimination, prosecuting perpetrators and awarding compensation to victims. 25. The Country Team reported that members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community continued to be subject to unjustified arrest, denial of access to public spaces and violence therein, as well as discrimination in the workplace. CEDAW was concerned about discrimination against lesbian women. The HR Committee urged the Dominican Republic to indicate clearly and officially that it would not tolerate social stigmatization of homosexuality, bisexuality or transsexuality, and to prosecute any discriminatory or violent acts motivated by sexual orientation or gender identity. 26. The Country Team remarked on the persistent climate of stigma and discrimination in the labour market towards persons living with HIV/AIDS in the public and private sectors alike. CESCR recommended that the Dominican Republic take steps to prevent discrimination against specific groups in their access to protection against HIV/AIDS. B. Right to life, liberty and security of the person 27. UNESCO condemned the killing of the journalist José Agustín Silvestre on 2 August 2011 and called on the country to inform UNESCO, on a voluntary basis, of the actions taken to prevent impunity of the perpetrators and to notify the Director-General of the status of the judicial inquiries conducted on each of the killings condemned by UNESCO. 28. The HR Committee reiterated its concern at the high number of extrajudicial executions and regretted their lack of criminalization in domestic legislation. 29. The HR Committee reiterated its concern at police brutality and excessive use of force. It recommended that the State party continue efforts towards its elimination and make sure that the police force reforms ensure monitoring mechanisms. 30. CEDAW urged the country to amend the Criminal Code in order to criminalize all forms of violence against women. 31. The HR Committee deplored violence against women and the constraints on access to justice and protection for victims, especially in rural areas; it also regretted the persistent practice of sexual harassment. CEDAW urged the Dominican Republic to adopt a law on violence against women. 32. CEDAW was concerned about sexual exploitation of women and girls and adolescent prostitution. 33. CESCR recommended that the Dominican Republic intensify its efforts to combat human trafficking. CERD and the HR Committee had related concerns. CEDAW called for the enforcement of sanctions against law enforcement officials involved in trafficking. 34. The HR Committee and CESCR were concerned at child labour, especially in the domestic and agricultural sectors. C. Administration of justice and the rule of law 35. The Country Team stated that, despite sterling efforts to streamline the justice system, budgetary constraints severely curtailed access to justice, especially for the poor. It also pointed out that some of the factors contributing to this situation were the courts' excessive caseload, the cost of the judicial system, failure to hear cases, and insufficient public defender coverage. 36. The HR Committee recommended that the Dominican Republic ensure an investigation ex officio in all cases of brutality or of excessive use of force by law enforcement officials in which the victim does not file a complaint; and called for an independent mechanism to investigate such acts, particularly in prisons. 37. CEDAW noted with concern barriers to women's access to justice. It recommended that the State ensure that effective remedies are in place to enable women to bring complaints about sex-based discrimination and called on the Dominican Republic to raise awareness about the remedy of amparo. 38. The HR Committee regretted the limited use of alternatives to imprisonment. It urged compliance with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. 39. The Country Team recommended that the State step up its implementation of the New Prison Model for improving conditions in adult detention centres and establish a similar system for adolescents in custody as well as a system of alternatives to imprisonment, with deprivation of liberty as a last resort for persons under 18 years of age. 40. CERD invited the Dominican Republic to give full effect to the judgement of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in the case of the Yean and Bosico girls. D. Right to privacy, marriage and family life 41. CEDAW was deeply concerned that women of foreign descent and their children faced great difficulties regarding recognition or acquisition of Dominican nationality, which placed them at risk of statelessness. 42. CERD was concerned that the Dominican Republic refused to issue duplicate birth certificates, identity cards and passports to Dominicans of foreign origin, which led to a situation of statelessness. It invited the Dominican Republic to respect the principle of non-discrimination in access to nationality. 43. CEDAW recommended that the country raise the legal minimum age of marriage for women to 18 years and adopt effective measures to prevent early marriages. E. Freedom of expression and right to participate in public and political life 44. UNESCO reported that defamation remained criminalized under article 361 of the Penal Code and that the Press Law (No. 6132) also contained provision for criminal penalties. 45. UNESCO recommended the development of self-regulatory mechanisms of the media in the Dominican Republic to ensure that journalists and media workers are able to practice their profession in a free and safe environment as part of their fundamental human rights. 46. The HR Committee was concerned at cases of aggression, threats and intimidation against journalists. It urged the Dominican Republic to protect freedom of expression and investigate and prosecute such acts against journalists. 47. Three Human Rights Council special procedures mandate holders reported that on 24 October 2011 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights had purportedly held a thematic hearing on "The judicial response to incidents of denationalization in the Dominican Republic", apparently sought by over 17 national and international organizations, including the Dominico-Haitian Women's Movement. Once the hearing had been announced, Ms. Sonia Pierre, Executive Director of the Movement, had been exposed to harassment and threats, even death threats, and to an intense campaign to discredit her by the press and public officials. Ms. Pierre's lawyers, colleagues and close relatives are alleged to have been subjected to intimidation. On 22 November 2011, Ms. Pierre is said to have lodged a complaint with the National District prosecutor. Ms. Pierre died on 4 December 2011 reportedly of a heart attack. 48. The Country Team recommended that the Political Parties Act make it mandatory for the principle of gender equality enshrined in the Constitution to be applied in the charters of political parties, and to allocate a legally determined percentage of public funding to the training of women politicians and to training on gender issues for political party members. 49. The HR Committee noted with concern the underrepresentation of women in both the public and private sectors, especially in decision-making posts. CERD was concerned about the difficulties of dark-skinned Dominican women of African descent in securing, inter alia, political representation. F. Right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work 50. CESCR was concerned that underemployment and unemployment remained high, disproportionally affecting women and young persons, notably in rural areas. It recommended that the Dominican Republic adopt measures, such as an employment action plan, to expand regular employment; and undertake to ensure the respect of the rights of all employees. 51. CEDAW observed with concern the wide gender wage gap; sexual harassment of women in the workplace; discriminatory practices against pregnant women and women living with HIV/AIDS; and exploitation of women of Haitian origin in sugarcane plantations. CESCR recommended that the State party intensify its efforts to ensure equal working conditions. CEDAW urged the Dominican Republic to prevent forced labour of women, and CERD urged the State to adopt special measures to facilitate access by women of African descent to skilled employment. 52. CESCR was deeply concerned about poor working conditions in export-processing zones, particularly for women, and noted with concern the large groups of employees in such zones that had lost their jobs without compensation. 53. CESCR urged the Dominican Republic to enforce labour standards, increase the number of labour inspections and ensure trade union freedom. G. Right to social security and to an adequate standard of living 54. CESCR was concerned about the large number of persons living in poverty and extreme poverty. It urged the Dominican Republic to integrate human rights into its poverty-reduction strategies and encouraged steps aimed at reducing social inequalities. 55. The Country Team reported that, despite the economic growth of recent years, overall poverty, extreme poverty, and inequality remained quite considerable. According to Ministry of the Economy, Planning and Development statistics, 10.5 per cent of the total population was living in extreme poverty in 2011, while 42.2 per cent lived in conditions of overall poverty. 56. CESCR recommended extending social security coverage to workers in rural areas and the informal sector. 57. The Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and on the right to non-discrimination in this context expressed concern that, on 15 October 2011, 72 families from the Altos de Brisas del Este sector had reportedly been evicted on the orders of mayor Juan de los Santos following a previous attempted eviction ordered without the approval of the senior authorities of the Santo Domingo City Council. Some 20 persons had been injured, 3 of them seriously, and the sector had been razed to the ground. 58. CESCR was concerned about the housing deficit; housing conditions in the bateyes, and forced evictions. It recommended that the Dominican Republic provide access to adequate and affordable housing for everyone, particularly disadvantaged groups, and alternative accommodation or compensation for persons forcibly evicted, including through the adoption of a legal framework. H. Right to health 59. The Country Team reported that national efforts to guarantee the population universal access to health care had focused on enhancing the quality of services and bringing down the number of mother and child deaths, the vast majority of them preventable. Public investment in health accounted for a mere 2.8 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), a situation that affected service quality as well as coverage. 60. CESCR was concerned that the public health system was underfunded. It urged the Dominican Republic to increase health-care expenditures and ensure universal access to health and adequate training of health personnel. 61. CEDAW recommended that the Dominican Republic adopt a plan to reduce maternal mortality; provide free or affordable access to family planning services and contraceptives for all women; ensure access to health care for migrant women and girls, irrespective of their migration status; and ensure access to sexual and reproductive health for all women, including lesbians. CESCR and the HR Committee had similar concerns and recommendations. 62 CESCR expressed concern about the increasing number of teenage pregnancies and the high number of unsafe abortions involving girls between 12 and 18 years old. 63. CEDAW was concerned that the draft amendment to the Criminal Code still criminalized abortion in cases of rape, incest and serious malformation of the foetus. CESCR and the HR Committee had similar concerns. 64. CEDAW was concerned about the high number of women living with HIV/AIDS. 65. CESCR was concerned that antiretroviral treatment or specific HIV-related tests were not covered by the Basic Health Plan. It encouraged the Dominican Republic to continue efforts towards the adoption of HIV/AIDS care programmes, including support services, and prevention campaigns. I. Right to education 66. CEDAW recognized that discriminatory and sexist practices in the education sector still persisted. 67. UNESCO recommended that the Dominican Republic continue to provide access to quality education without discrimination for the school-age population throughout the country. The State should be encouraged to intensify programmes of human rights education with a view to eliminating discriminative practices and to ensuring inclusive education and gender equality. 68. CESCR urged the Dominican Republic to guarantee universal free primary education and strengthen the quality of the public education system. 69. CESCR was concerned that children in remote areas, Dominican-born children of foreign descent and children of migrants faced difficulties in initial enrolment and access to education. It recommended ensuring equal access to education for all without discrimination. J. Cultural rights 70. UNESCO encouraged the Dominican Republic to develop public policies aimed at strengthening capacities of local cultural managers and communities to ensure a more effective contribution of culture to human and economic development. It encouraged the Dominican Republic to promote domestic cultural diversity and enhance awareness of its contribution to social cohesion and conflict resolution, in particular among youth. K. Persons with disabilities 71. The HR Committee regretted that persons with disabilities faced constraints in their access to education, cultural, health and labour services. It urged the Dominican Republic to ensure their full integration and participation in society. L. Migrants, refugees and asylum seekers 72. In 2011, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and OHCHR renewed their appeal to the Government of the Dominican Republic to suspend, on humanitarian grounds, all involuntary returns to Haiti, as precarious conditions continued to persist in the country. The appeal called on the Government to assess Haitian cases on an individual basis and to pay special consideration and refrain from returning to Haiti persons with special protection needs, and to prevent situations where returns could lead to family separation. 73. CESCR, CERD and the HR Committee were concerned about the vulnerable situation of migrant workers in an irregular situation. 74. The HR Committee was concerned at the lack of clarity concerning the status of refugees, including in terms of their access to temporary identity documents. CESCR noted that the refugee status determination procedure had been largely inactive and regretted the non-renewal of personal documentation of refugees. 75. The Country Team recommended that the State party adopt the measures needed to guarantee the normal operation of the National Commission for Refugees and that it process pending applications within a reasonable time. 76. The HR Committee regretted the detention for unspecified periods of persons who were going to be deported, and CERD expressed concern about reports of mass, indiscriminate and arbitrary deportations of citizens of foreign origin. 77. CERD expressed concern about the arduous living conditions of migrants, particularly on the sugar plantations. M. Right to environmental issues 78. UNESCO stated that national environmental strategies providing a policy-institutional framework for biodiversity conservation and sustainable development were still lacking. 79. CESCR recommended that the State party take steps to ensure that environmental and social impact assessments precede approval of investment agreements or activities that might have a negative impact on economic, cultural and social rights, in particular of the most vulnerable groups. 80. UNESCO emphasized that the development of national sustainable development strategies and policies, the strengthening of environmental legislation and policies, and the establishment of legal advisory and enforcement capacity on environment should be considered as priority needs and actions. Notes 