%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|YEMEN|INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS|TREATY-MONITORING BODIES|SPECIAL PROCEDURES|

United Nations A/HRC/WG.6/18/YEM/2 General Assembly Distr.: General 11 November 2013 Original: English Human Rights Council Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Eighteenth session 27 January - 7 February 2014 Compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21 Yemen The present report is a compilation of the information contained in the reports of treaty bodies and special procedures, including observations and comments by the State concerned, and of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), and in other relevant official United Nations documents. It is presented in a summarized manner due to word-limit constraints. For the full text, please refer to the document referenced. This report does not contain any opinions, views or suggestions on the part of OHCHR other than those contained in public reports and statements issued by the Office. It follows the general guidelines adopted by the Human Rights Council in its decision 17/119. Information included herein has been systematically referenced in endnotes. The report has been prepared taking into consideration the periodicity of the review and developments during that period. A. Scope of international obligations International human rights treaties Status during previous cycle Action after review Not ratified/not accepted Ratification, accession or succession ICERD (1972) ICESCR (1987) ICCPR (1987) CEDAW (1984) CAT (1991) CRC (1991) OP-CRC-AC (2007) OP-CRC-SC (2004) CRPD (2009) ICCPR-OP 2 OP-CAT ICRMW CPED Reservations, declarations and/or understandings ICERD (reservations, arts. 17, para. 1, 18, para. 1, and 22, 1972) CEDAW (reservation, art. 29, para. 1, 1984) Complaint procedures, inquiry and urgent action A table in the previous UPR compilation contained the following information under Recognition of specific competences of treaty bodies: Individual complaints: ICCPR-OP 1, art 1; OP-CEDAW, art. 1; OP-CRPD, art. 1; OP-ICESCR, art. 1; OP-CRC-IC, art. 5; ICERD, art. 14; CAT, art. 22; ICRMW, art. 77; and CPED, art. 31. Inquiry procedure: OP-CEDAW, art. 8; CAT, art. 20; CPED, art. 33; OP-CRPD, art. 6; OP-ICESCR, art. 11; and OP-CRC-IC, art. 13. Inter-State complaints: ICCPR, art. 41; ICRMW, art. 76; CPED, art. 32; CAT, art. 21; OP-ICESCR, art. 10; and OP-CRC-IC, art. 12. Urgent action: CPED, art. 30. CAT, art. 20 (1991) OP-CRPD, art. 6 (2009) ICERD, art. 14 OP-ICESCR ICCPR ICCPR-OP 1 OP-CEDAW CAT, arts. 21 and 22 OP-CRC-IC Other main relevant international instruments Not ratified Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide Conventions on refugees 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and Additional Protocols I and II Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (First Convention); Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (Second Convention); Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (Third Convention); Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (Fourth Convention); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I); Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II). For the official status of ratifications, see Federal Department of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland, at www.eda.admin.ch/eda/fr/home/topics/intla/intrea/chdep/warvic.html. ILO fundamental conventions International Labour Organization Convention No. 29 concerning Forced or Compulsory Labour; Convention No. 105 concerning the Abolition of Forced Labour; Convention No. 87 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise; Convention No. 98 concerning the Application of the Principles of the Right to Organise and to Bargain Collectively; Convention No. 100 concerning Equal Remuneration for Men and Women Workers for Work of Equal Value; Convention No. 111 concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation; Convention No. 138 concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment; Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour. Palermo Protocol Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court ILO Conventions Nos. 169 and 189 International Labour Organization Convention No. 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries and Convention No. 189 concerning Decent Work for Domestic Workers. Additional Protocol III to the 1949 Geneva Conventions Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Adoption of an Additional Distinctive Emblem (Protocol III). UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education Conventions relating to statelessness 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. In 2010, the Committee against Torture (CAT) invited Yemen to ratify ICRMW and CPED. In 2013, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) recommended ratifying CPED. In 2011, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) encouraged Yemen to consider ratifying ICRMW. UNCT recommended ratifying OP-CEDAW and OP-CAT. CAT also recommended ratifying OP-CAT and making the declarations envisaged under articles 21 and 22 of the Convention. UNCT and the Human Rights Committee (HR Committee) encouraged Yemen to ratify ICCPR-OP 2 and ICCPR-OP 1. The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) and UNCT urged Yemen to ratify OPICESCR. UNCT urged Yemen to expedite ratification of OP-CRC-IC. CAT and OHCHR urged Yemen to consider ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. In 2009, the Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and UNCT encouraged Yemen to ratify the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto. 5. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recommended that Yemen fulfil its 2011 pledge to accede to the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. B. Constitutional and legislative framework 6. UNCT noted that the draft Transitional Justice and National Reconciliation Law had been sent back and forth between the law-making bodies and urged Yemen to initiate a broad consultation process to discuss it. 7. The United Nations Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights (Deputy High Commissioner) noted that human rights must be taken into consideration in the upcoming constitutional process, particularly those of women, children and marginalized communities, particularly the Muhammasheen. 8. CRC urged Yemen to finish harmonizing its legislation with OP-CRC-SC. 9. UNCT was concerned by the absence of a constitutional framework to ensure children's rights and the lack of a clear, consistent and unified definition of the child in all legal texts, which sometimes resulted in interpretative judgments. UNCT noted that in 2012, the Government had reviewed national laws concerning children; it urged Yemen to adopt constitutional provisions upholding children's rights and ensuring their enforcement. C. Institutional and human rights infrastructure and policy measures Status of national human rights institutions National human rights institution Status during present cycle For the list of national human rights institutions with accreditation status granted by the International Coordination Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (ICC), see A/HRC/23/28, annex. No 10. Several treaties bodies and OHCHR urged Yemen to expedite the establishment of an independent national human rights institution (NHRI) in compliance with the Paris Principles. UNCT noted that the Ministry of Human Rights was leading preparations to establish an NHRI and develop a national human rights strategy. 11. The Deputy High Commissioner regretted that the appointment of members of the Commission of Inquiry into the 2011 events was still pending and stressed that members must be individuals of integrity, independence and expertise. UNCT advocated establishing a justice and national reconciliation commission as soon as possible and providing urgent administrative, financial and technical support to the Commissions established to Consider and Address Land Issues and the Commission on Forcibly Dismissed Employees. 12. UNCT noted that, despite a presidential decree in 2012 to establish a commission of inquiry into human rights violations committed during the 2011 revolution, the commission was not yet operational and its members had not been identified. 13. CRC recommended that Yemen ensure that the Higher Council for Motherhood and Childhood had adequate authority and resources. It welcomed the adoption of the National Strategy for Youth and Children, and recommended that Yemen consider elaborating a national plan of action targeting issues covered by OP-CRC-SC. II. Cooperation with human rights mechanisms 14. OHCHR recommended enhancing cooperation with the United Nations, including by implementing the recommendations of the treaty bodies, the universal periodic review, the special procedures and the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict. A. Cooperation with treaty bodies 1. Reporting status Treaty body Concluding observations included in previous review Latest report submitted since previous review Latest concluding observations Reporting status CERD August 2006 March 2011 Nineteenth and twentieth reports due in Nov. 2013 CESCR November 2003 May 2011 Third report pending consideration HR Committee July 2005 March 2012 Sixth report due in 2015 July 2008 Seventh and eighth reports pending consideration CAT May 2010 Third report due in 2014 CRC June 2005 (OP-CRC-SC) /2012 (OP-CRC-AC) September 2009 (OP-CRC-SC) Fourth report pending consideration (CRC)/Initial report to OP-CRC-AC pending consideration CRPD Initial report overdue since 2011 2. Responses to specific follow-up requests by treaty bodies Concluding observations Due in Subject matter Submitted in Data on demographic composition of the population and protection of refugees and internally displaced persons. CERD/C/YEM/CO/17-18, para. 24. NHRI; discrimination against women; torture and ill-treatment by law enforcement and security forces; and refugees. CCPR/C/YEM/CO/5, para. 29. Inspection of detention centres; incommunicado detention; investigation into allegations of torture; early marriage; and harassment of an NGO. CAT/C/YEM/CO/2/Rev.1, para. 41. Follow-up ongoing. Letter dated 1 December 2011 from CAT to the Permanent Mission of Yemen. Available from http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CAT/Shared%20Documents/YEM/INT_CAT_FUL_YEM_15261_E.pdf. 15. The HR Committee regretted that none of the 2002 or 2005 recommendations on discrimination against women had been implemented. B. Cooperation with special procedures Current status Standing invitation Visits undertaken Extreme poverty and human rights (2 - 5 October 2003) None Visits agreed to in principle Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (2006) Food (2009) Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (2006; reminders in 2008 and 2013) Visits requested Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (since 2006 reminder 2007) Freedom of religion or belief (2006) Freedom of peaceful assembly and of association (request in 2011) African Descent (Request in 2013) Responses to letters of allegations and urgent appeals In the period under review, 25 communications had been sent. The Government had replied to 3 communications. 16. In 2013, the Working Group on Enforced Disappearances noted that, of the 160 cases it had transmitted to Yemen, 9 had been clarified by the source, 135 by the Government, 14 had been discontinued and 2 remained outstanding. C. Cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 17. The Deputy High Commissioner appreciated the readiness of the national authorities to facilitate the presence of a United Nations human rights office in Yemen and concluded her 2013 visit by inaugurating the OHCHR Office. III. Implementation of international human rights obligations, taking into account applicable international humanitarian law A. Equality and non-discrimination 18. CERD recommended incorporating into national law a definition of racial discrimination that was in line with the Convention. It also recommended revising the Penal Code in order to criminalize conduct and activities such as propaganda and dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority. 19. The HR Committee regretted the inertia of Yemen in matters related to discriminatory practices affecting women and the persistence of domestic violence. It recommended that Yemen increase its efforts to end discriminatory traditions and customs such as female genital mutilation (FGM); criminalize marital rape and other forms of domestic violence; prosecute the perpetrators of such crimes and provide appropriate punishments; and assist the victims. CESCR and CAT raised similar concerns and recommendations. UNCT recommended that Yemen continue supporting national efforts to combat FGM and involve official religious leaders in resolving disputes on its legitimacy. 20. The HR Committee and CAT regretted the lack of progress in repealing all discriminatory provisions, particularly article 23 of the Personal Status Law which provided that a "virgin's silence" signified consent to marriage. 21. UNCT reported that credible indicators revealed that discrimination persisted against vulnerable children like marginalized dark-skinned children (Muhamesheen), migrants, street children and children with disabilities. B. Right to life, liberty and security of the person 22. UNCT stated that the death penalty was widely used in Yemen, even for non-lethal offences, including drug trafficking. 23. The HR Committee remained concerned that the law de facto permitted the imposition of the death penalty on persons below 18 years of age at the time of the alleged commission of the offence, and about reports that a proposed amendment to the Penal Code might allow the death penalty to be used against children. It called on Yemen to revise its death penalty legislation so that it complied with the Covenant, and to officially abolish the sentence and execution of death by stoning. CAT raised similar concerns and recommendations. UNCT called for an immediate suspension of all unfair and inhumane death sentences, and urged the President to ensure that all cases of juveniles under the age of 18 at the time they were accused of infringing penal law were tried by specialized juvenile courts, not ordinary courts. The Deputy High Commissioner noted that OHCHR maintained its position that the death penalty should be abolished; until then, Yemen should ensure that the death penalty was not applied to minors. 24. In 2012 and 2013, special procedures mandate holders sent communications regarding alleged executions or risk of executions of minors. A communication sent in December 2012 expressed concern at the alleged risk of 23 executions and 2 executions in 2012 of individuals who were minors at the time of the alleged offence. In 2013, a second communication was sent regarding the alleged risk of execution of a juvenile offender. In 2013, the Special Rapporteur on summary executions regretted that the Government had not responded to those communications and called on the authorities to stay all executions that might be carried out in contravention of international human rights law, ensure a thorough review of all cases and consider commuting the death sentences. 25. OHCHR documented widespread allegations of extrajudicial killings and excessive use of force by security forces and affiliated groups against civilians and civilian targets. 26. The HR Committee was concerned at reports of excessive and disproportionate use of lethal force and torture, arbitrary detention and threats against civilians involved in peaceful demonstrations in 2011. CAT recommended that Yemen investigate all allegations of the involvement of members of law enforcement and security agencies in extrajudicial killings and other serious human rights violations. The HR Committee made similar recommendations. OHCHR recommended that Yemen take immediate action to end attacks against civilians and civilian targets by security forces, in full compliance with its obligations under international human rights law, particularly those concerning the use of firearms. 27. CAT recommended that Yemen take measures to counter enforced disappearances and the practice of mass arrests without warrants and arbitrary detention without charges and judicial process. 28. CAT remained concerned that certain criminal sanctions such as floggings, beatings and even amputation of limbs were still prescribed by law and practised in public. The HR Committee raised similar concerns. 29. CAT recommended that Yemen urgently discontinue the practice of holding relatives of alleged criminals as hostages, and punish the perpetrators of such acts. 30. CAT, UNCT and the HR Committee expressed concern about the lack of a comprehensive definition of torture. CAT was concerned about article 26 of the Criminal Procedure Code and recommended that Yemen announce a policy of eradication of torture and ill-treatment by State officials. It was concerned that the current definition of torture in the Constitution did not extend to individuals who were complicit in acts of torture. It urged Yemen to ensure that confessions obtained under torture or duress were inadmissible in courts. 31. UNCT noted that, recently and during the 2011 protest and its aftermath, detainees had reported torture or other ill-treatment by the Republican Guard and the Central Security Forces. CAT and UNCT were deeply concerned at numerous reports of allegations of a widespread practice of torture and ill-treatment of detainees. OHCHR received information regarding cases of individuals allegedly tortured in detention centres in Sanaa. CAT called on Yemen to establish an effective national system to monitor and inspect all places of detention and to follow up on the outcome of such systematic monitoring. 32. Several treaty bodies were concerned about reports of corporal punishment of children outside judicial spheres, such as within the family and in schools. 33. The HR Committee had received disturbing reports about violent acts perpetrated by non-State actors during the long-standing conflict and the 2011 unrest. 34. UNCT stated that between July 2011 and March 2013, about 564 children had been killed or injured due to, or in relation to, armed conflicts. 35. The HR Committee was seriously concerned about reports revealing the use of children to man military checkpoints and protect protesters during the 2011 unrest, and recommended prohibiting the use of child soldiers. The report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict (SRSG) welcomed progress made to accelerate the restructuring of the military and establish appropriate age verification procedures in recruitment centres and screening of all under-age recruits. The SRSG encouraged all stakeholders to consider children's issues and needs in the context of the National Dialogue and encouraged Yemen to finalize an action plan to address the recruitment and use of children by government forces, in line with Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005), 1882 (2009) and 1998 (2011), and to ratify the proposed amendments to five relevant military laws and allocate adequate resources for their effective implementation. The ILO Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations also expressed serious concern about children being recruited for use in armed conflict. The High Commissioner for Human Rights recommended that government forces and armed opposition groups take immediate measures to end the use and recruitment of children and demobilize those who had already been recruited. 36. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) acknowledged progress towards universal primary education and gender parity, but noted that around one fifth of boys and one quarter of girls were still involved in child labour. CRC and CESCR recommended that Yemen criminalize the offering, delivering or accepting of a child for the purpose of forced labour. 37. In 2011 and 2012, the Special Rapporteur on torture sent communications regarding allegations of incommunicado detention and torture. The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention noted that it had adopted several opinions of a similar nature on cases in Yemen. CAT urged Yemen to abolish incommunicado detention and ensure that all persons held incommunicado were released, or charged and tried under due process. CAT urged Yemen to ensure that all detainees were afforded, in practice, all fundamental legal safeguards from the very outset of their detention, and the HR Committee called for all persons deprived of their liberty to have their detention reviewed by a judge. 38. UNCT noted that women and girls in Yemen faced widespread domestic violence and discrimination in law and practice. UNHCR recommended launching national awareness campaigns to address violence against women, strengthening the capacity of the judiciary to prosecute perpetrators of gender violence, FGM, sexual abuse and rape, and establishing facilities to support victims. CAT expressed its concern at the "legality" of early marriage for girls, which amounted to violence against them and inhuman or degrading treatment. CESCR and UNCT recommended that Yemen adopt and implement legislation setting the minimum age of marriage at 18 years, and raise awareness of the negative effects of child marriages. 39. CAT was concerned that the Penal Code (art. 232) provided that a man or any male relative who killed his wife or a female member of the family suspected of adultery was not prosecuted with murder but a less serious crime. 40. CAT was concerned about allegations of harassment and sexual violence perpetrated by male guards against women in detention. It was also concerned that the majority of women in prison had been sentenced for prostitution, adultery, alcoholism, unlawful or indecent behaviour, in a private or public setting, or for violating restrictions of movement imposed by family traditions and Yemeni laws. 41. Several treaty bodies were concerned about the situation of women who had served prison sentences but remained in prison for prolonged periods owing to their guardian's or family's refusal to receive them or their inability to pay the "blood money" they had been ordered to pay. They recommended that the women be released and adequate shelters provided. 42. UNHCR reported that no special provisions had been adopted to prevent refugees, asylum seekers and other persons of concern from being trafficked, and recommended that Yemen take into account the fact that victims or potential victims of human trafficking might qualify as refugees under the 1951 Convention. 43. Several treaty bodies were deeply concerned about large-scale trafficking in women and children for sexual and other exploitative purposes, and the low rate of prosecutions. UNCT recommended that Yemen take swift action to approve the Anti-Human Trafficking Law and establish the necessary framework and resources. 44. CRC recommended that Yemen criminalize the sale of children for the purpose of transfer of organs for profit, and bring perpetrators to justice. CRC further recommended that Yemen criminalize the sexual exploitation of children conducted under the guise of "tourist marriages" or "temporary marriages". The ILO Committee of Experts recommended direct assistance for the identification and removal of child victims of trafficking and for their rehabilitation and social integration. C. Administration of justice, including impunity and the rule of law 45. Several treaty bodies recommended reform of the judiciary to ensure its independence and proper functioning. They recommended that Yemen combat corruption by investigating promptly and thoroughly all allegations of corruption and abolish all ad hoc judicial bodies, such as the Specialized Criminal Court. The Deputy High Commissioner raised the issue of the capacity of the judiciary to be free, independent and fair. 46. The United Nations Security Council resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012) strongly condemned the continued human rights violations by the Yemeni authorities and human rights abuses perpetrated by other actors. Resolution 2014 (2011) stressed that "all those responsible for violence, human rights violations and abuses should be held accountable" and underlined "the need for a comprehensive, independent and impartial investigation consistent with international standards ... with a view to avoiding impunity and ensuring full accountability". OHCHR expressed concern that judicial investigations into human rights violations committed in the wake of the 2011 unrest remained selective and lacked credibility. 47. The Deputy High Commissioner noted that no agreement had been reached on the final version of the draft law on transitional justice and national reconciliation, pending the recommendations of the Transitional Justice Working Group at the National Dialogue. She reiterated the need to address human rights violations that had occurred in 2011 and earlier. OHCHR considered that the immunity law effectively denied accountability. 48. The HR Committee and the High Commissioner for Human Rights were concerned at the adoption of Amnesty Law No. 1 of 2012, which granted a blanket amnesty to former President Saleh and immunity from prosecution for all political crimes apart from acts of terrorism to all those who had served with him during his 33-year rule. The HR Committee called on Yemen to repeal the Law and comply with international human rights law prohibiting immunity for those responsible for serious human rights violations. 49. The HR Committee strongly encouraged Yemen to engage in taking full civilian control of and completely reforming the security apparatus, including the armed forces. 50. CERD urged Yemen to ensure the application of sharia law was consistent with its obligations under international law, and that sharia law was not applied to foreigners and non-Muslims without their consent. 51. UNCT recommended adopting the proposed amendments to the Juvenile Justice Act. CAT remained concerned at the very low age of criminal responsibility (7 years). 52. CRC recommended that Yemen establish jurisdiction over all offences under OP-CRC-SC, including in all cases when the victim was one of its nationals. CRC urged Yemen ensure that child victims of such crimes were properly identified and not subject to fines or sentenced to imprisonment. D. Right to privacy, marriage and family life 53. UNHCR recommended that Yemen clarify the status of the 2010 amendment granting women the right to confer nationality to children on an equal basis as men and its implementation in practice. 54. CESCR recommended that Yemen urgently amend its matrimonial and family law to guarantee women the right to marry without the consent of a guardian, equal rights in divorce proceedings and under inheritance law. 55. UNHCR and CRC urged Yemen to ensure that all births were registered. CRC further urged Yemen to prohibit charging fees for birth registration in law and in practice. 56. The HR Committee urged Yemen to repeal or amend all legislation that provided for or could result in prosecution and punishment of people because of their sexual orientation. E. Freedom of religion or belief, expression, association and peaceful assembly, and right to participate in public and political life 57. CERD urged Yemen to ensure that the rights of religious minorities, particularly Jews and the Baha'is, to freely practise their religion were protected by guaranteeing their security and freedom of worship at all times. 58. OHCHR received information that more than 320 cases of violations affecting journalists, including illegal arrest and detention, had been reported since January 2011. The HR Committee was concerned about serious infringements of peaceful demonstrators' freedom of expression during the 2011 unrest; the use of the Specialized Criminal Court to try journalists along with political detainees and those accused of terrorism; and the creation of the Specialized Press and Publications Court to review all pending cases related to the implementation of the 1990 Press and Publication Law, which seriously infringed the freedom of the press. CAT raised similar concerns. 59. The HR Committee urged Yemen to release all journalists detained as a consequence of the 2011 unrest; guarantee freedom of expression and freedom of the press; investigate allegations of violent acts affecting journalists and those who had exercised their freedom of expression; initiate criminal proceedings against those responsible and provide the victims or their families with reparation; and abolish the Specialized Press and Publications Court. 60. The HR Committee urged Yemen to take immediate steps to repeal all laws that unreasonably restricted freedom of assembly, and release all persons deprived of liberty as a consequence of the implementation of such laws. OHCHR recommended that all remaining detainees be released, the names of persons still detained and the justification for their continued detention published, and that the public be informed of the whereabouts of detained or missing persons. 61. CESCR recommended that Yemen amend the 2002 Trade Unions Act to facilitate the establishment of autonomous trade unions and their federations, and strengthen efforts to prevent retaliatory action by private-sector employers against union members. 62. The HR Committee recommended that Yemen take measures to preserve the achievements women had made in terms of public participation in peaceful demonstrations in 2011. CESCR recommended that Yemen adopt a comprehensive gender equality act and introduce temporary special measures, including a quota system, to promote women's representation in decision-making positions. F. Right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work 63. CESCR recommended that Yemen take steps to reduce unemployment and to eliminate discrimination against persons from the south of Yemen within the public sector. 64. CESCR recommended that Yemen abolish the requirement for the permission of a male relative for a woman's employment in the public sector. 65. The ILO Committee of Experts asked Yemen to take steps to ensure equal remuneration for men and women for work of equal value. 66. CESCR recommended establishing a national minimum wage. 67. The ILO Committee of Experts urged Yemen to take measures to prohibit and prevent sexual harassment in employment and occupation. G. Right to social security and to an adequate standard of living 68. CESCR was concerned that Social Welfare Fund benefit levels were insufficient to ensure an adequate standard of living for recipients and their families, and at the reported misappropriation of social insurance benefits by State officials or tribal leaders. 69. CESCR was concerned about the very high level of poverty and recommended that Yemen strengthen efforts to combat poverty, focusing on the most disadvantaged and marginalized individuals and groups, and adopt a new national development and poverty reduction plan. 70. CESCR was concerned about insufficient and unequal access to water; the high prevalence of waterborne diseases and resultant child deaths; and that the public sanitation network was confined to urban centres. 71. OHCHR recommended that Yemen refrain from any action intended to deprive the population of basic services such as electricity, fuel and water. 72. The World Food Programme noted that the collapse of public services had left millions of people without access to health services, clean water and basic sanitation. H. Right to health 73. UNCT noted that child marriage was a major factor in malnutrition, and chronic malnutrition had reached 61.4 per cent in 2011. CESCR was concerned about the extent of malnutrition, the high rates of wasting, underweight and stunting, and rising household food insecurity, aggravated by rising food prices. It was also concerned that a disproportionate amount of agricultural land was allocated to the cultivation of qat. The World Food Programme and other aid agencies had stated that 1 million children would become acutely malnourished in 2012. 74. CESCR recommended that Yemen ensure universal access to affordable primary health care and specialized reproductive health services; increase skilled birth attendance and antenatal and postnatal care; and increase women's representation among health-care personnel, especially in nursing. 75. UNCT noted that laws and health facility regulations discriminated against women and basic obstetric emergency care was still not provided for free. I. Right to education 76. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict was concerned about attacks on schools. UNCT indicated that 242 such attacks had been reported between July 2011 and March 2013, 239 of which had been verified. 77. UNCT reported that following the 2011 crisis, net enrolment in basic schools had declined to 73 per cent (80 per cent for boys and 66 per cent for girls). Several treaty bodies and UNCT recommended that Yemen take urgent steps to ensure girls' and women's literacy and education. 78. UNESCO reported that poverty drove both boys and girls into employment, because of household cash needs or because parents could not afford education fees. While 70 per cent of male child labourers attended school, only 52 per cent of females did. J. Persons with disabilities 79. CESCR recommended that Yemen eliminate discrimination and stigma attached to disabilities in all spheres of life; take urgent measures to counter discrimination against women and girls with disabilities in accessing employment; and make an appropriate percentage of government jobs available to persons with disabilities. K. Minorities and indigenous peoples 80. CERD recommended that Yemen formally recognize the existence of various ethnic groups within its territory and the fact that it was not a truly homogenous society. 81. The HR Committee was concerned about reports of long-standing discrimination and marginalization of some minority groups, such as the Muhammasheen, and recalled that victims of discrimination should be provided with effective remedies, including compensation. CERD and CESCR raised similar concerns and recommendations. L. Migrants, refugees and asylum seekers 82. UNHCR reported that in March 2013, Yemen had hosted 237,717 refugees, and that only around 15 per cent of all new arrivals registered with Yemen or UNHCR. UNHCR was concerned at the number of incidents of sexual and gender-based violence committed against refugees and asylum seekers and the continuation of FGM and early marriage, and called on Yemen to strengthen the capacity of the judiciary to prosecute perpetrators and establish victim support facilities. 83. UNHCR and the HR Committee praised the generous asylum policy towards refugees from a neighbouring country. The HR Committee was concerned that similar care was not extended to all persons seeking protection. While the former were granted prima facie refugee status, others were systematically considered illegal immigrants and placed in detention centres. The HR Committee recommended that Yemen ensure the adequacy of the refugee determination process and asylum procedures for migrants of all nationalities. CERD recommended that Yemen establish a legal framework to govern the asylum application process and adopt specific measures to coordinate with UNHCR in the issuance of refugee certificates. 84. CAT remained concerned at numerous cases of forced return of foreign nationals in which the individuals concerned had been unable to appeal their return by means of an effective remedy. 85. UNHCR urged Yemen to ensure that detention was used only as a last resort, for as short a period as possible, and with judicial safeguards. 86. UNHCR recommended that Yemen conduct national awareness-raising campaigns on statelessness and the amendments to the 1990 Nationality Law. M. Internally displaced persons 87. The HR Committee was concerned about the fate of the estimated 400,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs), more than half due to the pre-existing conflict with the Huthis. It recommended ensuring the protection of all those affected by the pre-existing conflict, adopting the 2010 Draft Strategy on internal displacement in Yemen, and working towards a durable solution to end displacement. CAT made similar recommendations. 88. CERD recommended that Yemen strengthen efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to IDPs and ensure their immediate return to their communities. UNHCR recommended that Yemen enhance the issuance of civil documentation to IDPs. N. Right to development and environmental issues 89. CESCR was concerned about the increasing lack of water, the shortage of safe drinking water, and the depletion of non-renewable groundwater reserves. 90. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations noted that in Yemen the ownership and exploitation of land and water were controlled by the more influential sectors of society. O. Human rights and counter-terrorism 91. The HR Committee recommended that Yemen ensure that domestic legislation defined terrorist crimes in terms of their purpose and also defined the nature of those acts with sufficient precision to enable individuals to regulate their conduct accordingly. CAT made related recommendations. 92. OHCHR noted reports that the two security organs in charge of counter-terrorism, National Security and Political Security, operated on the margins of the law and without parliamentary oversight and that a draft counter-terrorism bill had not yet been passed. 93. OHCHR was gravely concerned about the reported use of armed drones in the south of the country to target individuals described by Yemeni officials or international media as "militants", "operatives" or "terrorists". OHCHR recalled States' obligation under international law to conduct credible, prompt and effective investigations, and to ensure accountability in all such instances. 