%%%OUTER SPACE|DISARMAMENT|

CD/1954 Conference on Disarmament 31 July 2013 Original: English Letter dated 29 July 2013 from the Permanent Representatives of Indonesia and the Russian Federation addressed to the Secretary-General of the Conference on Disarmament transmitting the text of the joint statement by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia and the Russian Federation to declare that they will not, in any way, be the first to place weapons of any kind in outer space, signed in Bandar Sery Begawan on 1st July 2013 We have the honour to transmit herewith the text of the joint statement of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Indonesia on the no first placement of weapons of any kind in outer space signed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Mr. Sergei V. Lavrov and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia Mr. R.M. Marty M. Natalegawa on 1 July, 2013. We would be grateful if this letter and the attached Joint Statement could be issued and circulated as an official document of the Conference on Disarmament. (signed) Triyono Wibowo Ambassador Permanent Representative of Indonesia (signed) Alexey N. Borodavkin the Russian Federation Joint statement by the Russian Federation and the Republic of Indonesia The Russian Federation and the Republic of Indonesia, Noting the significance of outer space activities as an important factor of social, economic, scientific and technological development of States, as well as its role in maintaining national and global security, Believe that outer space should be used in compliance with international law for the benefit of all Nations, regardless of the level of their economic, scientific or technological development; Reiterate their commitment to the principle enshrined in Article II of the United Nations Charter - to refrain in international relations from the threat or use of force, including in outer space activities - and proceed from the assumption that all States will strictly adhere to that policy; Declare that they will not in any way be the first to place weapons of any kind in Outer Space, that they will make all possible efforts to prevent Outer Space from becoming an arena for military confrontation and to ensure security in Outer Space activities. The Russian Federation and the Republic of Indonesia call upon Outer Space-faring Nations to follow their example; Done on the First of July in the Year Two Thousand and Thirteen in Bandar Sery Begawan, Brunei Darussalam. For the Russian Federation (signed) Sergei Victorovich Lavrov Minister of Foreign Affairs For the republic of Indonesia (signed) Marty M. Natalegawa 