%%%ELECTION OF OFFICERS|

Conference of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Sixth session New York, 17-19 July 2013 Summary record of the 1st meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Wednesday, 17 July 2013, at 10 a.m. Temporary President: Ms. Bas (Director, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Division for Social Policy and Development) President: Mr. Kamau (Kenya) later: Mr. Tafrov (Vice-President) (Bulgaria) later: Mr. Kamau (President) (Kenya) Contents Opening of the Conference of States Parties Election of the President and other officers of the Conference Adoption of the agenda Organization of work Matters related to the implementation of the Convention (a) General debate The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m. 1. The Temporary President, speaking as representative of the Secretary-General, declared open the Conference of States Parties. 2. Mr. Kamau (Kenya) was elected President of the Conference by acclamation. 3. Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh), Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria), Mr. García González (El Salvador) and Mr. Prosor (Israel) were elected Vice-Presidents by acclamation. 4. Mr. Kamau (Kenya) took the Chair. Adoption of the agenda (CRPD/CSP/2013/1) 5. The agenda was adopted. Accreditation and registration of non-governmental organizations 6. The President drew attention to the list of nongovernmental organizations requesting accreditation to the Conference circulated to all States parties by the Secretariat on 17 and 27 June 2013. He took it that the States parties wished to accede to those requests. 7. It was so decided. 8. The President said that although the international community had taken significant steps towards implementing the Convention, with 132 States parties having ratified it, much remained to be done to achieve its goals of eliminating discrimination and exclusion and creating societies which valued diversity and inclusion. All countries should create opportunities for persons with disabilities in education, health, service provision and employment, in order to change the lives of the one billion people living with disabilities around the world. 9. The Conference of States Parties was crucial for building partnerships among Governments, the United Nations and civil society, with the full participation of persons with disabilities, to advance the implementation of the Convention. The theme of the 2013 Conference, "Ensuring adequate standards of living: empowerment and participation of persons with disabilities within the framework of the Conference on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities", was crucial, since such persons must have the opportunity to reach their full potential. The premise of the Convention was that disability was a development issue, something that more and more countries now acknowledged. The links between disability and sustainable development had been addressed at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 2012. Sustainable development beyond 2015 would not be possible without the full participation of persons with disabilities. 10. In its capacity as Co-Chair of the General Assembly Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals and President of the Conference of States Parties, Kenya was committed to championing the cause of persons with disabilities. The work of the Conference would feed into the development agenda beyond 2015, while the High level Meeting on Disability and Development, to be held in September 2013, would be instrumental in the establishment of a disability-inclusive development framework beyond 2015. 11. Ms. Bas (Director, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Division for Social Policy and Development), speaking as representative of the Secretary-General, said that since the adoption of the Convention, the United Nations had intensified its campaign to make the voices of persons with disabilities heard by mobilizing action for their full and equal participation in a truly inclusive society. The international community should be commended for advancing that goal by supporting the Convention and its Conference of States Parties. The decision by the Conference to focus on empowerment in 2013 was laudable, because enabling people with disabilities to reach their full potential would foster progress for all. 12. More and more countries were addressing the rights of persons with disabilities in their efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. That momentum should be maintained as the development agenda for the future was being shaped. Even though 132 countries had ratified the Convention, many of the world's one billion people with disabilities still did not enjoy the protections to which they were entitled. 13. All countries should therefore join the Convention, and civil society and the private sector should work for bolder action to achieve the goals of the Convention. In that connection, participants should ensure that the Conference reinvigorated the global commitment to those goals and contributed to a disability-inclusive United Nations development agenda for the future. 14. Speaking in her capacity as Director of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs Division for Social Policy and Development, she said that the Conference had established itself as a unique global forum that enabled States parties, United Nations entities and civil society to strengthen multistakeholder partnerships and ensure that persons with disabilities participated fully and effectively in society. Many States had shown their commitment to addressing the challenges faced by persons with disabilities by signing and ratifying the Convention and its Optional Protocol. Others had gone further, bringing their domestic laws and policies into line with the Convention. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs would support all Member States' efforts to implement the Convention. 15. The current Conference focused on economic empowerment through inclusive social protection and poverty reduction strategies, which entailed the empowerment of persons with disabilities through decent work with a view to reducing their poverty, enhancing their income security and promoting their autonomy. Other areas of focus were disability-inclusive development in national, regional and international processes for the mainstreaming of disability in development policies and programmes; and community-based rehabilitation and habilitation to facilitate inclusive development by, for and with persons with disabilities. 16. The linkages between disability and sustainable development had been addressed at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in June 2012. The report of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, entitled "A New Global Partnership: Eradicate Poverty and Transform Economies though Sustainable Development", had addressed disability in relation to human rights, participation and monitoring, and as a cross-cutting development issue. 17. The High-level Meeting on Disability and Development, to be held in September 2013, would draw global attention to the plight of persons with disabilities and allow the international community to discuss how to promote their inclusion in development and society. Online and regional consultations on the draft outcome document of the High-level Meeting had been held with a broad range of stakeholders in various regions around the world. The participants had identified priorities for the achievement of disability-inclusive development, including the ratification and implementation of the Convention. 18. The Department of Economic and Social Affairs would hold a forum, entitled "Dialogue on Post-2015 Development Frameworks and Disability", in July 2013, to discuss the inclusion of disability in the future development agenda. At the current Conference, it would explore options for further cooperation and partnership with Member States, United Nations entities, civil society and other stakeholders to help achieve the goals of the Convention and realize the potential of the Millennium Development Goals for persons with disabilities. 19. Mr. Šimonovič (Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights) said that the Convention confirmed that persons with disabilities were active members of society and holders of human rights, rather than mere objects of goodwill, charity or medical care. In that regard, it embodied a human rights-based approach to disability that celebrated the value of each individual. The increasing number of States that had signed or ratified the Convention and its Optional Protocol demonstrated a growing willingness to put that approach into practice. If the Convention was to affect the lives of persons with disabilities, however, it should be implemented at the national level through changes in laws, policies and attitudes. 20. The theme of the Conference reflected the position adopted by the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in its jurisprudence, where it urged States parties to ensure that persons with disabilities were able to participate fully in all aspects of life. The right to an adequate standard of living was linked to the right to work, as defined in the Convention. Only by enabling persons with disabilities to live independently and provide for their families could such a standard be ensured. 21. The December 2012 report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, entitled "Thematic study on the work and employment of persons with disabilities", had drawn attention to the barriers preventing persons with disabilities form exercising their right to work. Following the report, the Human Rights Council had adopted its resolution 22/3, which recognized that the ultimate goal of social protection programmes was to help persons with disabilities find employment. 22. The importance of implementing the Convention had been highlighted during the preparations for the September 2013 High level Meeting on Disability and Development. A unique link between development and human rights was established in article 32 of the Convention, in which the States parties agreed to take measures to ensure that international cooperation and development programmes were inclusive of and accessible to persons with disabilities, and to uphold their human rights. Participants in the consultations on the development agenda beyond 2015 had also called for human rights to be central to that agenda; for health, water, sanitation and education systems to make provision for persons with disabilities; and for such persons' lack of identity and property rights, which excluded them from society, to be addressed. 23. Although the States parties were responsible for implementing the Convention, everyone had a role to play. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights was committed to working with States, persons with disabilities, civil society, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the broader United Nations family, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and academia to uphold the human rights of such persons. 24. Mr. Vardakastanis (International Disability Alliance) said that persons with disabilities, in particular those living in developing countries, were faced with exclusion, discrimination and poverty, and had not been taken into consideration in the Millennium Development Goals. Disabilities should be mainstreamed in the development agenda beyond 2015. The Third Civil Society Forum on the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, held in July 2013, had focused on the ways in which disability rights were addressed in the negotiations relating to that agenda and on the challenges to disability advocacy work. 25. The development agenda beyond 2015 should be driven by five transformative shifts, the most important of which was the acknowledgment that no person should be denied universal human rights and basic opportunities. His Organization was participating in the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals and the review of the World Bank safeguard policies, in order to ensure that disability was mainstreamed in the development agenda beyond 2015. That agenda must be driven by the Convention, the implementation of which required States parties, the United Nations and civil society, including organizations of persons with disabilities, to join forces. 26. Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria), Vice-President, took the Chair. 27. Ms. Ifill (Barbados) said that her Government had ratified the Convention in February 2013 and was committed to creating an inclusive and accessible society for all. The economic empowerment and full participation of persons with disabilities could be achieved only through equal access to education, health care, housing and public infrastructure. Strong social protection was necessary because persons with disabilities were vulnerable and faced the risk of poverty. 28. Her Government had therefore established a National Disabilities Unit, a sign-language teaching programme, and computer education for the blind and visually impaired, and had enabled tertiary institutions to supervise graduate students with disabilities. It helped persons with disabilities to participate in sport; made infrastructure more accessible; facilitated transport for persons with disabilities; and established special programmes to assist caregivers. The Barbados Council for the Disabled worked to bolster her Government's efforts and had petitioned it to ratify the Convention. 29. Governments, civil society, including organizations of persons with disabilities, and the private sector should work in partnership to enable persons with disabilities to exercise their rights. Her Government subsidized non-governmental organizations working to empower such persons and had declared March the month of the disabled. However, it faced challenges in maintaining universal access to social services, and the effects of the financial crisis threatened its disability-inclusive initiatives. In developing countries, economic growth and national capacity-building were needed for the implementation of the Convention. 30. Mr. Sarki (Nigeria) said that his Government was taking measures to incorporate the Convention into domestic law. In that connection, it had conducted a baseline survey on persons with disabilities in 2012, pursuant to the Convention, to determine the number, location and needs of such persons, in order to enable them to participate in the political, social and economic development of the country. The National Assembly was considering a bill to uphold the rights of persons with disabilities and to ensure that they received adequate education and health care. The bill recommended the establishment of a national commission for persons with disabilities to enforce its provisions once it was passed. 31. Lastly, in line with article 30 of the Convention, his Government had organized political empowerment programmes for persons with disabilities aspiring to contest elective positions. 32. Mr. Salgado Rubi (Honduras) said that his Government had made the provision of incentives for decent work for persons with disabilities a priority. It ensured that the staff of all ministries included the legally prescribed minimum proportion of such persons. It made special effort to assist persons with disabilities who were members of ethnic groups and of African descent; introduced financing mechanisms to help persons with disabilities to become self-employed; supported organizational development projects involving young persons with disabilities; and built homes with accessibility features for persons with disabilities. 33. The piece of legislation concerning the equality and full development of persons with disabilities was being amended, while the Congress was considering the appointment of a disabilities ombudsman. In July 2013, the Council of Ministers had approved the region's first public policy on disability. His Government also supported sporting activities involving persons with disabilities. 34. Ms. Ayllón Quinteros (Plurinational State of Bolivia) said that her Government embraced the principles set out in the Convention and had taken measures to protect the rights of persons with disabilities, which were enshrined in the country's Constitution. It had approved General Act No. 223, which called for the protection of the rights of persons with disabilities and enjoined the central Government as well as local governments to develop an inclusive public policy. 35. Public and private institutions were required by law to ensure that at least 4 per cent of their employees were persons with disabilities; and persons with severe disabilities received an annual subsidy from the State. The Government was establishing teams to help it determine who qualified as persons with disabilities, for the purposes of its plans and programmes. 36. Ms. Solórzano-Arriagada (Nicaragua) said that, in keeping with the principles of the Convention and the Protocol thereto, her Government was implementing an inclusive policy with regard to persons with disabilities. It had brought its legislation into line with the Convention and had established an office to promote dialogue between disabled persons' organizations and State institutions. The Voices for All (Todos con Voz) study, conducted with the support of the Government and people of Cuba, had been converted into a permanent health and social assistance programme for persons with disabilities. Through it, 70 per cent of such persons under 18 had gained access to education. 37. New health and education buildings were designed to be accessible to persons with disabilities. In Managua, 10 per cent of public transport vehicles now had accessibility features. The Disability Rights Fund had recognized all those efforts by stating that Nicaragua had made significant progress in restoring the rights of persons with disabilities. 38. Ms. Okity-Duah (Ghana) said that her Government had ratified the Convention in March 2012. The 2006 Disability Act had established a National Council on Persons with Disabilities, comprising State agencies and civil society representatives, to coordinate the national disability policy. The National Development and Planning Commission, responsible for defining the country's development agenda, was well-placed to ensure disability-inclusive development. 39. Since Ghana's governance framework emphasized decentralization, local development priorities were articulated through the district assemblies with support from the District Assemblies' Common Fund. A portion of that Fund was allocated to persons with disabilities in the form of grants to support community capacity-building. The framework also encouraged local ownership of economic empowerment programmes. 40. Her Government provided cash and other benefits to the poorest households through the Livelihood Empowerment against Poverty scheme. It had also established a programme to train 5,000 persons with disabilities in basic information and communications technology, mobile telephone and computer technologies, assembly and repair, and business skills. However, the high cost of such initiatives in a low-income environment meant that their effects would be marginal in the short term. Nonetheless, the Government would maintain the momentum through public education on risk factors in the area of disability, programmes to change beliefs, and family support for the vulnerable. 41. Ms. Bogopane-Zulu (South Africa) said that the empowerment of persons with disabilities should be central to the development agenda beyond 2015. Other countries should follow the example set by South Africa, where persons with disabilities held posts at many public institutions. Measures should be taken to ensure that persons with disabilities and their organizations participated fully and actively in determining the items to be included on that agenda, including access to rehabilitation and assistive technology, personal assistance and accessible environments. An understanding of the cost of disabilities to rights holders was needed. In that connection, her Government looked forward to the outcome of its collaboration with the United Nations Partnership to Promote the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 42. The Diplomatic Conference to Conclude a Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works by Visually Impaired Persons and Persons with Print Disabilities, held in Marrakesh, Morocco, in June 2013, had shifted the cost of access to published works from the rights holder to the duty bearer and had underscored the need for the Committee to establish a tracking system for international treaties which could affect the rights of persons with disabilities. Such a system would allow the United Nations to advise States parties of upcoming negotiations and to guide such negotiations within the framework of the Convention. 43. That Conference had also highlighted the importance of the voice of persons with disabilities in negotiation processes and the need for their empowerment. Her Government was therefore committed to finalizing its rehabilitation programme, which was managed by organizations of persons with disabilities. Community-based rehabilitation was essential to the empowerment of such persons and provided a platform for change through people-driven, barrier-free development. 44. Mr. Noor Ismail (Kenya) said that his Government had for the first time appointed a person with disabilities to the post of Principal Secretary, in the Ministry of Interior and Coordination of National Government. It had adopted policies to ensure that persons with disabilities had an adequate standard of living and social protection. The Constitution made provision for their rights, and a National Council for Persons with Disabilities had been established. Disability was a cross-cutting issue in Kenya's Vision 2030 development framework. 45. In 2012, his Government had introduced a national social protection policy in which persons with disabilities were identified as a priority group. To protect them, the National Development Fund for Persons with Disabilities and the Cash Transfer Programme for Persons with Severe Disabilities had been established. Other initiatives benefiting such persons included free primary education, cash transfers for older persons and orphaned and vulnerable children, and youth development. Low-income persons with disabilities were exempt from tax and from duties on imported assistive devices and customized vehicles, and programmes had been established to help them secure employment 46. Lastly, his Government had held consultations with such persons and their organizations, United Nations agencies and international non-governmental organizations to prepare for the High-level Meeting on Disability and Development, be held in September 2013, and had submitted recommendations for the development agenda beyond 2015. 47. Mr. ten Geuzendam (Observer for the European Union) said that the European Disability Strategy 2010-2020 provided a framework for cooperation between European Union institutions and member States as they worked to build a barrier-free Europe for all. The European Commission was also examining the possibility of submitting draft legislation to make relevant goods and services more accessible to persons with disabilities. All member States of the European Union had established, or were establishing, governance structures in accordance with article 33 of the Convention, and bodies such as the European Ombudsman, the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights and the European Disability Forum ensured that the Convention was promoted and monitored at the European Union level. 48. The European Commission's annual work forum on the implementation of the Convention provided a platform for exchange and mutual learning between civil society and organizations of persons with disabilities and other stakeholders. The European Commission's 2013 report on the implementation of the Convention by member States contained a thematic chapter on disability and development cooperation. 49. Ms. Bersanelli (Argentina) said that dramatic changes were taking place in her country with regard to disability rights. The National Advisory Committee for the Integration of Persons with Disabilities was now responsible for implementation of the Convention, and the Disability Observatory had been established to promote policies and practices to transform the lives of persons with disabilities. In addition, the Audiovisual Communication Services Act guaranteed the right of persons with disabilities to access information, and progress had been made in guaranteeing their right to health, education, social protection and employment. 50. Lastly, the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights had established a programme to ensure that persons with disabilities enjoyed equal access to justice. Nevertheless, much remained to be done. While being a development issue, the empowerment of persons with disabilities was, above all, a human rights issue. All actors should work together constructively to empower persons with disabilities and build an inclusive society. 51. Mr. Mercieca (Malta) said that disability must be mainstreamed into society through social dialogue involving all stakeholders. The notions of equal opportunity and social cohesion were at the centre of his Government's disability strategy, given the realization that society could only benefit from the active participation of persons with disabilities. The Government was therefore committed to encouraging the economic and social engagement of such persons with a view to building stronger communities, healthier societies, more productive populations and happier citizens. 52. To that end, it had devised its first national disability policy; was consolidating the Equal Opportunities Act; and was reviewing the Constitution to reflect the needs of persons with disabilities. In addition, it was increasing welfare benefits, strengthening the rights of persons with disabilities and devising a national strategy to combat poverty and social exclusion. All those actions and others were being carried out with the full participation of persons with disabilities. 53. Mr. Zribi (Tunisia) said that his country had embarked on a steady and consensus-based transition to democracy, and was convinced of the need to empower all sectors of society in every aspect of public life. The challenge was not to treat persons with disabilities as objects of charity, but rather to create the environment for their economic and social empowerment. In that connection, it had taken several measures, including legislative reform, to ensure that they could fully enjoy their rights under the Convention, including civil and political rights and the right to employment and training. It had also formulated national action plans to prevent discrimination based on disability, integrate children with disabilities into the school system and promote employment. 54. Tunisia had submitted its first report to the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2011, and was now working to implement a range of actions, including incorporating the rights of persons with disabilities into the new Constitution, improving statistical records, increasing access to education, and improving services and social protection. Tunisia also supported the integration of disability into the development framework beyond 2015 and the decision to convene the High-level Meeting on Disability and Development in September 2013. 55. Mr. Corporán (Dominican Republic) said that stronger policies on social inclusion were needed and that the disability perspective should be mainstreamed into the development agenda beyond 2015. As persons with disabilities were a priority in its national economic, social and environmental development plan, the Government had increased the budget allocated to the National Council for Persons with Disabilities. A programme that included the construction of five comprehensive care centres was being implemented to address the needs of children with disabilities. 56. A theatre company comprising 129 performers with disabilities had been established to allow them to showcase their talents. The multi-stakeholder outreach programme launched by the National Council for Persons with Disabilities and the national household survey conducted by the National Office of Statistics were designed to determine the number of persons with disabilities in the country. 57. A national literacy plan had recently been launched and learning centres established, although the plan was poorly funded. The National Council for Persons with Disabilities was also developing a national plan for universal accessibility. While transport developments had been slow, access to communication and information for persons with disabilities had improved somewhat. 58. Measures had been taken to help persons with disabilities establish small and medium-sized enterprises, and technical and vocational training was being provided across the country. Persons with disabilities were covered by a subsidized health insurance scheme and were included in social welfare plans. The Government was committed to promoting full inclusion, combating discrimination and improving access to transport and employment for persons with disabilities. 59. Mr. Alemán Arias (Panama) said that his country had been the first State to incorporate the provisions of the Convention into domestic law and had established the National Secretariat for Disabilities, which comprised members of civil society and had accessible offices in every province. As part of the Government's national disability policy, the Ministry of Health had recently opened the first osteogenesis imperfecta (brittle bone disease) ward in a Latin American public hospital, while the Ann Sullivan Centre had been opened to care for children with autism and similar disabilities. 60. The Government was also promoting national forums on technology and disability and had established a programme to provide persons with disabilities with free access to software. As part of its national strategic plan for 2010-2014, it was providing subsidies for persons with disabilities living in extreme poverty, as well as support for the establishment of small businesses, including the provision of technical assistance. Lastly, the relevant administrative and legal steps were being taken to introduce disability certification based on the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. 61. Mr. Kamau (Kenya) resumed the Chair. 62. Mr. Saeedi (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his Government attached great importance to the rights of persons with disabilities, many of whom had been the victim of chemical weapons. The national parliament had approved legislation to promote the rights of persons with disabilities, which provided that at least 3 per cent of Government posts must be allocated to eligible persons with disabilities, and that persons with disabilities should be granted discounted access to public facilities. 63. As part of its national plan, the Government was implementing measures to make all public places accessible to persons with disabilities, while its latest five-year development plan included provisions to protect the rights of children with special needs. Besides the Government, a growing number of non-governmental organizations and charities were also working to protect the rights of persons with disabilities. Given that the majority of such persons lived in developing countries, disability must be incorporated into the development agenda beyond 2015. 64. Mr. Al-Hajiri (Qatar) said that his Government had made sustained efforts to promote the rights of persons with disabilities through its National Vision 2030, a broad framework of national strategies intended to transform Qatar into an advanced society capable of sustainable development. One such strategy sought to ensure that persons in disadvantaged sectors of society, including persons with disabilities, had the opportunity to achieve economic independence. Other programmes offered support to vulnerable families, provided training and employment for persons with disabilities, and sought to involve such persons in decision-making. 65. Qatari legislation also contained a range of measures protecting the rights of persons with disabilities. Act No. 2 (2004) guaranteed them the right to means of transport, equipment for learning and mobility, and public and private-sector work. It allocated 2 per cent of Government jobs to them, in accordance with their abilities and skills, and provided a monthly subsidy for those unable to work. In 2009, a committee of competent agencies had been established to determine mechanisms for implementing the Act. 66. The Supreme Council for Family Affairs had worked together with the League of Arab States, the Arab Deaf Union and the Arab League Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organization to standardize sign language and compile a sign-language dictionary. In cooperation with Rehabilitation International, the Council had also put in place guidelines for access to buildings by persons with disabilities. 67. Ms. Knospe (Germany) said that her country was making good progress in implementing the Convention. Under its national action plan, it had mainstreamed disability policy at all levels of government, as well as within institutions and private-sector companies, and had established new permanent forms of participation and focal points. It had also produced its first inclusion report, which identified the barriers to the participation of persons with disabilities, and would be conducting a study to gather up-to-date and internationally comparable data for the next report. 68. Inclusion concerned both persons with disabilities and those without, and required public and private initiatives covering all areas of political, economic, cultural and social life. With that in mind, the Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development had devised a strategy for the inclusion of persons with disabilities in German development cooperation, as part of its objective to include persons with disabilities in all areas of German development policy. 69. Ms. Setthakorn (Thailand) said that the disability perspective must be mainstreamed into the development agenda beyond 2015 and that States should continue to work together to implement the Convention, in particular through regional and multi-stakeholder cooperation. The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities must also be provided with sufficient resources to carry out its work. 70. Thailand had recently co-hosted the Asia-Pacific regional consultation on a disability-inclusive development agenda and believed that the empowerment, participation and employment of persons with disabilities were crucial to ensure that they had an adequate standard of living. In that connection, the Government had established a fund for the empowerment of persons with disabilities, community-based rehabilitation programmes and the first empowerment plan for women with disabilities, covering the period 2013-2016. Thailand remained committed to working with all stakeholders to protect the rights of persons with disabilities both at home and abroad. 71. Mr. Lewis (Australia) said that his Government was implementing a major reform agenda across its disability services and support systems, including making fundamental changes to public policy under its National Disability Strategy for 2010-2020. The Strategy ensured that the principles of the Convention were mainstreamed into all domestic policies, services and programmes affecting persons with disabilities, their families and caregivers, and identified the factors that were critical for an inclusive society. The government had launched a new national disability insurance scheme which provided tailored support for individuals with disabilities. 72. At the international level, Australia was actively working with Member States and the United Nations to establish a disability-inclusive development agenda beyond 2015, in order to ensure that persons with disabilities were empowered to be both agents and beneficiaries of development in 2015 and beyond. Through its aid programme, it had also established partnerships with the Pacific Disability Forum, the Disability Rights Fund and the Women's Refuge Commission. His country firmly supported the United Nations Partnership to Promote the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 73. Mr. Langeland (Norway) said that his Government was committed to incorporating the rights of persons with disabilities into its development policy. To that end, it had developed guidelines on the country's efforts in that regard and had contributed US$500,000 to the United Nations Partnership to Promote the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Sustainable development was not possible without the meaningful involvement and active participation of persons with disabilities. In addition, a universal social protection floor was vital, including equal access to health services, education and employment for all. It was also important to encourage the political participation of persons with disabilities at all levels. 74. Activities targeting women and girls must include those with disabilities. In that connection, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs' new action plan on gender equality emphasized the need to address multidimensional discrimination. Measures must also be taken to protect persons with disabilities in humanitarian emergencies, and victims of cluster munitions and landmines must be included in activities promoting the rights of persons with disabilities. Lastly, the rights and needs of persons with disabilities must be given due consideration in the discussions on the development agenda beyond 2015. 75. Mr. Mellado Berríos (Chile) said that the human-rights-based approach to disability required States to incorporate disability into every aspect of human development and to draft inclusive public policies that would drive cultural change. Chile's national institutions were facing the challenge of understanding development from an inclusive perspective, so that it benefited all citizens, especially those with disabilities. Poverty reduction strategies and social protection instruments should respect intercultural aspects and break down barriers to full social inclusion. It was therefore important to recognize the country's multicultural nature and incorporate indigenous peoples into public disability policy 76. Chile was developing a community-based approach to rehabilitation that included the provision of multidisciplinary care for all types of disabilities, with the involvement of the family and society as a whole. The Convention required an effective body to facilitate monitoring of its implementation in collaboration with States. Chile therefore supported the treaty body strengthening process and the search for a sustainable solution in that regard. 77. Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) said that his country was preparing for the forthcoming interactive dialogue on its first report and was examining the possibility of withdrawing its reservation to the Convention. In addition, consultations were being held with persons with disabilities concerning national policy. A tool on inclusive education had been developed to guide teachers, and was being piloted in 22 schools. Persons with disabilities had been provided with training and assistance in finding employment, and self-employment fairs had been organized to enable them to access financial support. 78. The Ministry of Health was promoting a comprehensive rights-based reform of the health-care system, which was designed to foster inclusion and active participation, and to recognize individuals as rights holders. A transport policy had been drafted to improve access to the capital for persons with disabilities. The Government would conduct a more comprehensive census of persons with disabilities as part of its efforts to improve data collection. Lastly, it would address the needs of older persons with disabilities in particular, since those persons were doubly vulnerable. 79. Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) said that his Government was drafting a new disability and social inclusion policy based on the effective enjoyment of rights by persons with disabilities and their involvement in every phase of programme development. However, it continued to face challenges in implementing the Convention. In particular, it needed to harmonize its national disability policy with sectoral policies; develop a policy to assist caregivers; devise strategies to promote independent living; and empower persons with disabilities and their families. It also needed to train new leaders among persons with disabilities so that they could participate actively in drafting public policies to promote social inclusion and adequate standards of living for the entire population. The participation of children with disabilities was a major challenge and strategies were required to ensure that they played an active role in social policy decisions. 80. At future sessions, States should promote understanding of the complexities of disability and the need for a cross-cutting approach linked to national and international decisions on social policy and development. They should also encourage recognition of diversity and respect for the human rights of all persons, especially those with disabilities. Public policies should be guided by a differentiated approach that took account of the limitations defined by the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. Sessions should also cover disability information management and the development of actions designed to prevent and combat violence against persons with disabilities. 81. Mr. Rubisch (Austria) said that civil society organizations had participated in the drafting of Austria's first report to the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the National Action Plan for Persons with Disabilities 2012-2020, which was the main framework for Austria's disability policy. The Plan was complemented by efforts at the regional and provincial levels. His Government's implementation of the Convention was also guided by the European Union Disability Strategy 2010-2020 and the Council of Europe Disability Action Plan 2006-2015. 82. His Government was promoting inclusive education by establishing model regions, and had launched a project to encourage supported decision-making. The Disability Equality Act had established a conciliation procedure as an alternative to legal proceedings. A pilot project would be carried out to develop an inclusive work environment for persons with severe disabilities, and personal assistance would be provided to enable all persons with disabilities to gain employment. Lastly, a long-term care allowance enabled persons with disabilities to live as independently as possible. 83. Mr. Goldberg (Observer for the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights) said that article 33, paragraph 2, of the Convention was designed to establish ongoing domestic dialogue on implementation between States parties, civil society organizations and organizations of people with disabilities. It could therefore fill the gap between the periodic international monitoring process and day-to-day domestic implementation. 84. States parties were required to establish independent mechanisms for the promotion, protection and monitoring of Convention obligations, taking into consideration the Paris Principles. Currently, 69 national human rights institutions were accredited by his organization. Although more than a dozen "A" status institutions had been given monitoring roles by their States, overall implementation of article 33, paragraph 2, had been slow. 85. Government institutions had a tendency to treat persons with disabilities as the objects of benevolence and charity, when they were in fact rights holders. States had an obligation to ensure that all persons with disabilities enjoyed an adequate standard of living on the same basis as other citizens, taking into account their special needs. 86. In closing, while his organization appreciated being given the opportunity to speak at the Conference, it regretted that it lacked official status. It therefore looked forward to renewed discussions on how its role and that of national human rights institutions could be formalized in the work of the Conference, in line with the evolving practice of many United Nations bodies. The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 