%%%ECONOMIC COOPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE|PROGRAMME EVALUATION|COUNTRY PROGRAMMES|REGIONAL PROGRAMMES|RECOMMENDATIONS|

Annual session 2013 3 to 14 June 2013, New York Item 7 of the provisional agenda Evaluation Evaluation of UNDP contribution to South-South and triangular cooperation (2008-2011) Executive summary Contents I. Introduction South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation, which have emerged as vital elements of the global development cooperation architecture, are set to assume greater importance in the future. This report presents the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the independent evaluation of the UNDP contribution to South-South and triangular cooperation, conducted by the UNDP Evaluation Office in 2012. The evaluation reviewed performance during the period 2008-2011, examined it through the lenses of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability. It focused particularly on UNDP support to the achievement of development results through South- South and triangular cooperation and on clarifying the added value and comparative advantage of UNDP in this regard. As the second Evaluation Office exercise dedicated to the theme (the previous one, covering the period 1996-2006, having been conducted in 2007), this evaluation also assessed the extent to which the recommendations of its predecessor had been addressed. As is inevitable in the implementation of any programme of this nature, the actual progress over time would be varied, as would the successes and challenges in different regions. The decentralized nature of UNDP means that policy intent is dependent upon a series of variables that are context specific, as reflected in this evaluation. The conclusions and the recommendations take into account both where the organization has come from and where it is heading. The findings will provide substantive inputs to the UNDP strategic plan, 2014-2017, and the fifth cooperation framework for South-South cooperation, 2014-2017. The evaluation was conducted against the UNDP strategic plan, 2010-2013, and the fourth cooperation framework for South-South cooperation (DP/CF/SSC/4), both approved by the UNDP Executive Board in 2008 and extended until 2013. The strategic plan identified the fourth cooperation framework for South-South cooperation as the document that "establishes and elaborates on the specific elements of the UNDP approach to South-South cooperation". The implementation of the fourth cooperation framework for South-South cooperation relied on the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation as the `focal point' for South-South cooperation in UNDP. The Special Unit was renamed the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation in 2012. The scope of the evaluation mirrored the strategic plan vision of mainstreaming South-South approaches throughout UNDP focus areas at the global, regional and country levels, and of facilitating South-South and triangular cooperation initiatives within and across the five regions in which the organization operates. The evaluation assessed the extent to which UNDP supported South-South and triangular cooperation with respect to the still valid principles outlined in the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries: national ownership, equality, mutual respect, national sovereignty, mutual benefit, non-conditionality, and solidarity. Two sets of questions guided the evaluation: (a) Has UNDP played a relevant role in assisting programme countries to address their development challenges based on South-South and triangular cooperation? Was UNDP support to such cooperation based on a Southern perspective as expressed in the principles for South-South and triangular cooperation? Has UNDP responded appropriately to the dynamic context of international development cooperation by adjusting its role and approaches to strengthen South-South and triangular cooperation? (b) To what extent has UNDP provided such assistance in an effective, efficient and sustainable manner and yielded results from a human development perspective? An evaluation framework consisting of key issues, specific questions and sources of information was developed to guide the enquiry. A mixed-method approach was employed to generate a more comprehensive picture of the subject under evaluation by combining complementary data from primary and secondary sources so as to produce a strong basis for generating evidence to enhance the explanations for the findings. The evaluation identified a sample of 13 countries across the globe for visits, which provided insights into some impressive initiatives that have sought to knit together countries in the South for collective self-reliance, as envisaged in the policy mandates for South-South cooperation. The evaluation team was informed by interviews with over 290 stakeholders at the country, regional and headquarters levels. The team reviewed extensive programme documentation, General Assembly resolutions and Executive Board decisions in addition to numerous progress reports, regular monitoring data, and institutional reports. The meta-analysis, including a review of 18 thematic evaluations and 48 assessments of development results (the country-level evaluations of UNDP contribution to development results) was used to broaden the information base and cross-check for similarities and differences in UNDP-supported approaches. At various stages the evaluation benefited from wide-ranging internal and external quality-assurance mechanisms and from the advice of an external advisory panel of development experts. II. Key findings 11. UNDP policy frameworks and statements of intent are aligned with the key principles for South-South cooperation embodied in the Buenos Aires and Nairobi outcome documents. UNDP official documents and statements make frequent reference to the principle of national ownership. UNDP has focused its support on the development of national capacities, which must be led by and grounded in endogenous efforts in order to be meaningful and sustainable. As stated in the UNDP strategic plan, 2008, this is the crux of how UNDP understands and applies the principle of national ownership. The evaluation found, moreover, that the preambles to several country and regional programmes prepared by UNDP in collaboration with its partners mirror the principles of respect for national sovereignty and ownership, equality and non-conditionality. 12. UNDP has a strong comparative advantage in supporting and facilitating South-South and triangular cooperation. The evaluation found that UNDP has a strong comparative advantage in supporting and facilitating South-South and triangular cooperation. The advantage is rooted in the following six operational characteristics: an extended country presence and decentralized structure with the operation of country offices and regional service centres; extensive technical know-how in the focus areas of UNDP and a portfolio of good practices; neutrality and absence of political bias; strategic position within the United Nations system; emphasis on capacity development and a demand-led approach to programming; and the flexibility to respond at the country level. 13. Based on elements of its comparative advantage UNDP enjoys great demand from partners for its services. Government officials in countries spoke highly of the ability of the UNDP country offices to help identify sources and methodologies for South-South information exchanges that met their stated development priorities and objectives, including the achievement of internationally agreed development goals such as the Millennium Development Goals. 14. UNDP support for South-South cooperation-related policy and institutional work has led to preliminary results that reinforce the potential of the organization for innovation. The three main types of UNDP involvement in the policy and institutional areas related to South-South cooperation can be described as capacity development of country-level international cooperation organizations and South-South mechanisms; support to research and advocacy on the strategic and policy dimensions of South-South cooperation; and enhanced country partnership agreements with `emerging economies' wishing to intensify their leadership in South-South cooperation, including through the establishment of thematic centres where lessons learned and expertise may be shared. 15. UNDP brokering of South-South knowledge exchanges and learning experiences, which constitutes one of the most common ways in which UNDP supports South-South cooperation, has produced immediate short-term benefits for participants with the potential to evolve into institutional and country benefits. In 2010, 126 UNDP country offices reported support to some sort of South-South cooperation initiative. The evaluation identified examples in all the regions for each focus area. 16. In the area of governance, UNDP was involved in helping countries address issues related to democratic transitions, accountability of governance systems, and elections and constitutional reform. These UNDP-sponsored exchanges and events were considered highly beneficial by participating governments and civil society organizations, because without them the parties involved would not have had access to the same range and scope of knowledge and expertise. 17. Recent UNDP country programme evaluations have noted the growing importance of South-South knowledge and technical exchanges for sustainable development, management of natural resources and climate change adaptation and mitigation. The value added by UNDP to the global South-South cooperation debate in terms of highlighting people-centred and rights-based approaches to development, including gender equality, was significant to the majority of stakeholders interviewed for this evaluation. 18. UNDP displayed a strong commitment to South-South and triangular cooperation work with a focus on achieving the Millennium Development Goals. In terms of disaster prevention and recovery, UNDP has been involved in brokering Southern-based immediate responses to natural disasters as well as in the later stages, when the countries involved were dealing with the recovery phase. 19. UNDP support for South-South cooperation has contributed to regional integration efforts. Recent UNDP thematic and country programme evaluations have shown that a number of initiatives have taken place through direct cooperation between regional cooperation entities and the regional programming approaches of UNDP. 20. In Africa, for example, UNDP has entered into a joint agreement with the New Partnership for Africa's Development to strengthen partnership arrangements and help build regional cooperation in key thematic areas under the African Peer Review Mechanism. In Asia, UNDP has provided direct long-term support to entities such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Melanesian Spearhead Group, the South Pacific Forum, the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme and the Caribbean Community, to name a few. 21. Several partners at the country level identified regional integration as an important component of South-South cooperation which could be further supported by UNDP. The evaluation identified numerous examples from different regions, and there exists a wide range of areas for UNDP-supported regional capacity-building and strategic collaboration among programme countries and regional institutions, including climate change, disaster risk reduction, water and natural resource management, energy, trade relations, gender equality, poverty reduction, indigenous rights, HIV/AIDS and small business development. 22. Despite high and increasing demand, due in part to successes in certain areas and demand for replication, the financing commitment of UNDP for South-South cooperation has not grown proportionately. The core resources allocation to South-South cooperation activities was determined by the Executive Board in its decision 23/95. The allocation of core resources to support the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation was 0.5 per cent, which translated into $4.5 million per year at its peak, declining to $3.76 million in 2011. That percentage is no longer proportionate to the growing demand of partners for the role UNDP can play in respect to South-South and triangular cooperation. UNDP has also supported South-South cooperation initiatives through regional and country programmes, while the size and scope of its funding commitment to South-South and triangular cooperation as translated into regional and country programmes is not accounted for at present. UNDP has no policy to encourage the allocation of a certain proportion of core resources specifically to South-South cooperation-related work at the country or regional levels. 23. UNDP efforts to mainstream South-South cooperation in its programmes have been uneven. The process continues, but the need for support remains until a more even pattern of progress is apparent. UNDP has made several efforts to formulate a South-South cooperation strategy that would help mainstream support during the period under evaluation, but those efforts have not yielded concrete results. 24. There is a need for dedicated resources and budgets; specific tools and operational guidance; continuous monitoring; and an overarching strategy with clear objectives, benchmarks and incentives for achievement. The lack of decentralized resources and tools for operationalizing and mainstreaming South-South cooperation was found to produce practical shortfalls. The evaluation revealed a lot of good will among UNDP personnel towards increased integration of South-South cooperation into UNDP operations at both country and regional levels, but the understanding of exactly how to bring it about is often vague. 25. The extent of mainstreaming of South-South and triangular cooperation within United Nations development assistance frameworks and UNDP country programmes followed no consistent institutional guidance or model. The evaluation identified various monitoring mechanisms that were initiated by UNDP management during the period; those efforts were commendable, and need to be strengthened. 26. There is a gap between how South-South and triangular cooperation is promoted and advocated for at higher levels of the organization, and its practical and functional integration into programming. In a context of differentiated progress around South-South and triangular cooperation it was found that there are various understandings of what the UNDP support to them involves. The programme itself is sufficiently broad to incorporate a wide variety of activities which could have led to this ambiguity, as could the fact that many activities purported to be South-South and triangular cooperation may not be aligned with South-South principles. 27. This finding may in part reflect on the broader question of benchmarks, milestones, indicators and standards in the area which have not been fully developed, thus making it hard to define and hard to measure. It means that work needs to be undertaken based on the current experience to arrive at agreement on these issues and bring about a more robust reporting framework. Until this is in place it will not be possible to provide the type of analysis required for effective reporting against intended outcomes. 28. In such a context it is necessary for UNDP to assert its leadership in the area by providing corporate guidance and mechanisms in the following areas: (a) producing consensual definitions, as a basis for developing more sophisticated indicators that allow for a better tracking of progress; and (b) using the knowledge platforms more effectively to share knowledge at the national, regional and global levels. In the absence of a more dynamic system that permits reporting on the quality of the myriad innovative experiences supported globally, many good practices are lost. 29. UNDP-wide operational guidance and mechanisms to support South-South and triangular cooperation at the regional and country levels were not in place. Operational plans, frameworks and tools for implementation and oversight at an organization-wide level are lacking. Some parts of UNDP have commendably taken it upon themselves to develop their own approaches for supporting South-South and triangular cooperation (for example, the regional bureaus for Latin America and Central Europe, and some regional centres and country offices), but it was observed that the level and type of integration of South-South and triangular cooperation was quite varied and lacked a systematic approach. 30. There are few designated focal points for South-South and triangular cooperation within UNDP programming structures, and some specific staff positions related to South-South cooperation. Relationships and information flow about activities and resources between UNDP headquarters (including the United Nations Office for South-South cooperation), regional bureaus, regional centres, country offices and the new centres of excellence were mostly ad-hoc and poorly defined. 31. The recently approved framework of operational guidelines on United Nations support to South-South and triangular cooperation should be taken into account in developing the UNDP-specific guidelines. 32. Knowledge-sharing platforms and institutional reporting systems concerning South-South cooperation are not generating learning and or systematically providing information on performance. The vast majority of the information reported by UNDP in support of South-South cooperation concerns exchanges of knowledge and experiences, mainly through study tours, knowledge fairs and participation in regional meetings. Such support usually is offered within a specific region, most often at the sub-regional level. 33. Although the number of country offices and the quantity and quality of information reported have improved since 2008, the evaluation found that, with very few exceptions, UNDP does not distil lessons learned from current practices and approaches to South-South cooperation within country and regional programmes. 34. Valuable lessons can be drawn from both successful and unsuccessful experiences, and these should be disseminated throughout the organization. UNDP could play a critical role in supporting programme countries in scaling up successful South-South cooperation initiatives. The weakness in this area has unfortunately undermined what has been, overall, an impressive initiative - a fact that becomes apparent only through evaluations such as this one. 35. It is too early to determine whether the results of current South-South cooperation initiatives are sustainable due variations in the context and to the absence of effective monitoring systems. It is too early to determine, based on the evaluative evidence, whether the current initiatives are in fact sustainable or not, due in part to the fact that the initiatives are varied, dynamic and complex and are located in an array of country and regional contexts that further influence potential success. 36. The absence of effective monitoring systems for this element must be addressed so as to resolve the ambiguity that exists in definitions and, consequently, in benchmarks and milestones. At the operational level, little attention has been paid to the long-term benefits of discrete projects or to designing exit strategies for UNDP support, since many of these initiatives are `one-off' activities. 37. The UNDP partnership strategy has been undergoing a gradual repositioning in many countries in response to the changing development cooperation context. Several recent UNDP programme evaluations have emphasized the need for UNDP to reconsider its strategic positioning in middle-income countries by strengthening support to South-South cooperation. Other evaluations have emphasized the need for UNDP to play a stronger brokering, needs-assessment and networking role in the area of South-South cooperation. 38. The UNDP `External Relations and Advocacy Framework', 2012, prioritizes South-South cooperation as one of its objectives and corporate resource mobilization as another. The resource mobilization approach does not fully encompass the broader strategic commitment to South-South and triangular cooperation that is demanded of UNDP by country-level interactions with many programme countries that have already attained a higher level of development. 39. The evaluation found that UNDP was struggling to move away from more traditional development approaches related to responding to needs under its thematic priorities, towards a country-centred approach to South-South and triangular cooperation. One positive example in this regard is the UNDP-supported International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth, in Brazil, which promotes the use of mechanisms such as conditional cash transfers for poverty reduction and is exploring the policy implications of their more widespread use in developing countries. 40. There is a lack of clarity about the division of labour, roles and responsibilities, and lines of accountability for outcome achievement between UNDP and the newly renamed United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation. The fourth cooperation framework states that "UNDP should define clear collaborative arrangements with the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation" and emphasizes the importance of leveraging between the two entities. 41. The framework did not actually clarify the respective roles, detailed functions and individual and shared mandates of the two entities with respect to South-South cooperation. The performance indicators and targets used in the results framework for the UNDP strategic plan, 2008, pertained mainly to the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation. There were few details on the exact division of labour, roles and responsibilities, or lines of accountability for outcome achievement. This is especially true in terms of the strategic linkages between the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation, UNDP headquarters units and the decentralized offices of UNDP at the field level. 42. The United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation has produced some key outputs under the fourth cooperation framework related to the `three-in-one' architecture for support to South-South cooperation, but the overall effectiveness and sustainability of the approach have yet to be seen. The United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation has created what it refers to as a `three-in-one' architecture for supporting global, regional and national work on South-South cooperation. This has translated into various coordination and policy research activities, events, tools, knowledge products and online information portals and clearing houses created by the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation as key outputs under the fourth cooperation framework. 43. The three-tier strategy corresponds to the outcome areas under the framework, namely: (a) facilitation of knowledge exchange; (b) support to policy advice and innovation; and (c) scaling up for greater impact on development results. These areas are all considered relevant by Southern countries, which recognize that knowledge exchange is a necessary first-level interaction towards the achievement of development results - hence the importance of the other two tiers. 44. One example of the knowledge-exchange work of the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation is its organization of the annual Global South-South Development Expo, together with United Nations organizations, Member States and other development partners. Under the second tier, policy advice, its main activities have involved helping Member States coordinate and facilitate the meetings and related deliberations of the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation. The third tier, innovating and scaling up South-South cooperation-related ideas, includes the development of platforms such as the Global South-South Development Academy and the South-South Global Assets and Technology Exchange System. 45. The activities, tools and systems under each of the three tiers were all judged by the evaluators to be technically proficient, containing interesting, innovative content and well-organized meetings. United Nations specialized agencies praised the coordinating role of the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation in knowledge exchanges and inter-organization collaboration. 46. In spite of relatively high participation and use of some of the key events and tools, challenges remain with respect to follow-up, utilization and the sustainability of products and services. The broader development effects of the efforts of the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation efforts have not been fully analysed and documented. III. Conclusions 47. Conclusion 1. UNDP is in the unique and strategic position in the United Nations system to foster stronger mechanisms of support and implementation for South-South and triangular cooperation, under the guidance of the General Assembly and the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation. 48. The contextual evidence, historical background and institutional information presented in this report points to South-South and triangular cooperation having increased global importance in the future, as well as to the continued and growing importance of UNDP as a broker, facilitator and interlocutor for stronger horizontal cooperation among United Nations Member States. 49. The leadership and coordination role of UNDP in effective and strategic responses to South-South cooperation issues is well respected in the United Nations system and among partners, and the organization is viewed as having the potential to do much more. In particular, an important global dialogue is under way regarding how to balance the traditional North-South development paradigm with one in which the primacy of South-South mechanisms is respected, enhanced and recognized. UNDP could potentially play a much larger role in creating linkages between these two modalities of development cooperation, which need to function in a mutually complementary fashion, and in finding ways to direct traditional North-South assistance flows towards support for stronger horizontal cooperation mechanisms, thus strengthening triangular cooperation. 50. UNDP will face challenges in fulfilling this potential if it does not develop the necessary internal analytical capacity and resources. Knowledge-sharing about South-South cooperation-supported initiatives leaves room for improvement. The fragmented UNDP approach leads to a rich and diverse array of South-South cooperation activities, but since these are not well-documented UNDP and its partners risk losing potential synergies and efficiencies as well as broader impact that might characterize a more systematic and better delineated approach. The opportunities for scaling up successful experiences, which is one of the areas where South-South and North-South cooperation modalities can meet, could be lost. 51. Conclusion 2. UNDP has made substantial contributions to facilitating South-South knowledge exchanges in all its focus areas and in all regions. 52. UNDP is recognized as a key facilitator of effective horizontal cooperation mechanisms among Member States, particularly among countries emerging into or consolidating their middle-income status and wishing to capitalize on what they have to offer to other countries going through similar development processes. 53. Both UNDP and the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation have done many things right, as evidenced by the positive aspects of the picture emerging from the assessment of progress against key frameworks and results and from testimonials and evidence obtained at the country level about the utility of UNDP support for specific South-South cooperation knowledge exchange and capacity-building activities among partner countries. 54. In the focus area of governance, UNDP was involved in interregional exchanges that helped countries address issues related to democratic transitions, elections and constitutional reform, and the accountability of governance systems. Recent UNDP country programme evaluations have noted the growing importance of South-South knowledge and technical exchanges for sustainable development, management of natural resources and climate change adaptation and mitigation. UNDP supported South-South exchanges for addressing the poverty-environment nexus and displayed a strong commitment towards Millennium Development Goals-focused South-South and triangular cooperation work. With respect to disaster prevention and recovery, UNDP has been involved in brokering Southern-based immediate responses to natural disasters as well as in the later stages, when the countries involved were dealing with the recovery phase. 55. UNDP support for South-South cooperation-related policy and institutional work has been particularly effective in the areas of capacity development of country-level international cooperation organizations and South-South mechanisms; enhanced country partnership agreements for South-South and triangular cooperation through thematic centres; and support to research and-or advocacy on the strategic and policy dimensions of South-South cooperation, enabling developing countries to play a more active role in international policy and decision-making processes. 56. Conclusion 3. The size, diversity and complexity of UNDP (which, paradoxically, are also its greatest assets), as well as its corporate funding constraints, make it hard to shift efficiently into new ways of thinking and functioning in support of South-South cooperation. 57. Facilitating or supporting South-South cooperation requires much more than project-based support if the sustainability of the concept and its effects are to be assured (although it may still be an important tool). There is a gap between rhetoric at the corporate level and the reality of what happens on the ground when the ideas are implemented in practice. 58. In terms of institutional arrangements, South-South cooperation lacks a specified `home' within the structure of UNDP. At least two headquarters units (the Bureau for Development Policy and the Bureau for External Relations and Advocacy) played a role in supporting the UNDP approach to South-South cooperation and in liaising with Member States, but there does not appear to be a clearly defined location for coordinating and strategizing about South-South cooperation-related work. 59. The United Nations Office for South-South cooperation should not be expected to play this role internally, within UNDP, because although it is officially hosted by UNDP, its mandate is United Nations system-wide. 60. There are two other critical strategic issues related to the programmatic and operational efficiency of the organization. One is the dominant operational approach of UNDP, which is still largely determined by traditional paradigms of North-South aid flows in which funds have to be raised from wealthier developed nations and then channelled through specific projects to less developed partners. 61. In spite of the strong commitment of UNDP personnel in reaching towards new models of horizontal interaction and resource mobilization, traditional development funding and implementation paradigms continue to be replicated within the UNDP approach to South-South and triangular cooperation. UNDP has the potential to do much more to increase complementarity and stretch the boundaries of cooperation and coordination between the coexisting modalities of North-South and South-South development assistance. 62. A second, closely related issue is the fragmentation of the UNDP approach. The picture that emerges from the evaluation reveals a lack of overall coherence regarding the work of UNDP in South-South and triangular cooperation, both in its on-the-ground support and in the wider realm of knowledge management. The knowledge-sharing platforms related to South-South cooperation being promoted and utilized by UNDP are not yet fully managed to create the best possible synergies. 63. There is fine line between appropriate adaptation to different contexts and what could be viewed as a reactive, fragmented and ad-hoc approach on the part of UNDP to its work on South-South cooperation. The evaluation uncovered several examples in which different regional and country programmes each had to `reinvent the wheel' to some extent in determining how to support South-South cooperation, since there is little institutional operational guidance and no overarching action plan under which to make consistent, strategic choices and investments in South-South and triangular cooperation approaches. 64. UNDP has opportunities to further distinguish the different types of triangular cooperation modalities and strategies that it offers and to adapt the range of approaches (and specific effects) that are required to work with different countries having diverse development needs and expertise to share. 65. Countries that are emerging onto the world economic stage with considerable resources and strong international political and economic agendas are in a better position to move ahead with forging their own South-South cooperation linkages without much third-party assistance from UNDP, but they still appreciate its continued capacity development efforts and encouragement of opportunities oriented towards crucial human development issues such as gender equality, environmental sustainability and inclusive economic growth. 66. Conclusion 4. There is no clear evidence of the long-term sustainability of South-South initiatives supported by UNDP, and the wider replication of their benefits is uneven. 67. Because of their voluntary nature and mutual learning approach, South-South and triangular cooperation initiatives demand high national ownership, which is conducive to long-lasting results and stronger replication. However, sustainability has not always been factored in when designing South-South cooperation initiatives supported by UNDP, especially for short-term, knowledge-based exchanges or information sharing. This is a clear area for improvement, where much attention needs to be paid to the follow-up effects of various South-South knowledge exchange initiatives, either in direct implementation or in the policy arena. 68. Neither is the replication of initiatives always evident, probably due to limited systematization and learning from previous experiences - which, again, is linked to poor knowledge management in various contexts. Nevertheless, in some cases national partners have taken full ownership of various capacity-building or innovation initiatives related to South-South cooperation and there has been considerable investment by them, which is likely to continue. It may be too early, based on some of the evaluative evidence, to determine whether or not the current initiatives are sustainable, due in part to the fact that the initiatives are varied, dynamic and complex and located within country and regional contexts that further influence potential success. 69. Recommendation 1. UNDP should develop a comprehensive institutional strategy for its support to South-South and triangular cooperation. 70. Following the decision of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, 2012, of the United Nations development system, UNDP needs a fully articulated strategy to mainstream its support to South-South and triangular cooperation. This will require dedicated plans, tools, structures, resources, and incentive and accountability mechanisms that ensure its mainstreaming into regular planning and programming activities. UNDP needs to embark upon an iterative process of integrating South-South cooperation into its programming with the necessary budgeting, implementation and monitoring processes at national, regional and global levels. 71. UNDP still lacks a coherent institution-wide strategy with a clearly defined vision, priorities and practical approaches to support South-South cooperation and promote triangular cooperation. Such a strategy would allow the organization to capitalize on its comparative advantages. Administrative and political leadership are needed to address this shortcoming. 72. The new strategy should help the organization position South-South cooperation as a key element contributing to enhanced national and local capacities for human development and the achievement of internationally agreed development goals, and a as valid development cooperation modality relevant to programme countries. Working with a common definition is an important requirement in constructing a strategy. The definition can take the framework of operational guidelines on United Nations support to South-South and triangular cooperation as a basis and recognize the somewhat differentiated development trajectory of Southern countries as a complement to the broad experience of international cooperation and as a relevant vehicle to address development challenges faced by developing countries. The strategy should help the organization to operationalize the Southern perspective to South-South cooperation, based on the importance accorded by UNDP to the principle of national ownership. 73. The human development perspective is another added value that UNDP brings to the global debate on South-South and triangular cooperation. Programme and donor countries alike appreciate the people-centred approach of the proposition. The strategy should build on this comparative advantage and help develop the capacities of programme countries to maximize the benefits and impact of South-South and triangular cooperation in order to achieve their national goals, with special emphasis on the achievement of internationally agreed development goals. 74. UNDP should promote further investment and engagement in institutional capacity development initiatives that have proved successful in the past to expand the efforts of programme countries to engage in South-South cooperation. UNDP support should shift from the downstream level of direct involvement in implementing programmes to a capacity development and knowledge innovation role, as demonstrated by the experiences of the thematic centres established in partnership with selected Member States. 75. With that approach in mind, UNDP can act as an enabler of substantive policy dialogue among developing countries to promote, enhance and advocate for a new global partnership for development. UNDP is viewed by many partners as an organization with the potential to offer new forms of advisory and institutional support related to South-South cooperation, and this must be clearly reflected in its concrete interactions and methodology. 76. Based on its extensive presence, UNDP should strengthen cross-regional knowledge exchange and improve its support to regional cooperation as important components of its approach to South-South cooperation. The ability of UNDP to foster effective initiatives in the area of regional integration was viewed positively in several regions and should be leveraged. The UNDP approach to South-South cooperation could derive benefit from a dedicated strategy to support regional integration efforts. 77. Recommendation 2. Under the new institution-wide strategy for South-South cooperation, UNDP will need to clarify its corporate structure and define its operational approaches and guidance for continued support to South-South and triangular cooperation 78. In conjunction with the need for an institution-wide strategy, as noted under recommendation 1, UNDP should clearly define roles and responsibilities within its operational structure to implement its strategy and coordinate the efforts made by programme units at global, regional and country levels. Concretely, this would involve strengthening and delineating the accountabilities and functions of UNDP support to South-South and triangular cooperation. 79. There is a need to operationalize UNDP support to South-South and triangular cooperation in stronger and more coherent ways. UNDP needs to restructure incentives and reform internal management and operational systems to discourage top-down approaches to South-South cooperation and facilitate enhanced country ownership. UNDP should introduce planning and operational procedures that streamline and fully mainstream South-South cooperation within its programmes. While recognizing the continued advantages in some instances of a project-based approach to South-South cooperation-related programming, UNDP should consider developing more flexible and agile mechanisms to respond to the rapidly evolving needs of programme countries for knowledge and technology exchange. 80. Support to South-South cooperation at the country level. UNDP supports the resident coordinator system encompassing all organizations of the United Nations system dealing with operational activities for development, regardless of their formal presence in the country. In that capacity, it should enhance its efforts towards the coordinated and cohesive support to South-South and triangular cooperation initiatives that programme countries are demanding from the United Nations. UNDP support to South-South cooperation at the country level should be undertaken in an integral and cooperative way with the United Nations development system. 81. UNDP should intensify its cooperation and adopt collaborative approaches to support country-level development initiatives, in alignment with the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, to establish or improve mechanisms to promote knowledge-sharing through South-South cooperation or triangular schemes. The United Nations system, and UNDP in particular, should respond to the diverse priorities, visions and demands of United Nations Member States regarding South-South cooperation. 82. The emerging role of triangular cooperation should be recognized as a mechanism in which neutral third-party funders or supporters can play a brokering or facilitation role for the demand-driven, inter-country and country-owned sharing of expertise, knowledge and technology. 83. The recent renaming of the Special Unit serves to reinforce its broader role as an office in the United Nations system and should help dispel some of the ambiguity regarding its exact relationship with UNDP, its host organization. A re-examination of the existing division of labour and responsibility between UNDP and the United Nations Office for South-South cooperation is needed to improve coordination and synergy. The extended country presence and operational capacity of UNDP should benefit from the convener role played by the United Nations Office for South-South cooperation, enabling various United Nations legislative bodies to make informed decisions on South-South and triangular cooperation. 84. The link between the normative side of United Nations support to South-South and triangular cooperation, represented by the United Nations Office for South-South cooperation, and its operational side, represented by UNDP, should be mutually reinforcing. The United Nations Office for South-South cooperation has a broad mandate and a thin resource endowment, both human and financial, and, as has been mentioned frequently by Member States, it requires further institutional strengthening. At the same time, it has to forge its own, parallel and complementary approach, building on past successes while rethinking its relationship to UNDP. Now that it is clearly identified as a United Nations office, there should be less confusion and additional opportunities for the unit to define new and better institutional working relationships and synergies with UNDP. 85. Recommendation 3. Knowledge management, a critical component of previous cooperation frameworks, needs to be addressed in a more systematic and coherent manner. 86. UNDP should undertake an earnest review South-South and triangular cooperation experiences towards the achievement of internationally agreed development goals and should reinforce its mandate to support the capacity development of programme countries. UNDP needs a stronger information system in support of South-South and triangular cooperation. Starting with a single, easily accessible repository of recorded efforts, it needs to distil lessons learned from practices and approaches within country and regional programmes. Valuable lessons can be drawn from experiences both successful and unsuccessful provided that they are systematically disseminated throughout the organization. 87. UNDP should be able to support programme countries in scaling up successful South-South cooperation initiatives. To do so, it will need to improve its capacity to learn from past experience. It will need to determine how best to facilitate the complementarity of approaches between South-South cooperation and traditional North-South cooperation, in which the United Nations in general and UNDP in particular should be an important and critical player. The United Nations Office for South-South cooperation has developed useful platforms for knowledge-sharing that UNDP should be using systematically across the organization. 88. Recommendation 4. UNDP should intensify its information-sharing, reporting and evaluation in connection with support to and results achieved through South-South and triangular cooperation. 89. UNDP needs to further strengthen its approaches to performance reporting for South-South cooperation-related work, as well as to monitoring and evaluating the contributions of South-South and triangular cooperation to development results. Many results observed during the evaluation emphasised short-term benefits, revealing a need to articulate theories of change more clearly during the design phase of the support. More robust monitoring and evaluation frameworks should be developed for any UNDP-supported programme or initiative related to South-South cooperation, with the aim of extracting and documenting lessons and best practices for further replication. 90. The current results framework for South-South cooperation, with its explicit reference to outputs, indicators and targets, should be considerably improved. First, the outputs should refer to efforts undertaken by UNDP programme units at the regional and national levels leveraging the network of country offices and regional service centres in support of South-South cooperation rather than relying on the implementing capacity of the United Nations Office for South-South cooperation. Second, the relationship between outputs, indicators and targets should be tightened. Finally, there should be more clarity about benchmarks and ways to measure progress against expected outcomes in a cohesive and meaningful fashion. 91. UNDP is making significant efforts to improve its approach to capturing progress through the results-oriented annual reports. The organization needs to continue strengthening its results-based-management with regard to South-South cooperation. UNDP has made important progress in capturing the quantity of supported initiatives. It can now move into capturing and analysing the quality of South-South cooperation initiatives for the achievement of development results. UNDP needs to pay more attention to the processes and pathways to measure the impact of South-South and triangular cooperation initiatives and the sustainability of their benefits. 92. Recommendation 5. UNDP should clarify its financial commitment with regard to its support to South-South and triangular cooperation 93. UNDP provides financial and in-kind support to South-South and triangular cooperation that is not fully accounted for or recognized. UNDP does not collect financial information on South-South cooperation-supported initiatives except with respect to its regular contribution to the United Nations Office for South-South cooperation. Most of its financial contribution is integrated into programme at the global, regional or country level. UNDP should improve its accounting mechanisms to take stock of the support being provided to South-South cooperation through programme resources. 94. Country offices should include resources to support South-South and triangular cooperation initiatives into their regular programmes. In practice, initiatives that have not been planned within a programme or project are unlikely to be supported, as no resources are `earmarked' for the support of South-South cooperation at the country or regional level. This hinders the flexibility of UNDP to respond to increasing demand. Programme countries expect UNDP to allocate counterpart or seed money to launch joint strategies and pilot initiatives. For example, implementation of the new partnership strategy, which seeks to strengthen the relationship with middle-income countries, would benefit from centrally available financial resources earmarked for supporting South-South and triangular cooperation. 95 As a key aspect of a renewed institution-wide approach, the Executive Board may want to consider increasing its financial commitment to South-South and triangular cooperation. There is a need to address the current imbalance between stated ambition and financing. Specifically, the 0.5 per cent of UNDP core resources allocated to South-South cooperation (all of which now goes directly to support the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation) should be re-examined so as to find ways to make more funds directly available for South-South cooperation-related programming at the country and regional levels. The Executive Board may consider increasing funding and resource allocation to support South-South and triangular cooperation so as to be aligned with the increasing demand from programme countries. 