%%%DOCUMENTS|

Annual session 2013 3-14 June 2013, New York Item 1 of the provisional agenda Organizational matters Provisional agenda, annotations, list of documents and workplan Note by the Executive Board secretariat Contents Item Page Organizational matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . UNDP segment Annual report of the Administrator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . UNDP strategic plan, 2014-2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . Funding commitments to UNDP. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Human Development Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . UNDP country programmes and related matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . United Nations Capital Development Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . United Nations Volunteers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Programming arrangements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . UNFPA segment Annual report of the Executive Director. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Funding commitments to UNFPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . UNFPA country programmes and related matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . UNOPS segment United Nations Office for Project Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Joint segment Internal audit and oversight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Reports of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS Ethics Offices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Field visits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . Other matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tentative workplan for the annual session 2013 of the Executive Board of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Item 1 Under this item, the Executive Board will adopt the agenda for the annual session 2013 and agree on the workplan for the session as presented by the Secretary of the Board. The Board may wish to approve the report of its first regular session 2013. A draft report was distributed to members of the Board for their comments; the final report contains comments received within the deadline. Documentation: Provisional agenda, annotations, list of documents and workplan (DP/2013/L.2) Report of the first regular session 2013 (DP/2013/9) Decisions adopted at the first regular session 2013 (DP/2013/10) Item 2 Annual report of the Administrator In line with Executive Board decision 2012/9, the cumulative review and the annual report of the Administrator on the strategic plan, 2008-2013, provides a high-level, multi-year analysis of achievements under the current strategic plan, and identifies challenges and lessons learned on the basis of performance. It provides an overview of development and institutional results, including UNDP contributions and lessons learned across the four output dimensions, the four focus areas of the strategic plan, and the cross-cutting and development effectiveness areas of work. The report also includes an annex with the annual report on the remaining seven strategic plan outcomes subject to in-depth reporting. The Board may wish to take note of the report and provide guidance relevant to the preparations of the next strategic plan. In line with General Assembly resolutions 59/267 and 62/246, the UNDP report on the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) provides a summary of UNDP management responses to the recommendations contained in the reports issued by the JIU in 2012, as well as the implementation status of relevant JIU recommendations issued in 2010 and 2011. The Board may wish to take note of the report. The statistical annex contains detailed financial information on the annual stock of income and expenditures for UNDP country programme activities and for the funds and trust funds administered by UNDP. Cumulative review of the strategic plan and annual report of the Administrator: performance and results for 2012 (DP/2013/11) Report of UNDP on the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit in 2012 (DP/2013/11/Add.1) Statistical annex (DP/2013/11/Add.2) Item 3 UNDP strategic plan, 2014-2017 The draft UNDP strategic plan, 2014-2017, has been prepared within the framework of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review and the outcomes of United Nations international conferences. It is the product of discussions with the Exeutive Board, United Nations agencies, independent experts and UNDP staff. The draft plan states that the world is undergoing an unprecedented transition where the eradication of extreme poverty has become possible. It proposes that UNDP commit to a vision that focuses on this potential breakthrough: the simultaneous eradication of extreme poverty and reduction of inequalities and exclusion using a sustainable human development approach. The draft plan, including its annexes, sets out the results and actions, targeting both development and institutional issues, together with the improved partnerships and coordination, needed to deliver on this vision. Draft strategic plan, 2014-2017 (DP/2013/12) Item 4 Funding commitments In line with Executive Board decision 98/23 and building on the approach taken in that context, the Board will have before it a report on the status of regular funding commitments for 2013 and onwards and a summary of the provisional income for regular and other resources received in 2012. The Board may wish to adopt a decision, elements of which are contained in the report. Status of regular resources funding commitments to UNDP and its funds and programmes for 2013 and onwards (DP/2013/13) Item 5 Human Development Report The Human Development Report Office (HDRO) will present an oral report on consultations regarding the 2014 Human Development Report in accordance with General Assembly resolution 57/264. The HDRO Director will describe the key findings of the 2013 Human Development Report, `The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse World'; the global reception of the report; and the tentatively planned stakeholder conversations in the context of a second Global Human Development Forum, likely to take place in late May. The Director will briefly summarize the 2014 Human Development Report theme and outline the development process for the report, with particular attention to strengthened dialogue with Member States, including on statistical aspects of the report. He will also highlight recent HDRO dialogues with global experts on the human development measurements. Item 6 UNDP country programmes and related matters The final report on the UNDP global programme, 2009-2013, requested by the Executive Board in its decisions 2008/32 and 2011/18, assesses the progress achieved by UNDP multi-practice policy advisory services, including progress towards the Millennium Development Goals; preparations for the `Rio+20' Conference on Sustainable Development; and advancing the local development and local governance agenda. The report notes that the global programme has been successful linking the global and local, influencing global policy discourse and bringing policy services closer to national counterparts and country offices. The Executive Board may wish to take note of the final report and suggest strengthening policy advisory services for the next global programme. Under this item, the Executive Board will also be asked to: (a) take note of the first one-year extensions of the country programmes for Afghanistan, Angola, Kenya and Venezuela for a period of one year, from 1 January to 31 December 2014; (b) approve the second one-year extensions of the country programmes for Guinea-Bissau and Mali, from 1 January to 31 December 2014; the exceptional third-year extensions of the country programmes for Madagascar, Tunisia and Paraguay, from 1 January to 31 December 2014; the two-year extension of the country programme for C么te d'Ivoire, from 1 January 2014 to 31 December 2015; and the two-and-half-year extension of the country programme for South Sudan, from 1 January 2014 to 30 June 2016; (c) comment, prior to their finalization, on the draft country programme documents for Benin, Burundi, Republic of the Congo, Niger, Nigeria, Togo; Bhutan (common country programme) and Cuba; and (d) in accordance with decisions 2012/17 and 2013/6, review and approve, on an exceptional basis, the draft common country programme document for Rwanda and the draft country programme document for Egypt, respectively. Report on global programme performance and results (DP/2013/14) Extensions of country programmes (DP/2013/15) Africa Draft country programme document for Benin (DP/DCP/BEN/2) Draft country programme document for Burundi (DP/DCP/BDI/3) Draft country programme document for the Republic of the Congo (DP/DCP/COG/2) Draft country programme document for Niger (DP/DCP/NER/2) Draft country programme document for Nigeria (DP/DCP/NGA/2) Draft common country programme document for Rwanda (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF-WFP/DCCP/2013/RWA/1 and Add.1) Draft country programme document for Togo (DP/DCP/TGO/2) Asia and the Pacific Draft common country programme document for Bhutan (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF/DCCP/2013/BTN/1 and Add.1) Arab States Draft country programme document for Egypt (DP/DCP/EGY/2) Latin America and the Caribbean Draft country programme document for Cuba (DP/DCP/CUB/2) Item 7 Evaluation The 2012 annual report on evaluation assesses the progress made by UNDP, UNCDF and UNV in fulfilling the evaluation functions outlined in their combined evaluation policy. The report presents key findings and lessons learned from evaluations conducted in 2012 and sets out the programmes of work for 2013 and 2014. The Executive Board may wish to adopt a decision, elements of which are contained in the report. The evaluation of the UNDP strategic plan, 2008-2013, was part of the Evaluation Office programme of work for 2012, approved by the Executive Board. It is an independent evaluation of (a) UNDP performance during the first five years of the strategic plan in relation to the strategic intent as expressed in the strategic plan goals, and (b) UNDP use of the strategic plan to strengthen the management of the UNDP contribution to development results. The evaluation of the UNDP fourth global programme was requested by the Executive Board and included in the 2011 Evaluation Office workplan. The evaluation assesses the progress achieved by UNDP multi-practice policy advisory services, including progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, preparations for the `Rio+20' Conference on Sustainable Development, and advancing the local development and local governance agenda. Assessed against programme objectives, the report considers the extent to which the global programme has been successful in influencing the global policy discourse on development issues, and in bringing policy services closer to UNDP national counterparts and country offices. UNDP regional programmes are designed to enhance the coherence of UNDP technical support and to facilitate the exchange of knowledge and experience across the countries served in each region. As part of its programme of work for 2012-2013, the Evaluation Office launched evaluations of each of the five regional programmes, for Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Arab States, Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States, and Latin America and the Caribbean. The evaluations cover the period 2008-2013, and respond to the results and resources frameworks developed for each regional programme. They examine programme relevance and results achieved, including the quality of technical support services provided by the regional centres to country offices and other national or regional partners. The evaluations were carried out using a combination of desk reviews, field visits, interviews with stakeholders, and a survey of country offices. The independent evaluation of the UNDP contribution to South-South and triangular cooperation was conducted by the Evaluation Office in 2012. The evaluation reviewed performance during the period 2008-2011, examining it through the lenses of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability. It focused particularly on UNDP support to the achievement of development results through South-South and triangular cooperation and on clarifying the added value and comparative advantage of UNDP in that regard. The evaluation was conducted against the UNDP strategic plan, 2008-2013, and the fourth cooperation framework for South-South cooperation (DP/CF/SSC/4). The scope of the evaluation mirrored the strategic plan vision of mainstreaming South-South approaches throughout UNDP focus areas at the global, regional and country levels, and of facilitating South-South and triangular cooperation initiatives within and across the five regions in which the organization operates. The evaluations will be accompanied by UNDP management responses. The Executive Board may wish to take note of the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the evaluations and of the management responses. Annual report on evaluation (DP/2013/16) Evaluation of the UNDP strategic plan, 2008-2013 (DP/2013/17) Management response to the evaluation of the UNDP strategic plan, 2008-2013 (DP/2013/18) Evaluation of the UNDP global programme (DP/2013/19) Management response to the evaluation of the UNDP global programme (DP/2013/20) Evaluation of the regional programme for Africa (DP/2013/21) Management response to the evaluation of the regional programme for Africa (DP/2013/22) Evaluation of the regional programme for Asia and the Pacific (DP/2013/23) Management response to the evaluation of the regional programme for Asia and the Pacific (DP/2013/24) Evaluation of the regional programme for the Arab States (DP/2013/25) Management response to the evaluation of the regional programme for the Arab States (DP/2013/26) Evaluation of the regional programme for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States (DP/2013/27) Management response to the evaluation of the regional programme for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States (DP/2013/28) Evaluation of the regional programme for Latin America and the Caribbean (DP/2013/29) Management response to the evaluation of the regional programme for Latin America and the Caribbean (DP/2013/30) Evaluation of UNDP contribution to South-South and triangular cooperation (DP/2013/31) Management response to the evaluation of UNDP contribution to South-South and triangular cooperation (DP/2013/32) Item 8 United Nations Capital Development Fund The annual session of the Executive Board is an opportunity for Member States to be briefed by the Executive Secretary on UNCDF results for 2012 and perspectives for the future. The annual report of UNCDF documents and analyses performance against established targets in terms of programme, management and financial results. In 2012, donor development partners confirmed a strong demand for the products and services of UNCDF, giving rise to a number of major new initiatives and partnerships with public- and private-sector donors. Non-core contributions increased to new record levels (300% growth since 2006), while delivery levels remained high. Over the year, the UNCDF practice areas - inclusive finance and local development finance - made significant progress in improving the quality and results of their interventions in contributing to poverty alleviation in the least developed countries. The stakeholder consultations on the future of UNCDF, mandated by the Executive Board in its decision 2012/12, commenced in late 2012 and made apparent that the expertise, flexible financial investment mandate and geographic focus of UNCDF will remain relevant in the post-2015 development framework. They also stressed the alarming imbalance between the limited core resources of UNCDF and its fast growing non-core resources. As forewarned in earlier Executive Board sessions, the low levels of core resources will force UNCDF - beginning in 2013 - to reduce its technical presence and programming in a number of least developed countries. Addressing the unsustainable and apparently contradictory nature of this situation is the top priority of management and deserves the full attention of the Executive Board. In this context, an informal report with findings from the stakeholder consultation process will be presented to the Board at its annual session 2013. Report on results achieved by UNCDF in 2012 (DP/2013/33) Item 9 United Nations Volunteers In accordance with Executive Board decision 2012/13, the Board will have before it a report on the evolution of the role and function of the United Nations Volunteers (UNV) programme since its inception. It is presented with an analysis of the three main phases in UNV history, including the principal milestones, from start-up to the present time. This will contribute to an understanding of how UNV is situated today in terms of volunteerism and people-centered development, and will provide a solid basis for determining strategic directions for the next four years and beyond, including in relation to the need to deliver clearly articulated results. The Executive Board may wish to adopt a decision, elements of which are contained in the report, including requesting UNV to present to the Board a strategic framework for the period 2014-2017. Report of the Administrator on the evolution of the role and function of the United Nations Volunteers programme since its inception (DP/2013/34) Item 18 Programming arrangements In response to Executive Board decision 2013/4, the present document addresses the inclusion of UNCDF in the programming arrangements, with a focus on their implications on core resources available for programming within the context of the integrated budget, as well as the rationale for making this an annual expenditure. The document provides information on the performance of the functions financed under the following lines in the programming arrangements framework: the office of development studies, development support services, economists' programme, and policy advisory services. The Board may wish to take note of the proposed approach for the inclusion of UNCDF in the programming arrangements, as well as of the information presented on the performance of functions financed under the above-mentioned lines in the programming arrangements framework. Proposal to include UNCDF in the programming arrangements (decision 2013/4) (DP/2013/37) Item 10 Annual report of the Executive Director Under this item, the Executive Board will have before it the annual report of the Executive Director for 2012. Part I of the report provides a cumulative analysis of UNFPA progress against its strategic plan, 2008-2013, including the challenges and lessons learned during the plan's implementation. The report presents the global context in which the strategic plan was implemented, the UNFPA response to this changing global context at both global and organizational levels, and an analysis of results of the strategic plan's development results framework and the management results framework. To comply with word-count limitations for official Executive Board documents, the report focuses on highlights; and more detailed quantitative and qualitative analysis and information about the Fund's performance and results are presented in annexes, available separately on the UNFPA website. Part I, Add.1 of the annual report summarizes the financial situation of UNFPA in 2012 and provides statistical highlights concerning the Fund's finances and programmes in 2012. It should be noted that all figures for the 2012 financial information are provisional. Furthermore, figures in the report are consistent with the full accrual-basis accounting adopted by UNFPA in 2012 through implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards. The Executive Board may wish to adopt a decision on the annual report of the Executive Director. Elements for a decision are contained in the report. Part II of the annual report of the Executive Director for 2012 is entitled Report on the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit in 2012. In accordance with General Assembly resolution 59/267, the report provides a synopsis of UNFPA management responses to key recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU), that are relevant to UNFPA, and contained in 15 JIU reports and notes, including eight issued by the JIU in 2012 and seven carried over from 2011. Furthermore, the report draws attention to specific recommendations directed to the legislative organs of the United Nations system organizations. To comply with word-count limitations for official Executive Board documents, annexes 4 and 5 are available separately on the UNFPA website. The Executive Board may wish to take note of the report, especially those aspects of the JIU reports that have particular relevance to the work of UNFPA. Report of the Executive Director for 2012: Cumulative analysis of progress in implementation of the strategic plan, 2008-2013 (DP/FPA/2013/3, Part I) Statistical and financial review, 2012 (DP/FPA/2013/3, Part I, Add.1) Report on the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit in 2012 (DP/FPA/2013/3, Part II) Item 11 Funding commitments to UNFPA Under this item, the Executive Board will have before it a report prepared in response to decisions 99/5 and 2000/9, which requested the Executive Director to provide annually updated estimates of regular and co-financing resources. The report focuses on the resource situation of UNFPA for regular and co-financing resources for 2013 and future years. It provides revenue analysis for 2013 and comparisons to prior years. The Executive Board may wish to adopt a decision on funding commitments to UNFPA. Elements for a decision are contained in the report. Report on contributions by Member States and others to UNFPA and revenue projections for 2013 and future years (DP/FPA/2013/4) Item 12 UNFPA country programmes and related matters The Executive Board will have before it 12 programme extensions for Angola, Kenya, Madagascar and South Sudan in the East and Southern Africa region; C么te d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and Mali in the West and Central Africa region; Tunisia in the Arab States region; Afghanistan and Timor-Leste in the Asia and the Pacific region; and Paraguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) in the Latin America and the Caribbean region. In accordance with decisions 2012/17 and 2013/6, respectively, the Executive Board will have before it for review and approval, on an exceptional basis, the draft common country programme document for Rwanda and the draft country programme document for Egypt. The Executive Board will also have before it for discussion seven draft country programme documents for Benin, Niger, Nigeria, Republic of the Congo and Togo in the Western and Central Africa region; State of Palestine in the Arab States region; and Cuba in the Latin America and the Caribbean region; as well as the draft common country programme document for Bhutan in the Asia and the Pacific region. The Executive Board may wish to: (a) approve the second one-year programme extensions for Guinea-Bissau and Mali; (b) approve the second extension - one year for the Madagascar programme; (c) approve the two-year programme extension for C么te d'Ivoire; (d) approve the exceptional two and a half year programme extension for South Sudan; (e) approve the exceptional third one-year programme extension for Tunisia; (f) take note of the six-month programme extension for Kenya; and (g) take note of the one-year programme extensions for Afghanistan, Angola, Paraguay, Timor-Leste and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). The Executive Board may also wish to approve, on an exceptional basis, the draft country programme document for Egypt and the draft common country programme document for Rwanda. The Executive Board may wish to take note of the draft country programme documents for Benin, Niger, Nigeria, Republic of the Congo, Togo, State of Palestine and Cuba; and of the draft common country programme document for Bhutan. Extensions of country programmes in the East and Southern Africa region: Angola (one-year extension), Kenya (six-month extension), Madagascar (second extension - one year) and South Sudan (two and a half year extension) (DP/FPA/2013/9) Extensions of country programmes in the West and Central Africa region: Guinea-Bissau (second one-year extension), Mali (second one-year extension) and C么te d'Ivoire (two-year extension) (DP/FPA/2013/10) Extensions of country programmes in the Arab States region: Tunisia (third one-year extension) (DP/FPA/2013/11) Extensions of country programmes in the Asia and the Pacific region: Afghanistan (one-year extension) and Timor-Leste (one-year extension) (DP/FPA/2013/8) Extensions of country programmes in the Latin America and Caribbean region: Paraguay (one-year extension) and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) (one-year extension) (DP/FPA/2013/7) Draft country programme and common country programme documents East and Southern Africa region Draft common country programme document for Rwanda (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF- WFP/DCCP/2013/RWA/1) and addendum (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF-WFP/ DCCP/2013/RWA/1/Add.2) West and Central Africa region Draft country programme document for Benin (DP/FPA/DCP/BEN/8) Draft country programme document for the Niger (DP/FPA/DCP/NER/8) Draft country programme document for Nigeria (DP/FPA/DCP/NGA/7) Draft country programme document for the Republic of the Congo (DP/FPA/DCP/COG/5) Draft country programme document for Togo (DP/FPA/DCP/TGO/6) Draft country programme document for the State of Palestine (DP/FPA/DCP/PSE/5) Draft country programme document for Egypt (DP/FPA/DCP/EGY/9) Draft common country programme document for Bhutan (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF/DCCP/2013/BTN/1) and addendum (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF/DCCP/2013/BTN/1/ Add.2) Draft country programme document for Cuba (DP/FPA/DCP/CUB/8) Item 13 Under this item, pursuant to decision 2012/26, the Executive Board will have before it the revised UNFPA evaluation policy. The revised policy provides greater clarity about the concept, role and use of evaluation within the organization, including the institutional framework and the definition of roles and responsibilities. In addition to delineating how the evaluation function and evaluations are planned, managed, quality-assured and resourced, the revised policy articulates a clearer institutional basis for an independent evaluation function in UNFPA. Furthermore, the revised policy reflects the Fund's commitment to public accountability, transparency, capacity-building and knowledge-sharing. The Executive Board may wish to adopt a decision on the revised UNFPA evaluation policy. Elements for a decision are contained in the report. Revised UNFPA evaluation policy (DP/FPA/2013/5) Item 14 United Nations Office for Project Services The annual report of the Executive Director of UNOPS for 2012 details the operational and management results of the organization, demonstrating how UNOPS has supported the United Nations and its partners to implement peacebuilding, humanitarian and development operations that matter for people in need. The Board may wish to adopt a decision, elements of which are contained in the report. In accordance with its decisions 2008/35 and 2012/24, the Executive Board will have before it the UNOPS strategic plan, 2014-2017. The strategic plan provides direction and focus for the role of the organization as a valued partner for advisory, implementation and transactional support services in sustainable project management, infrastructure and procurement. It articulates what UNOPS can contribute operationally to the development, humanitarian and peacebuilding objectives and results of its partners, and how it can do so. The Board may wish to adopt a decision, elements of which are contained in the report. Annual report of the Executive Director (DP/OPS/2013/2) UNOPS strategic plan, 2014-2017 (DP/OPS/2013/3) Item 15 Internal audit and oversight Under this item, the Executive Board will have before it the internal audit and oversight reports of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS. The UNDP report provides information on the activities of the Office of Audit and Investigations (OAI) for the year ended 31 December 2012. As requested by the Executive Board in its decisions 2012/18, 2011/23 and 2011/22, this report contains information on: (a) titles of all internal audit reports issued in 2012; (b) details of OAI resources for audit, investigations and advisory services; (c) experience gained on joint audits; (d) cases of fraud and action taken in cases of misconduct; and (e) internal audit reports disclosed in 2012. As in the past, the management response to this report is presented separately (in accordance with decision 2006/13), and the annual report of the Audit Advisory Committee is appended to this report (in accordance with document DP/2008/16/Rev.1 on the UNDP accountability system). The report of the Director of the Division for Oversight Services on UNFPA internal audit and oversight activities in 2012 responds to decisions 2011/22 and 2011/23 and other pertinent decisions of the Executive Board. The report presents a review of oversight activities completed in 2012 by the Division for Oversight Services (DOS) in internal audit, evaluation and investigation. The report provides information on the overall audit assessment of the risk exposure of UNFPA; significant issues revealed through DOS oversight activities; investigations, including cases of fraud and actions taken; a review of the internal audit recommendations issued during 2009-2012 and their implementation status; and the disclosure of internal audit reports. In addition, a comprehensive management response to the DOS report is made available separately on the UNFPA website. Furthermore, pursuant to decision 2008/37, the annual report of the UNFPA Audit Advisory Committee and the management response thereto are provided in the addendum to the DOS report on internal audit and oversight. The Executive Board will also have before it the activity report on UNOPS internal audit and investigation services for the year ended 31 December 2012, submitted by the Internal Audit and Investigations Group. The report is accompanied by the management response and the annual report of the UNOPS Strategy and Audit Advisory Committee for 2012 (submitted separately in accordance with decision 2006/13). The Executive Board may wish to adopt a decision on the internal audit and oversight reports of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS. UNDP: Report on internal audit and investigations (DP/2013/35) UNFPA: Report of the Director of the Division for Oversight Services on UNFPA internal audit and oversight activities in 2012 (DP/FPA/2013/6) and addendum (DP/FPA/2013/6, Add.1) UNOPS: Activity report for 2012 of the Internal Audit and Investigations Group (DP/OPS/2013/4) Item 16 Reports of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS Ethics Offices Under this item, the Executive Board will have before it the reports of the Ethics Offices of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS. Pursuant to Executive Board decision 2008/37, the UNDP Ethics Office submits to the Board the present report covering the year 2012. In accordance with the Secretary-General's bulletin on United Nations system-wide application of ethics: separately administered organs and programmes (ST/SGB/2007/11), the United Nations Ethics Committee reviewed the report at its forty-fifth session, and the report was subsequently presented to the Administrator of UNDP. As required by the Board in its decision 2011/24, the report includes recommendations to management on strengthening the UNDP culture of integrity and compliance. The present report is the fifth annual report presented by the Ethics Office since its establishment in 2007 and the first annual report to be presented by the new Director appointed in 2012. Pursuant to decision 2010/17, UNFPA submits the report of the Ethics Office 2012. The report provides a summary of the activities undertaken by the UNFPA Ethics Office during the period 1 January to 31 December 2012. In accordance with decision 2012/19, the report also describes trends in the mandated activities of the Ethics Office and provides recommendations to management on strengthening the organizational culture of integrity and compliance. Pursuant to the Secretary-General's bulletin on United Nations system-wide application of ethics: separately administered organs and programmes (ST/SGB/2007/11), the report has been reviewed by the United Nations Ethics Committee at its 45th session on 30 January 2013 and was subsequently provided to the UNFPA Executive Director. The management response to the report of the Ethics Office 2012 is made available separately on the UNFPA website. Pursuant to Executive Board decision 2010/17, the Ethics Officer of UNOPS submits to the Board the report on the activities of the Ethics Office during 2012. This report has been reviewed by the United Nations Ethics Committee, in accordance with section 5.4 of the Secretary-General's bulletin on United Nations system-wide application of ethics: separately administered organs and programmes (ST/SGB/2007/11). The Executive Board may wish to take note of the reports of the Ethics Offices of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS, and comment on the progress of the work of the Ethics Offices. Activities of the UNDP Ethics Office in 2012 (DP/2013/36) UNFPA: Report of the Ethics Office 2012 (DP/FPA/2013/2) Activities of the UNOPS Ethics Office in 2012 (DP/OPS/2013/5) Item 17 Field visits Under this item, the Executive Board will have before it the report on the field visit of the Executive Board of UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS to Timor-Leste (1-8 December 2012) and the report of the joint field visit of the Executive Boards of UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS, UNICEF, UN-Women and WFP to Myanmar (7-18 March 2013). The Board may wish to take note of the reports. Report on the field visit to Timor-Leste (DP-FPA-OPS/2013/CRP.1) Report of the joint field visit of the Executive Boards of UNDP/UNFPA/UNOPS, UNICEF, UN-Women and WFP to Myanmar (DP/FPA/OPS-ICEF-UNW-WFP/2013/CRP.1) Item 19 Other matters Day/Date Time Subject Monday, 3 June 10 a.m. - 1 p.m. ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS Adoption of the agenda and workplan for the session Adoption of the report of the first regular session 2013 UNOPS SEGMENT STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR PROJECT SERVICES UNOPS strategic plan, 2014-2017 1:15 to 2:45 p.m. Informal consultation on the UNOPS biennial budget estimates, 2014-2015 3 - 5 p.m. JOINT SEGMENT FIELD VISITS 5 - 6 p.m. Informal consultations on draft decisions Tuesday, 4 June JOINT SEGMENT (cont'd) INTERNAL AUDIT AND OVERSIGHT Reports of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS on internal audit and investigations, and management responses REPORTS OF THE ETHICS OFFICES OF UNDP, UNFPA AND UNOPS Reports of the Ethics Offices of UNDP, UNFPA and UNOPS on activities for 2012, and management responses .3 - 4 p.m. 4 - 6 p.m. Wednesday, 5 June UNFPA SEGMENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Report of the Executive Director: Cumulative report on implementation of the UNFPA strategic plan, 2008-2013 (decision 2011/39) Statistical and financial review, 2012 UNFPA report on the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit in 2012 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (cont'd) Informal consultation on the draft UNFPA strategic plan, 2014-2017, and the draft integrated budget, 2014-2017 Thursday, 6 June FUNDING COMMITMENTS TO UNFPA Report on contributions by Member States and others to UNFPA and revenue projections for 2013 and future years UNFPA COUNTRY PROGRAMMES AND RELATED MATTERS Draft country programme documents and extensions of country programmes EVALUATION UNFPA revised evaluation policy (decision 2012/26) Friday, 7 June 10 June UNDP SEGMENT STATEMENT BY THE ADMINISTRATOR ANNUAL REPORT OF THE ADMINISTRATOR Cumulative review of the strategic plan and annual report of the Administrator: performance and results for 2012 (decision 2011/14) ANNUAL REPORT OF THE ADMINISTRATOR (cont'd) UNDP report on the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit in 2012 Statistical annex UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2014-2017 Draft strategic plan, 2014-2017 including informal discussion in the context of the 2014-2017 integrated budget of the overall linkage between results and regular and other resources (decision 2013/9) 11 June PROGRAMMING ARRANGEMENTS Proposal to include UNCDF in the programming arrangements (decision 2013/4) FUNDING COMMITMENTS TO UNDP Status of regular funding commitments to UNDP and its funds and programmes for 2013 and onwards HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT Update on Human Development Report consultations (GA resolution 57/264) Informal consultation on the steps and timeline for the preparation of the next UNDP gender equality strategy (decision 2013/1) 3 - 6 p.m. UNDP COUNTRY PROGRAMMES AND RELATED MATTERS Report on global programme performance and results (decision 2011/18) Draft country programme documents Extensions of country programmes 12 June Annual report on evaluation and the management response Evaluation of the UNDP strategic plan, 2008-2013, and the management response Evaluation of the global programme and the management response Evaluation of the regional programme for Africa and the management response Evaluation of the regional programme for Arab States and the management response Evaluation of the regional programme for Asia and the Pacific and the management response Evaluation of the regional programme for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States and the management response Evaluation of the regional programme for Latin America and the Caribbean and the management response Evaluation of the fourth cooperation framework for South-South cooperation and the management response EVALUATION (continued) 13 June UNITED NATIONS CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND Report on results achieved by UNCDF in 2012 UNITED NATIONS VOLUNTEERS Report of the Administrator on the evolution of the role and function of UNV since its inception 3 - 4 p.m. OTHER MATTERS Adoption of decisions Adoption of the tentative workplan for the second regular session 2013 Closing of the session 14 June 