%%%ELECTION OF MEMBERS|APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS|

Resumed organizational session for 2013 25 and 26 April 2013 Agenda item 4 Elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments Election of eight members of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues from among candidates nominated by Governments and appointment of eight members by the President of the Economic and Social Council Note by the Secretary-General 1. Pursuant to its resolution 2000/22 and its decision 2001/316, the Economic and Social Council established the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues as a subsidiary organ of the Council. The Forum consists of 16 members, with all members serving in their personal capacity as independent experts on indigenous issues for a period of three years, with the possibility of re-election or reappointment for one further period. Eight members are to be nominated by Governments and elected by the Council according to a specified pattern set out in decision 2001/316, and eight members are to be appointed by the President of the Council following formal consultation with the Bureau and regional groups through their coordinators on the basis of broad consultations with indigenous organizations. 2. In 2013, at its resumed organizational session, the Economic and Social Council will be called upon to elect eight members according to the following pattern, as outlined in decision 2001/316: (a) Two members from African States; (b) Two members from Asia-Pacific States; (c) Two members from Eastern European States; (d) One member from Latin American and the Caribbean States; (e) One member from Western European and other States. 3. The terms of office of the new members of the Permanent Forum would begin on 1 January 2014 and expire on 31 December 2016. The current membership of the Permanent Forum is listed in the annex to the present note. 4. In a note verbale dated 5 October 2012, the Secretary-General invited Governments to submit, by 18 January 2013, their nominations for membership in the Permanent Forum. A list of the persons thus nominated is set out below. Biographical information on the candidates will be issued in document E/2013/9/Add.4. 5. The eight members nominated by indigenous organizations and appointed by the President of the Council will be communicated separately to members of the Council. Nominees African States Simon William M'Viboudoulou (Congo) Gervais Nzoa (Cameroon) Joseph Goko Mutangah (Kenya) Asia-Pacific States Mohammad Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran) Eastern European States Oliver Loode (Estonia) Aisa Mukabenova (Russian Federation) Latin American and Caribbean States Simón Freddy Condo Riveros (Plurinational State of Bolivia) Gabriel Muyuy Jacanamejoy (Colombia) Alvaro Esteban Pop Ac (Guatemala) Western European and other States Jens Dahl (Denmark) Megan Davis (Australia) Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (16 members; three-year term) Membership from 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2013 Eight experts elected by the Council Eva Biaudet (Finland) Paimaneh Hasteh (Islamic Republic of Iran) Andrey A. Nikiforov (Russian Federation)a Viktoria Tuulas (Estonia) Bertie Xavier (Guyana) Eight experts appointed by the President of the Council Mirna Cunningham Kain (Nicaragua) Raja Devasish Roy (Bangladesh) Dalee Sambo Dorough (United States) Edward John (Canada) Anna Naikanchina (Russian Federation) Paul Kanyinke Sena (Kenya) Valmaine Toki (New Zealand) Saul Vicente Vazquez (Mexico) 