%%%SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY|CULTURE|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|

Substantive session of 2013 Geneva, 1-26 July 2013 High-level segment: annual ministerial review Statement submitted by Association of African Entrepreneurs, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. The Association of African Entrepreneurs placed a call to its clients and stakeholders for submissions on the annual ministerial review theme via its newsletter, social media and forums. From Babagana Abubakar in Nigeria, the Association received feedback concerning astronomy and meteorology. Many components (for example, the stars, moon, lightning and thunder) are viewed as sacred or as gods by approximately 25 per cent of the African population, and are therefore not science-based. Also, the use of these components in astrology and fortune-telling deter both Muslims and Christians from studying space sciences and meteorology. These views and beliefs have led to the underdevelopment of these sciences across the continent. This paper suggests four key solutions: :: Major stakeholders, such as the United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs and the North American Space Agency (NASA), should sponsor public conferences, workshops and programmes :: Religious scholars should be included in capacity-building programmes and training :: NASA and other space science organizations should open offices and training institutes in Africa :: International space organizations should provide financial scholarships David Rugamba Muhizi from Rwanda focused on broadband for an inclusive digital society. He identified specific examples of progress being made in this area. Specifically, information and communication technologies have lead to e-health solutions, such as Onehealth, which has seen incredible increases in both quality and access to health care. Improvements in maternal health have been noted as a result of these technologies. In order to promote gender equality and empower women, programmes such as the Association's e-coaching centre in Ghana are helping women and young entrepreneurs access relevant support to start their businesses. This is another example of how technology and innovation are being used to facilitate access to learning, thereby helping women and youth in the community become more prosperous, and therefore healthier and more educated. Two other submissions from the Association contained several interesting, broad ways that science, innovation, technology and the potential of culture promote sustainable development and help achieve the Millennium Development Goals. For instance, technology, innovation and a shift in cultural beliefs are essential to addressing the achievement of universal primary education for Africans. Apart from increasing the number of computers in schools and connecting rural areas to internet access, further sponsorship from science and technology institutions will continue to ensure this fundamental goal is reached, as well as lead young people to science-based careers and open science-based businesses. Agriculturalists and their research and development teams can also propel communities forward with long-lasting ideas, thus contributing to the eradication of extreme poverty and hunger. Many communities must utilize innovative agriculture methods to take advantage of Africa's vast resources. Science, technology and innovation, however, should not be seen as a means to an end. Instead, these components supplement Africa's two greatest resources, namely, the people and the land. Keeping the unique cultures across the continent in mind, as well as the immense value and importance of sustainable development, is essential to achieving the Millennium Development Goals and therefore to Africa's future generations. 