%%%SCIENCE EDUCATION|EDUCATION|TEACHERS|

Substantive session of 2013 Geneva, 1-26 July 2013 Social and human rights questions: social development Statement submitted by Ecumenical Federation of Constantinopolitans, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. The Ecumenical Federation of Constantinopolitans, which is based on the millennial cultural and educational tradition of the Greek community of Istanbul, is happy to submit the following ideas. Throughout the ages, education has been the only investment that has kept its value over time and for the welfare of humankind. In this context, the universal and ecumenical values of making use of science, technology and cultural heritage for the benefit of future generations should be a cornerstone in the educational programmes of all countries at all levels, including in primary and secondary education. It is important to emphasize that the knowledge we have today on science and technology can be traced back to the Ionian Greeks of the sixth century B.C. and is the result of a constructive fusion of cultural developments among the ancient civilizations of the eastern Mediterranean in Egypt, Anatolia and Mesopotamia. The Homeric poems are essentially the first demonstration of the ability of humanity to understand nature and try to make use of its potential forces. In this context, the development of new curricula and educational applications and tools making the best use of digital technologies is very important, as is international cooperation, incorporating multilingualism, to support the vision of opening up education. It is generally accepted that supporting projects with the participation of schools, academic institutions, international organizations and non-governmental organizations, is required to achieve this goal. The introduction of experimentation and inquiry in the learning process is considered to be an important approach in educating young generations to obtain the ability of innovation and cope with everyday needs. In this context, the development of an open education, immersion technologies and problem-solving abilities among young generations is very important. In our view, teachers are key actors in facilitating this change towards a more open education in our schools and they should be encouraged, enabled and empowered to be agents of change. This can be achieved by enabling and motivating teachers to introduce innovative learning concepts and designs, including through the use of information and communications technologies; offering appropriate and effective teacher training; providing more independence and control over the educational process, e.g. over the curriculum and school management; allowing for a more relevant social context or personalized forms of learning; and cultivating a culture of sharing and collaboration. All these actions need to be actively supported by the United Nations, other international bodies and, more importantly, by United Nations Member States through their national policies. The teaching profession should be able to make an appropriate contribution to the policymaking process. This would provide valuable advice and opinion from the operational level, and ensure a collective policy awareness and commitment from teachers towards new policies. Crucially, educational policy development and mainstreaming should involve contributions from stakeholders from a wide range of sectors (economic, political and social) to ensure a consistent alignment with other national strategic policies. 