%%%REGIONAL SECURITY|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|DEVELOPMENT POLICY|AFRICA|PARTNERSHIP|

Committee for Programme and Coordination Fifty-third session Organizational session, 25 April 2013 Substantive session, 3-28 June 2013 * E/AC.51/2013/1. Item 4 (b) of the provisional agenda* Coordination questions: New Partnership for Africa's Development United Nations system support for the New Partnership for Africa's Development Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report provides an overview of activities undertaken by the United Nations system in support of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) since June 2012. It is organized around the nine clusters established under the Regional Coordination Mechanism of the United Nations agencies working in Africa, convened by the Economic Commission for Africa. In the report, it is reiterated that there is a need for the United Nations entities to develop a monitoring approach to review and evaluate the impact of their support in the implementation of NEPAD. A call is made for the United Nations to provide more focused and coordinated support to African countries to implement the recommendations made in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled "The future we want", and to ensure coherence between the recommendations and the post-2015 development agenda. 1. At its forty-fifth session, the Committee for Programme and Coordination recommended that the General Assembly should request the Secretary-General to report to the Committee, at its forty-sixth session, and annually thereafter, on the support provided by the United Nations system to the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), a programme of the African Union (see A/60/16, para. 237). The request was endorsed by the Assembly in its resolution 67/236. II. Support for the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's Development 2. The present report describes activities undertaken by United Nations system entities in support of NEPAD since June 2012, organized around nine thematic clusters corresponding to the priorities of NEPAD. It was prepared on the basis of input received from United Nations system organizations, agencies and departments that responded to the request of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa for contributions regarding key activities, programmes and projects implemented in 2011-2012, highlighting results and impact in both qualitative and quantitative terms. A. Infrastructure development 3. The infrastructure cluster coordinated by the Economic Commission for Africa comprises four subclusters: water and sanitation, energy, information and communications technology and transport. 4. During the reporting period, the World Bank strengthened its involvement in Africa's regional integration through its Regional Integration Assistance Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa and committed in excess of $2 billion in development financing for operations as part of infrastructure projects identified in the African Union/NEPAD African Action Plan 2010-2015. In the area of energy, the World Bank supported the Eastern Electricity Highway Project, which facilitated access to electricity to 2.2 million people in Ethiopia and 500,000 people in Kenya. The Economic Commission for Africa provided substantive input into the formulation of the energy and transport sections of the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa in line with the institutional architecture for infrastructure development in Africa. 5. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency (NEPAD Agency), the African Union Commission and the African Development Bank successfully collaborated in support of the Secretary-General's "Sustainable Energy for All" initiative. Through this partnership, UNDP supported gap analyses in 16 sub-Saharan African countries and organized a series of regional workshops resulting in the development of the Africa guidelines for national action plans to attain sustainable energy for all. 6. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) partnered with Barefoot College, India, to train rural women in Liberia, South Sudan, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania to become solar engineers. Through the initiative, communities benefited from solar electrification. Cluster members also developed a gender-sensitive bioenergy framework and policy guidelines to promote local decent employment in the bioenergy field and public-private partnership models to finance rural energy infrastructure development in Africa. 7. In the information and communications technology sector, the Economic Commission for Africa, in collaboration with the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), organized a series of workshops on harmonization of cyberlegislation and cybersecurity, the outcomes of which include a draft African Union convention on cybersecurity to be adopted in May 2013 at the twenty-first ordinary session of the summit of the African Union. Member States were urged to integrate cybersecurity policies and legislation into broad information and communications technology policies and strategies, while the regional economic communities were urged to consider cybersecurity and support the harmonization of cybersecurity policies and legislation. ITU continued to work with the NEPAD Agency, the African Union Commission, the Economic Commission for Africa, the African Development Bank, the World Bank and other partners in follow-up to the Connect Africa Summit in developing information and communications technology infrastructure in Africa. Its work had a direct impact on the promotion and advocacy of NEPAD public-private partnerships. 8. Through its projects to create a Central African Internet backbone and West African regional communications infrastructure, the World Bank supported the connection of seven African countries to international broadband cables and regional networks. Consequently, Internet access has increased by at least 50 per cent in almost all the countries involved. 9. On water and sanitation, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) strengthened national and regional capacity in the use of nuclear techniques for water resources. In July 2012, it launched a four-year project on water resource management for the Sahel to enhance the capacity of Sahelian countries to assess and manage their water resources. The International Maritime Organization (IMO) conducted capacity-building seminars for more than 700 African government officials in core areas, including maritime safety, port security and the protection of the marine environment from ship-based pollution. B. Governance 10. The governance cluster, coordinated by UNDP, supports the governance programmes of the African Union Commission, the NEPAD Agency and the regional economic communities. The cluster comprises four subclusters: economic and corporate governance, human rights, public service and administration and democracy and governance. 11. Within the framework of its regional programme on drug control, crime prevention and criminal justice reform in the Arab States for the period 2011-2015, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) supported newly established Governments in Egypt and Libya to institute governance reforms and establish the rule of law. UNODC assisted national authorities in Egypt to establish mechanisms to combat money-laundering and facilitate asset recovery. 12. UNIDO supported the NEPAD economic governance agenda by assisting enterprises to adapt their business environments to international norms. It worked to restructure and upgrade industries in the Central African Economic and Monetary Community region by supporting private-sector development at the policy, institutional and industrial levels to achieve competitiveness in price, quality and innovation. 13. Through its e-Regulations system, UNCTAD helped 11 African countries to simplify their rules and procedures for setting up a business. This contributed to increased transparency and greater institutional capacity, thereby increasing the attractiveness of African countries as foreign investment destinations. The UNCTAD Investment Policy Review programme helped to improve the business environment in several African countries. In addition, four African countries that were reviewed currently feature in the top 10 reformers of the World Bank's ease of doing business rankings. In 2012, UNCTAD published its Entrepreneurship Policy Framework, which provides African policymakers with a toolkit to formulate, monitor and evaluate national entrepreneurship policies. On the basis of the recommendations made in the Framework, the Government of Nigeria revised its national policy on micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises. 14. The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) provided technical advice to assist national planning processes in Chad, the Comoros, the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, the Gambia, Kenya, Madagascar and Sierra Leone for the adoption of intellectual property strategies and in conducting national intellectual property audits. By providing technical support to the African Group in Geneva during multilateral negotiations, WIPO enhanced Africa's participation in the Working Group on the Legal Development of the Madrid System for the International Registration of Marks. 15. On human rights issues, cluster members organized a dialogue between the Chairs of the United Nations human rights treaty bodies and the African human rights mechanisms, which was held in June 2012 in Ethiopia. The meeting highlighted complementarities in the promotion and protection of human rights standards. 16. On democracy and governance, cluster members assisted the African Peer Review Mechanism secretariat by facilitating and participating in the review and self-assessment processes of several countries. Consequently, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia were reviewed, bringing to 17 the number of peer-reviewed countries. Chad, the Niger and Tunisia acceded to the Mechanism during the reporting period, bringing its membership to 33. In June 2012, with United Nations support, the African Union Commission launched the African governance platform, the coordinating arm of the African governance architecture. The platform facilitates information flow, exchanges, dialogue and joint action between the various African governance actors. 17. In July 2012, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, in collaboration with the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre, organized an expert group meeting on the management of diversity in Africa. The meeting contributed to increasing awareness of the importance of securing and enhancing the participation of diverse groups, including women, young people and civil society, in processes that aim to achieve continental peace, unity and integration. The recommendations arising from the meeting fed into the eighth African Governance Forum. 18. In October 2012, the eighth African Governance Forum, on democracy, elections and the management of diversity in Africa, was jointly organized by the Economic Commission for Africa, UNDP and the African Union. It generated a rich policy-oriented and development-oriented debate on governance in Africa and contributed to the existing stock of knowledge. 19. UN-Women provided technical support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for gender mainstreaming in its electoral processes and the creation of new laws on gender parity. In South Kivu, it raised the awareness of 50 heads of political parties, 60 journalists and 150 civil society leaders about the importance of female leadership and trained 100 female leaders and potential candidates in electoral campaign strategies, which resulted in a 35 per cent increase in the number of women included in the electoral lists. In Senegal, UN-Women provided financial and technical support to the Ministry of Women's Affairs, Children and Female Entrepreneurship in the finalization and adoption of a gender parity law. The law was implemented in time for the parliamentary elections of July 2012. Consequently, the percentage of women parliamentarians in Senegal has almost doubled from 22.7 to 42.7 per cent. 20. The United Nations Democracy Fund financially supported 29 new projects by local civil society organizations working to strengthen democracy. The Fund supported the strengthening of legal frameworks for access to information in subSaharan Africa, democratic dialogue and social cohesion in C么te d'Ivoire and a project fighting violence and discrimination in Djibouti. It also supported citizen participation in Ghana, helped to mainstream women in the democratization process in Libya and supported the engagement of young people and civil society in public dialogue in North Africa. Other projects included promoting political tolerance in Malawi, advancing women in local governance in Mozambique and facilitating the participation of women in local budgetary processes in the Niger. The Fund helped to build social movements in Sierra Leone and strengthen the capacity of Sierra Leonean parliamentarians. The projects enabled greater participation and engagement by all groups in decision-making and governance. C. Peace and security 21. The peace and security cluster, co-chaired by the United Nations Office to the African Union on behalf of the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the African Union Peace and Security Council, comprises three subclusters: the peace and security architecture of the African Union, post-conflict reconstruction and development, and human rights, justice and reconciliation. 22. During the reporting period, the United Nations Office to the African Union facilitated the organization of two high-level meetings of the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security to review the situations in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and Somalia. 23. Under the peace and security architecture of the African Union subcluster, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat supported the conduct of a training needs assessment of the African Standby Force. The exercise aimed to build the Force's police and civilian capacities to enhance its multidimensional character and attain full operational capability by 2015. The Department continued to assist the African Union in planning, launching and managing peacekeeping operations, including in relation to the deployment of an international military force to Mali in accordance with resolution 2085 (2012), and in planning and managing the African Union Mission in Somalia. 24. The United Nations Office for West Africa, the United Nations Operation in C么te d'Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in Liberia are promoting the development of a subregional strategy to address cross-border movements of armed groups and weapons, in line with Security Council resolutions 2000 (2011) and 2066 (2012). 25. The Department of Political Affairs provided support to the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in developing a subregional counter-terrorism strategy, which was endorsed by the Mediation and Security Council of ECOWAS at a ministerial-level meeting in February 2013. The United Nations Office for West Africa is also stepping up efforts to enhance subregional capacity for conflict prevention and mediation by assisting in the development of an ECOWAS mediation facilitation division in Nigeria. It worked closely with ECOWAS, the Mano River Union secretariat and the African Union to review regional political and security trends and identify ways to anticipate and coordinate collective responses to peace and security challenges. 26. UNODC expanded its cooperation with the regional economic communities and the NEPAD Agency through its regional programme for Eastern Africa for the period 2009-2012 and its regional programme for West Africa for the period 2010-2014. It supported national counterparts in Kenya, Mauritius and Seychelles to prosecute and detain suspected pirates and to develop anti-piracy communication strategies. At the request of Ethiopia, UNODC initiated the development of a national integrated programme to combat drug trafficking and organized crime in the country. 27. UN-Women worked to promote women's leadership in peace and security by strengthening the advocacy skills of relevant civil society groups and raising the awareness of government authorities. In Mali, it engaged more than 1,000 women in preparing statements on the importance of women's participation in mediation and negotiation processes. 28. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations remained engaged with the African Union and ECOWAS to support the transition of C么te d'Ivoire to sustainable peace, security and economic recovery. It continued to provide proactive support to the initiatives of member States of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development Community. It developed a multi-year strategic partnership on security sector reform, bringing together the African Union, the United Nations and the European Union. A policy framework on security sector reform was adopted at the twentieth ordinary session of the summit of the African Union, held in January 2013. 29. The Department continued to support efforts aimed at building national police capacity to tackle sexual violence. A total of 140 police officers from 30 African Member States were trained and certified through a training-of-trainers course on preventing and investigating sexual and gender-based violence in post-conflict societies. 30. In November 2012, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs conducted an experience-sharing and consultation meeting in Kenya that brought together the various regional economic communities. The Office continued to provide technical support to African entities through information management and advice to establish pooled fund mechanisms for preparedness and recovery activities at the country and regional levels, as requested by the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. The Office helped Governments and regional economic communities in resilience planning and programming and with the design of information-sharing platforms. It also facilitated the development of the Sahel Resilience Strategy and the United Nations strategic review in Somalia. 31. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has been involved in addressing the humanitarian crisis in the Sahel, in particular regarding access to nutrition, hygiene, health, protection, water and immunization. The Sahel Resilience Strategy incorporated those aspects to strengthen community capacity to deal with the nutrition crisis. Furthermore, its humanitarian policy and disaster risk reduction strategy tackled impacts on children and women. 32. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) helped to repatriate 236,000 refugees, return some 1.7 million internally displaced persons and submitted 22,000 Africans for resettlement (of whom 10,200 resettled in Australia, Canada, Sweden and the United States of America). UNHCR also accelerated the implementation of its comprehensive strategies to bring to a close the protracted Angolan, Liberian and Rwandan refugee situations. 33. The distribution by UNHCR of 70,000 emergency assistance packages containing kitchen sets, sleeping mats and water purification tablets benefited more than 400,000 people in Mogadishu and southern Somalia. In Liberia, UNHCR extended protection and assistance to 224,000 Ivorian refugees. Post-distribution monitoring showed that more than 96 per cent of the items reached the intended beneficiaries. 34. UNODC, together with the World Customs Organization, assisted West African countries to combat illicit trafficking under the framework of the Airport Communication Project and the Global Container Control Programme. Joint airport interdiction task forces were installed in Cape Verde, Mali, Senegal and Togo and proved instrumental in making drug seizures. UNODC, together with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the International Criminal Police Organization, supported the implementation of the West Africa Coast Initiative in C么te d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone to improve cooperation and intelligence gathering and to advocate stronger international action against illicit trafficking in the region. D. Agriculture, food security and rural development 35. The agriculture, food security and rural development cluster is co-chaired by the African Union Commission and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 36. During the reporting period, the cluster provided coordinated and effective support to the agriculture, food and nutrition security and rural development agenda of the African Union Commission, the NEPAD Agency, the regional economic communities and African countries. The cluster achieved substantial results in implementing the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and supporting Africa's agricultural sector, including through the strengthening of country ownership and leadership, the mobilization of political, financial and technical support and the engagement of diverse regional and national actors. 37. UNDP collaborated with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme to facilitate investments for smallholder farmers and small- and medium-sized enterprises in an effort to boost private-sector investment in Africa's agriculture, including by developing private-sector guidelines for national and subregional investment plans. UNDP provided support in conducting business meetings, signing compacts and formulating post-compact investment plans, undertaking technical reviews of the investment plans and preparing applications for funding under the Global Agriculture and Food Security Programme. United Nations agencies supported 24 countries in developing national agriculture and food security investment plans based on the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, which helped to secure $430 million in funding for 11 countries to implement the plans. In June 2012, Burundi, the Gambia, Malawi, Senegal and the United Republic of Tanzania were selected to receive grants totalling $160.5 million from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Programme. 38. Since 2008, the World Bank has administered a multi-donor trust fund in the amount of $31 million for the implementation of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, for which the disbursement end date has been extended to June 2016. It has also administered two interrelated trust funds in support of regional institutions responsible for agricultural research under the fourth pillar of the Programme: the Forum for Agriculture Research in Africa and the Association for Strengthening Agricultural Research in Eastern and Central Africa. In February 2013, the trust fund of the former increased from $26 million to $31 million. In July 2012, an additional $6.5 million in funds was committed to the latter. 39. UNICEF, in collaboration with the African Union Commission, promoted an initiative to raise awareness of the importance of the first 1,000 days of a child's life, so as to combat problems such as stunting, during the commemoration in October 2012 of the third Africa Day for Food and Nutrition Security. UNICEF facilitated discussions on stunting and undernutrition and increased political awareness of the importance of food and nutrition security. 40. The World Bank extended the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Programme to nine West African countries to establish regional centres of excellence in agricultural research and technology dissemination. The Bank's support in Burkina Faso enabled an additional 215,000 farmers to receive agricultural extension and research services. In the United Republic of Tanzania, 2 million additional households directly benefited from access to critical agricultural inputs. Senegal released 20 improved varieties of maize, sorghum and millet and is also disseminating new technology for bread production, resulting in significant cost savings. ECOWAS adopted common regulations for the registration of genetic materials and pesticides and helped seven Sahelian countries to establish a new locust early warning and response system. The Bank supported Ghana and Guinea-Bissau in sustainable management of regional fisheries, which increased local fisheries revenue. 41. IAEA, in partnership with FAO, developed nuclear techniques that proved successful in fighting rinderpest, tsetse and trypanosomosis, thereby increasing agricultural and animal productivity and insect and pest control. The techniques also contributed to increasing agricultural productivity. To improve the productivity of cocoa farms, the Common Fund for Commodities supported capacity-building projects on integrated pest management in several African countries. The project strengthened in-country and regional capacity for pest surveillance to prevent the spread of pests and pathogens and reduced crop losses. 42. FAO, UNDP and the World Bank collaborated to help countries and regional economic communities to design effective programmes for climate-smart agriculture within the context of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme. Key stakeholders discussed best practices, challenges and opportunities in relation to climate-smart agriculture and coordinated to ensure synergy in tackling challenges. 43. Through the Great Green Wall for the Sahara and the Sahel Initiative, FAO, the Economic Commission for Africa and the World Bank collaborated to support countries in addressing desertification and environmental degradation through interrelated, mutually reinforcing and coordinated actions focused on poverty reduction, integrated natural resource management, sustainable land management, resource mapping, biodiversity, soil and water. They also supported the elaboration of regional integrated financing strategies, national components and the development of an overall harmonized strategy. Five countries developed national strategies through stakeholder consultations. 44. Through the Accelerated Agribusiness and Agro-industries Development Initiative, UNIDO promoted the development of agribusiness and agro-industries in Africa through selected value chain analysis. In 2012, it co-organized a workshop in Benin to enable 200 young entrepreneurs from 14 African countries to exchange best practices on agribusiness entrepreneurship and value chain development. Furthermore, in November 2012, UNIDO concluded a memorandum of understanding with Louis Dreyfus Commodities with the aim of enhancing the productivity and profitability of agribusinesses in Africa and to develop three to five projects in which joint action could directly affect rural communities. 45. The Common Fund for Commodities supported a capacity-building project on price risk management strategies for cocoa farmers in Africa. Smallholder farmers from Cameroon, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Togo learned about costs, negative impacts and mitigation measures with regard to cocoa price volatility in an effort to improve income predictability and production management. In East Africa, the Common Fund supported a project to establish demand-driven pilot rice value chains involving smallholder farmers, rice millers, commercial farmers, finance institutions and input providers. The project improved the food security and living standards of rice producers in Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania. In North Africa, the Common Fund supported the development of a pilot nursery to serve as a centre of excellence for the demonstration of innovative propagation techniques and modern technologies in olive production. E. Industry, trade and market access 46. The cluster, co-chaired by the African Union Commission and UNIDO, supported African regional and subregional organizations in building productive capacity for trade, market access and continent-wide sustainable industrialization. 47. The Standards and Trade Development Facility of the World Bank, the World Health Organization, FAO, the World Organization for Animal Health and the World Trade Organization (WTO) continued to support coordination mechanisms and capacity-building with regard to sanitary and phytosanitary measures. In September 2012, the African Union Commission and the Facility jointly organized a meeting on sanitary and phytosanitary coordination and capacity-building in Africa. The WTO technical cooperation programme trained more than 2,000 people from July to December 2012 to enhance their human and institutional capacity in relation to multilateral trade issues. WTO also increased its support to the African Group in Geneva, which has become a main pillar for the formulation of trade policy in Africa, in particular in preparation for the Ninth WTO Ministerial Conference, in 2013. 48. WTO, in collaboration with the other partner United Nations agencies, helped to strengthen trade institutions and implement priority national projects in agriculture, trade facilitation, export promotion and productive capacity-building through the Enhanced Integrated Framework. As at December 2012, contributions to the EIF Trust Fund had reached $178 million. Projects improved compliance with standards and facilitated value addition, export growth and income generation for the poor. Project examples include private-sector collaboration in sesame production in Burkina Faso and institutional capacity-building in sanitary and phytosanitary standards in Burundi. 49. On capacity-building, UNCTAD developed materials for African universities on the economics of commodities production and trade. The University of Dar es Salaam used the modules as training materials for its international trade programme and graduate student research. UNCTAD also provided World Integrated Trade Solution/Trade Analysis and Information System training workshops to African countries and regional capacity-building workshops to the Southern African Development Community and ECOWAS on the identification, collection and classification of non-tariff measures. 50. The Transparency in Trade initiative, implemented by UNCTAD, the International Trade Centre (ITC), the World Bank and the African Development Bank, made progress in data collection and classification and measurement of nontariff measures. UNCTAD initiated data collection in five ECOWAS member States, with indicative measurements in December 2012 estimating an increase of 1,000 database users since 2011. 51. The World Bank financed a project to improve transit time in regional corridors, reducing waiting time at the port of Mombasa, Kenya, from 19 to 14 days and reducing customs clearance time at the border between Kenya and Uganda from three days to three hours. To support regional trade integration, ITC and partner United Nations agencies implemented product packaging traceability technology in Mozambique. The technology strengthened market access and linkages between local producers and global retail giants such as Walmart and Massmart, thus integrating Africa into the global market. 52. A joint ITC and Southern African Development Community supply chain project in Malawi linked low-income farmers to formal buyers, including supermarkets and hotels, improving product supply, delivery and quality. ITC helped high-fashion houses and distributors to source parts of their collections from artisans in Burkina Faso, Ghana and Kenya, creating more than 1,100 regular jobs and 7,000 intermittent jobs. ITC strengthened the pineapple export value chain in several West African countries, supporting more than 200 small- and medium-sized enterprises. Enterprises and stakeholders acquired in excess of $8 million for the initiative. Of the more than 10,000 beneficiaries of the programme, 80 per cent were women. 53. The World Tourism Organization promoted sustainable tourism in several African countries by organizing training sessions on handicraft production, guiding techniques and tourism management. Those efforts enabled local communities to design and organize cultural tours. 54. UNIDO, together with the African Union Commission, established a comprehensive business plan for the African pharmaceutical industry to enable the independent production of important medicines on the continent. UNIDO also supported the transfer of soya bean processing technology from Japan to Eastern and Southern Africa, resulting in the production of high-protein soya bean products in Malawi, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe. 55. Through a conference on economic diversification and manufacturing in Africa, held in Addis Ababa in June 2012, UNIDO promoted investment in Africa's pharmaceutical and agribusiness industries. This strengthened international cooperation between emerging economies and African countries, in particular in resource mobilization and project implementation. F. Environment, population and urbanization 56. The cluster continued to tackle challenges relating to environmental degradation, population growth and movement of people, the rapid growth of cities and the dearth of demographic statistics. 57. The cluster assisted in training Africa's negotiators for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. As part of the African regional preparatory process for the Conference, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, in collaboration with the Economic Commission for Africa, UNDP, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the African Union Commission and the African Development Bank, organized events on the institutional framework for sustainable development (integrating the three pillars), financing sustainable development and the transition towards a green economy in Africa, and promoting inclusive green growth and building a green economy as a means of achieving sustainable development, in addition to an Africa Day high-level round table. Those events enabled Africa and its partners to identify sustainable development challenges and ultimately contributed to the outcome document of the Conference. 58. UNCTAD provided policy recommendations ahead of the Conference through the Economic Development in Africa Report 2012: Structural Transformation and Sustainable Development in Africa. It recommended decoupling natural resource use and environmental impacts from the economic growth process. In addition, UNCTAD provided capacity-building for the implementation of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants and national implementation plans in least developed countries of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa. 59. As the secretariat of the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment (AMCEN), UNEP continued to support AMCEN as part of the environment initiative of NEPAD. In collaboration with the Government of Mozambique and other partners, UNEP organized the seventh meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Amended Nairobi Convention for the Protection, Management and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Western Indian Ocean. UNEP also launched the report SIDS-focused Green Economy: An Analysis of Challenges and Opportunities, which provided an analysis of small-scale fisheries and other development sectors in small island developing States. UNEP also initiated a water scheme in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to protect the Lukaya river basin, which supplies safe drinking water to almost 380,000 residents. 60. In March 2013, a high-level meeting on national drought policy was organized under the auspices of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, the World Meteorological Organization, FAO, regional organizations and key national agencies. The meeting provided Governments and private-sector entities with practical, science-based strategies to tackle drought, including proactive mitigation and risk management strategies. IMO provided national and regional training courses and workshops on marine pollution prevention and protection of the marine environment in several African countries. 61. The World Bank continued to build institutional capacity with regard to collaborative management of the transboundary natural resources of the Lake Victoria basin. The Bank provided support on watershed management and erosion in Nigeria and helped to improve water sources for 1.8 million additional people in Kenyan urban areas. 62. The United Nations University (UNU) continued to support the action plan of the environment initiative of NEPAD through the UNU Institute of Advanced Studies, which promoted the expansion and capacity development of regional centres of expertise in Africa as networks for promoting education for sustainable development. Five new African centres were acknowledged in November 2012, bringing their number to 22 (of 116). 63. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), with the cluster members, supported the development of an African programme on accelerated implementation of civil registration and vital statistics, supporting the African integration agenda and protecting children and women by establishing identity and proof of age. 64. The International Organization for Migration (IOM) provided financial support, technical expertise and logistical assistance to the Economic Community of Central African States to initiate a regional consultative process for Central Africa. The initiative fostered inter-State dialogue and intraregional cooperation on migration management for policy coherence and regional integration in Central Africa. IOM provided technical support to ECOWAS member States through the Migration Dialogue for West Africa, which facilitates the implementation in West Africa of the ECOWAS Common Approach on Migration and Development and creates a proactive interface between national, regional and international actors. 65. The United Nations Human Settlements Programme continued to promote sustainable urbanization by supporting the development of the NEPAD cities programme in partnership with the NEPAD Agency and the city of Durban, South Africa, to encourage sustainable NEPAD cities that will deliver on the NEPAD goals. Furthermore, it supported local authorities in 18 African countries to develop capacity to address crime and delinquency affecting the vulnerable and destroying the basis of local economic development. Urban security was strengthened in Burkina Faso, while the safety and security of women and girls was enhanced in Egypt and Morocco. Safety and security audits were developed in Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea and Kenya. An African road map on urban safety and security and an action plan for reducing delinquency and disorder in Western and Central Africa were also developed. G. Social and human development 66. The social and human development cluster has progressively aligned its programme of work with NEPAD priorities. 67. Through the Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy, IAEA and the World Health Organization strengthened cancer control in Africa. The Programme helped 22 African countries by providing an evaluation of their readiness to implement cancer control programmes, completing an assessment of their national cancer burdens and providing recommendations on developing cancer control capacity. 68. IAEA also strengthened radiotherapy and nuclear medicine centres by procuring equipment and expert services and enabling the long-term training of radiation oncologists, medical physicists, nuclear medicine physicians and related professionals. From May 2012 to January 2013, IAEA awarded 302 fellowships and facilitated 84 scientific visits. During the same period, 75 training courses were held, with a total of 1,022 participants. 69. UNFPA continued to support the Campaign on Accelerated Reduction of Maternal Mortality in Africa, such as through a high-level event at the twentieth ordinary session of the summit of the African Union that celebrated the reduction of maternal mortality in Africa and saw renewed commitments to intensification of actions to reduce maternal and newborn morbidity and mortality on the continent. To tackle the issue of unattended births, efforts were made to train skilled practitioners. Cameroon is now opening eight midwifery schools and completing the training of a second wave of more than 200 students, while Sierra Leone has introduced free medical services for pregnant women and their babies. 70. The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS worked closely with the African Union Commission and the NEPAD Agency to develop a road map on shared responsibility and global solidarity for AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria response in Africa for the period 2012-2015. To generate support, a high-level event was convened in September 2012 entitled "Shared responsibility and global solidarity: leveraging the AIDS response for Africa's sustainable development". The event generated political impetus towards the achievement by 2015 of the targets and commitments made in the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS, adopted in June 2011. 71. The World Bank supported the construction and renovation of health facilities in African countries. In particular, 195 health facilities were built and renovated in Ethiopia, providing 30 million additional people with access to basic health, nutrition and population services. Some 8 million poor individuals are now receiving social safety net benefits. 72. IOM provided technical and logistical support to the African Union to make operational the Ouagadougou Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings, Especially Women and Children. With this support, the Union launched, in Gabon in December 2012, an initiative against trafficking with the goal of increasing awareness of human trafficking in all regions of Africa. The International Labour Organization (ILO) prepared a discussion paper on enhancing the capacity of labour market institutions in Africa to meet current and future challenges and a compendium of good practices in the implementation of the Plan of Action for Promotion of Employment and Poverty Alleviation. These will feed into the ninth session of the African Union Labour and Social Affairs Commission, to be held in April 2013. 73. UNDP and the NEPAD Agency supported several African countries in preparing national capacity development profiles and identifying capacity constraints and also recommended interventions to tackle institutional and systemic challenges. H. Science and technology 74. The support of the science and technology cluster focuses on the implementation of the NEPAD science and technology consolidated plan of action, which is built on the three interrelated pillars of capacity-building, knowledge production and technological innovation. The cluster members continued supporting the efforts of African countries to transform their economies into knowledge-based economies. 75. ITU continued to collaborate with the African Union in the implementation of the African Observatory for Science, Technology and Innovation through a feasibility study for a data collection platform and network design to promote a digital economy with cascading benefits to other sectors of African society. 76. To ensure that information and communications technology skills and knowledge reach primary and secondary school pupils, ITU continued to support the NEPAD e-Schools initiative with the aim of connecting all African primary and secondary schools to the Internet by the end of 2013. This enabled students to function in the emerging information society and knowledge economy, enhanced teaching and learning methods and facilitated the efficient management and administration of the schools. Under the "Connect a School, Connect a Community" initiative in the Gambia, Lesotho, the Niger, Sierra Leone and the United Republic of Tanzania, schoolchildren at 71 sites continued to receive information and communications technology materials and courses. 77. To improve the quality of reporting on science to the public and its impact on the livelihood of African citizens, the Economic Commission for Africa collaborated with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the African Union Commission to implement a series of workshops for science journalists and launch a network of science journalists (the African Technology Development and Transfer Network). 78. The UNU Maastricht Economic and Social Research and Training Centre on Innovation and Technology supported the African Union and NEPAD in providing training for the second phase of the African Science, Technology and Innovation Indicators Initiative. A new round of surveys was completed, with the results validated at a workshop in Cairo in February 2013. The data and related analysis will contribute to the preparation of the next edition of the African Innovation Outlook in 2013. I. Communication, advocacy and outreach 79. The advocacy and communications cluster, co-chaired by the African Union Commission and the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, continued to increase advocacy and mobilization for NEPAD through the Regional Coordination Mechanism process, to enhance the existing dialogue between the African Union/United Nations system and the community of media reporting on Africa and to increase the technical capacity of the NEPAD communication team. 80. The Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, in collaboration with the Economic Commission for Africa and the NEPAD Agency, facilitated the preparation and publication of Africa's Decade of Change: Reflections on 10 Years of NEPAD to mark the tenth anniversary of NEPAD. The cluster also supported the publication of a quarterly newsletter on intra-cluster activities to enhance communication within the Regional Coordination Mechanism process. The Commission strengthened the communication capacity of the NEPAD Agency through team restructuring, the secondment of short-term staff members and the production of advocacy tools. 81. The cluster trained media professionals and communications officers from NEPAD countries through a webcast funded by the Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation and prepared a technical manual on development reporting to provide common standards and tools for media practitioners in Africa. 82. In October 2012, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, in partnership with the Economic Commission for Africa, the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, the NEPAD Agency and the African Union Commission, organized a week devoted to NEPAD and Africa at United Nations Headquarters, during which a series of events were held, including panel discussions and briefings for Member States and the press. Publications on Africa's development were launched to increase awareness and improve international understanding and mobilization for development. 83. ILO helped to strengthen the capacity and reporting skills of African journalists through the Media for Labour Rights Prize, established by the International Training Centre. ILO also supported the creation of a database of journalists working in Africa or covering African issues and contributed to a technical review of a manual on reporting about NEPAD issues. 84. The Department of Public Information continued to support NEPAD by arranging and facilitating press briefings and interviews for the Chief Executive Officer of the NEPAD Agency and by providing media support and a press briefing by the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa and UNIDO in November 2012 to commemorate Africa Industrialization Day. It also prepared feature articles on NEPAD and other African development issues in major media in Africa and around the world. In the last eight months of 2012, its feature articles were published 489 times in scores of different media worldwide. By the end of December 2012, the English-language Africa Renewal Twitter account had more than 22,700 people and organizations following its tweets, while the French-language version had 9,160 followers. 85. ITU played a crucial role in advocating Africa's development by leveraging information and communications technology access and facilitating the mobilization of technical, human and financial resources for implementation. It also worked to narrow the digital divide by promoting the right of everyone to communicate through access to infrastructure and information and communication services. 86. In September 2012, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa concluded a General Assembly-led process to establish a United Nations monitoring mechanism to review commitments made towards Africa's development, as called for at the high-level meeting on Africa's development needs held in 2008. The monitoring mechanism, based on the principles of mutual accountability and partnership, will promote enhanced mobilization of support and transparency in the delivery of commitments made towards Africa's development. III. Policy issues in the implementation of the New Partnership A. Strengthening of the cluster system and enhanced United Nations/ African Union cooperation 87. During the reporting period, the United Nations system strengthened its support for the implementation of NEPAD and the 10-year capacity-building programme for the African Union by handing over to the Union the joint work programme for the implementation of the programme in June 2012. 88. The nine clusters of the Regional Coordination Mechanism continued to support the African Union Commission in the servicing of Union summits, the implementation of various programmes for Africa's development, the provision of effective technical support, capacity-building and a forum for consensus-building and advocacy, and the mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues such as gender and employment in their work. The clusters prepared business plans and developed benchmarks to monitor progress in the implementation of NEPAD priorities. The mechanism is now administered jointly by the Union and the United Nations. 89. A joint subregional coordination mechanism was established for Eastern and Southern Africa. With technical support from the Economic Commission for Africa, the mechanism developed a business plan in line with the decision of the regional economic communities in the subregion to facilitate a free trade area across Eastern and Southern Africa. 90. UN-Women provided technical and financial support for participatory gender audits for agencies participating in the governance and social development clusters. The audits strengthened capacity to mainstream gender equality in the governance and social development areas of NEPAD work. 91. In July 2012, UNEP and the Regional Coordination Mechanism secretariat held a two-day meeting to discuss resource mobilization strategies for the African Union and NEPAD. The meeting identified several possibilities for strengthening and building synergies and linkages between clusters, including strengthening intracluster and inter-cluster coordination among United Nations agencies in developing and implementing their cluster activities. B. Support for the mobilization of financial resources for the implementation of the New Partnership 92. In the light of the emphasis by African leaders on domestic resource mobilization as a core development finance option, the Economic Commission for Africa and the NEPAD Agency jointly prepared a draft research report on ways and means of mobilizing domestic resources for implementing national and regional NEPAD programmes and projects. Under the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme Trust Fund, the World Bank provided $3.5 million in budget support. 93. To achieve macroeconomic and financial stability in African countries, the International Monetary Fund provided financial support through a range of financing facilities, including concessional loans disbursed under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust and grants for heavily indebted poor countries. In 2012, disbursements from the Trust reached nearly $1 billion. Debt relief under the heavily indebted poor countries and multilateral debt relief initiatives helped to reduce the debt burden of heavily indebted poor countries and released resources for poverty-reducing expenditures. To date, 36 of 39 heavily indebted poor countries, 30 of which are in sub-Saharan Africa, have qualified under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative for debt relief totalling $76 billion expressed in 2011 net present value terms. By the end of 2012, 29 countries in sub-Saharan Africa had reached the heavily indebted poor countries completion point. 94. The UNCTAD Debt Management and Financial Analysis System nearly doubled its expenditure in 2012 to $1.12 million to support African countries in strengthening their human and institutional capacity to manage debt effectively and sustainably. The direct technical assistance provided to 18 African countries by the System since May 2012 has improved external and domestic debt recording. 95. To enhance investment to Africa, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency is expecting to issue guarantees amounting to $1.4 billion in 2013. Similarly, the Africa portfolio of the International Financial Corporation has grown steadily, the global crisis notwithstanding, with improved quality and development outcomes reaching $4.2 billion. 96. Further information on United Nations system resources provided in support of NEPAD can be found in the annex to the present report. C. Cross-cutting issues 97. In July 2012, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa organized, and engaged high-level policymakers in, a round-table breakfast on addressing youth unemployment as a strategy for peacebuilding, conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. The round table raised awareness of best practices, challenges and specific measures for securing greater opportunities for the participation and engagement of young people in decision-making in local and national structures. 98. UN-Women continued to provide support for the elaboration of gender policies and plans, women's economic empowerment and efforts to end violence against women and to promote women's leadership and political participation, including in peace and security. UN-Women advocated gender mainstreaming in the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and provided direct support for the economic empowerment of women through capacity development and support for gender-responsive economic policy management. In Ethiopia, UN-Women formed a partnership with the Women Entrepreneurs' Association to improve women's participation in specific value chains linked with the agropastoral and energy sectors. The partnership successfully renovated display centres and provided business training and start-up capital to more than 5,000 women, resulting in enhanced market entry for women's products. 99. In preparation for the fifty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status of Women, in March 2013, UN-Women supported an African ministerial meeting held in Addis Ababa that resulted in a declaration on measures to prevent and appropriately respond to violence against women. In December 2012, UNFPA supported a consultation of all regional economic communities, including the gender unit of the NEPAD secretariat, on engaging men and boys for gender equality. 100. UNICEF, in collaboration with the African Union Commission, facilitated the participation of children from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Mali, Somalia and Zambia in the third Pan-African Forum on Children, held in November 2012. During the forum, UNICEF provided input to the draft renewed call for action on the implementation of the Plan of Action towards Africa Fit for Children for 2013-2017. D. Institutional support 101. The Economic Commission for Africa supported the NEPAD Agency in enhancing coordination with regard to NEPAD implementation through a regional dialogue in June 2012. The participants adopted the Durban Statement, forged a common understanding among key stakeholders and institutionalized a forum of NEPAD focal points that provides a mechanism for coordination. 102. The Commission continued to provide substantive, financial and logistical support to the NEPAD Agency for the organization of statutory and ad hoc events. Technical support was provided for the preparation of African common positions and to reach consensus for the Group of Eight and Group of 20 processes, respectively, and for the regional preparatory process for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. The Commission supported the NEPAD Agency in responding to a joint request from Kenya and South Sudan for technical support to design, execute and mobilize resources for the South Sudan Development Initiative. FAO continued strengthening the capacity of the NEPAD Agency through the secondment of two experts to support the implementation of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme. 103. In December 2012, ILO and the African Union Commission signed a letter of intent to scale up the Union's workplace policy on HIV/AIDS and provide Union staff with tools and programmes to reduce their vulnerability to HIV and create a non-discriminatory workplace. ILO assisted the Union and NEPAD in its biennial follow-up on the implementation of the Plan of Action for Promotion of Employment and Poverty Alleviation in Africa by facilitating the information collection process for the fourth biennial report. 104. UNU supported the NEPAD Agency in preparing a proposal for research and policy formulation to develop a framework that takes into account the overall human well-being needs of small farmholders in Africa while harnessing the opportunities made available by modern bioenergy for equitable and sustainable energy provision. E. Challenges and constraints 105. While progress was achieved in providing coordinated support to the African Union Commission, the NEPAD Agency and the regional economic communities through demand-driven business plans, at its thirteenth session the Regional Coordination Mechanism noted the remaining key challenges, including limited resources, varied mandates of clusters, limited communication within and between clusters and inadequate intra-cluster and inter-cluster coordination. In addition, the Mechanism lacked a monitoring approach to review and evaluate the impact of cluster activities in support of the implementation of NEPAD. As part of the solution, the Mechanism recognized the importance of systematic mainstreaming of cross-cutting issues and current priorities of the global development agenda into the clusters' work. IV. Conclusions and recommendations 106. The United Nations system continues to provide substantial support to priority areas of NEPAD through the nine clusters of the Regional Coordination Mechanism and the funding of programmes and projects, capacity-building and institution-building, resource mobilization and advocacy, and humanitarian relief. 107. Through the Mechanism, United Nations entities should strengthen support for those areas identified as continuing priorities for the African Union Commission during the period 2012-2016, including agriculture and food security, infrastructure development, peace and stability and the participation of women and young people. 108. Given that the present report coincides with the fiftieth anniversary of the African Union (formerly the Organization of African Unity), it is timely for the United Nations system to formulate a monitoring approach to assess the impact of its support on Africa's development and, in particular, on the implementation of the commitments made by the United Nations system towards the African Union and NEPAD. 109. Although various policies have been adopted to promote national and regional infrastructure development in Africa, the continent's infrastructure deficit remains a particularly strong impediment to inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction. To overcome this, the United Nations system should strengthen its support for Africa's infrastructure development so that African countries, the African Union Commission, the NEPAD Agency and the regional economic communities continue regulatory reform processes, further mobilize domestic resources and enhance cross-border initiatives in the context of the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa. 110. Given the importance of agriculture to food security and development on the continent, the United Nations system should strengthen its efforts to assist African countries in achieving the target of allocating 10 per cent of national budgets to agriculture, as set down in the Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security in Africa, and in exceeding the target of 6 per cent in agriculture sector growth, as set down in the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme. 111. To strengthen regional economic integration in Africa, United Nations entities should align the planning, programming and budget cycles of country programmes with national planning and budgeting cycles and with regional and subregional programmes. In addition, United Nations entities should provide coherent and coordinated support for building African capacity through the 10-year capacity-building programme for the African Union. 112. The United Nations system should also strengthen its efforts to provide coordinated, inclusive and coherent support for the implementation of the recommendations of the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, including by integrating the recommendations into their work programmes and budgets. The United Nations system should, in particular, increase its support for the implementation of green growth policies in Africa, including by supporting the formulation of an investment strategy for Africa's transition towards a green economy. 113. In addition, the United Nations system should adopt a coordinated and coherent strategy to ensure that NEPAD priorities are fully reflected in the post-2015 development agenda, in particular in the areas of good governance and the nexus between peace, security and development. It is equally important for the United Nations system to redouble its efforts to ensure that Africa attains the Millennium Development Goals by 2015. 114. In line with General Assembly resolution 66/287, the United Nations system should take all measures necessary to strengthen the United Nations Inter-agency Task Force on Africa to ensure further coherence and an integrated approach for United Nations support for Africa, including in following up on the implementation of all global summit and conference outcomes relating to Africa. United Nations system support for Africa: financial and staff resources devoted to Africa, 2010-2012 Entity Type of support Resources (thousands of United States dollars) Africa's share of resources (percentage) Common Fund for Commodities Project commitments Department of Economic and Social Affairs/Office for Economic and Social Council Support and Coordination Total financial support Department of Public Information Financial and staff resources Economic Commission for Africa Total regular budget allotment under section 18 Total regular budget allotment under section 11 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Total field programme Emergency assistance Technical cooperation International Atomic Energy Agencya Technical cooperation fund Extrabudgetary Total technical cooperation programme International Labour Organization Regular budget Portion of staff resources devoted to Africa (regular budget) International Maritime Organization Financial resources Staff resources (number of people) International Monetary Fund Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust loans Heavily indebted poor countries grantsb IMF debt relief delivered to sub-Saharan Africa International Telecommunication Union Financial support International Trade Centre 11 095c Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS Support to African Union Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Budgeted contributions Number of field-based staffd Office of the Special Adviser on Africae Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Budgeted expenditure Number of staff members Peacebuilding Support Office Peacebuilding Fund (grants to strategic project interventions) United Nations Children's Fund Financial resources to sub-Saharan Africa United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Expenditures for Africa United Nations Democracy Fund Project funding United Nations Development Programme Financial contributions through Regional Programme Financial contributions multi-donor trust fund United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Total financial expenditure United Nations Office for Partnershipsf Expenditure United Nations Population Fund Country programme expenditures United Nations University Financial resources (total estimation) World Bank World Tourism Organization Total (regular programme) World Trade Organization/ Standards and Trade Development Facility (Footnotes on following page) : Agencies, departments, programmes, funds and organizations of the United Nations system. Note: Data were included in the table on the basis of available information received from the United Nations system. Figures are estimates or provisional, as indicated by relevant agencies. a Since 2011, IAEA programmes are budgeted in euros. The euro/United States dollar conversion rate applied is 0.774 for 2011 and 0.754 for 2012. b Includes interim assistance and/or disbursement at completion point. c The relative drop in assistance to Africa for 2012 compared with 2011 is because the Programme for Building African Capacity for Trade, funded by the Canadian International Development Agency, is ending. The figures are expected to rise in 2013-2014 as soon as the successor programme is operational. d The figures provided here are for field-based staff. e Just as any office or department of the Secretariat, the budget of the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa is calculated biennially. Data for 2012 are half of the appropriation for the current biennium. f United Nations Foundation spending channelled to United Nations agencies through the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships, which is part of the United Nations Office for Partnerships. 