%%%PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT|SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|GENDER EQUALITY|

Commission on the Status of Women Fifty-eighth session 10-21 March 2014 Follow-up to Economic and Social Council resolutions and decisions Implementation of General Assembly resolution 68/1 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council Note by the Secretariat 1. In its resolution 68/1 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly introduced changes that have implications for the subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council. Among other provisions, the resolution outlines the substantive leadership to be provided by the Council to the United Nations system through the adoption of an annual theme and the staggering of the segments of the Council throughout the year, effective from 2014. The resolution creates opportunities and expectations for the subsidiary bodies to advance their own work in the context of the wider process of the strengthening of the Council. This note sets out proposals as to how the Commission on the Status of Women could contribute to the Council's work in 2014. 2. In 2014, the proposed theme for the integration segment of the Council, scheduled to take place in May, is sustainable urbanization. The function of the segment is to consolidate all the inputs of Member States, the Economic and Social Council system, the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders in order to fulfil the mandate of the Council, as recognized in the outcome document of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 66/288), concerning the promotion of a balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development. The outcome of the segment will be a summary by the President of the Council which will serve as an input to the high-level segment of the Council, including the high-level political forum. The functional commissions and other subsidiary bodies are invited, to the extent possible, to provide inputs on sustainable urbanization around the three dimensions of sustainable development, with recommendations and technical guidance on how the Council can integrate their inputs into the larger picture of sustainable development. 3. Urbanization, and in particular sustainable urbanization, requires attention to the gender equality perspectives of its economic, social and environmental dimensions. The Commission on the Status of Women has not yet dealt with this issue in a systematic or in-depth manner. It may therefore wish to discuss the topic under its agenda item on the follow-up to Economic and Social Council resolutions and decisions, in order to provide a contribution to the integration segment. 4. The high-level segment of the Council, to be held in July 2014, will consist, among other components, of the annual ministerial review. The theme for 2014 is "Addressing ongoing and emerging challenges for meeting the Millennium Development Goals in 2015 and for sustaining development gains in the future". The outcome of the segment will be a ministerial declaration. 5. The Commission on the Status of Women will consider as its priority theme at its fifty-eighth session the topic of "Challenges and achievements in the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals for women and girls". As the topic is directly aligned with the Council's theme, the Commission should bring the outcomes of its consideration to the Council's attention during its deliberations. The outcomes would include the Commission's agreed conclusions on the priority theme; as well as the summaries by the Chair and the Moderator of the high-level round table and the interactive expert panels on the priority theme. In this manner, the Commission would exercise its catalytic role and support the Council in the integration of gender perspectives at its 2014 high-level segment. The reports of the Secretary-General on the priority theme could also contribute to the Council's deliberations. 