%%%WOMEN'S STATUS|ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|

Commission on the Status of Women Fifty-eighth session 10-21 March 2014 Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and to the special session of the General Assembly entitled "Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century": implementation of strategic objectives and action in critical areas of concern and further actions and initiatives Statement submitted by Islamic Women's Institute of Iran, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. In September 2000, world leaders met at the Millennium Summit and adopted the Millennium Development Goals, a series of scheduled targets that include the fight against poverty, hunger, disease, illiteracy, environmental degradation and gender inequality as well as the creation of a global partnership for development. In the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Millennium Development Goals are within the framework of wider social development. Unfair international sanctions pose a huge obstacle in the way of the realization of these targets in the Islamic Republic of Iran. However, the institutions did not disappoint, and their efforts to realize the Goals have been useful. In this regard, the Islamic Women's Institute of Iran implemented various plans and projects to achieve this purpose. One plan, entitled "Empowering local communities to prevent indiscriminate hunting of the Houbara Bustard and reducing the threats", in Darab County, Fars Province, was implemented in cooperation with the Small Grants Programme as a component of the Global Environment Facility of the United Nations Development Programme. The organization's main objectives were defined as follows: :: Protection of wildlife, especially birds called "Houbara Bustard" :: Training in the optimization of the use of water, fertilizer and pesticides for agriculture :: Protecting the wildlife habitat in the plains of the southern part of the country :: Empowering local communities regarding environmental information and knowledge about culture, economics, health and entrepreneurship :: Prevent destruction of palm groves :: Improvements in drinking water quality :: Education about waste and sewage separation The palm growers' cooperative action and follow-up plan for the region include providing water for farming. The project will contribute to the achievement of the following Millennium Development Goals: :: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger (Goal 1) :: Promote gender equality and women's empowerment (Goal 3) :: Ensure environmental sustainability (Goal 7) The activities will also contribute to improving citizens' awareness of environmental measures and their interest in preserving the environment. One of the achievements of this project was the provision of microcredit to empower women in the villages of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Although the preservation of the Houbara Bustard is at the centre of the project, a variety of other species have benefited. In the summer of 2013, the Islamic Women's Institute started a project to achieve Millennium Development Goal 2, achieve universal primary education, in Afghanistan and Tajikistan, as well as in our country. 