%%%GENDER EQUALITY|WOMEN'S STATUS|UKRAINE|

Commission on the Status of Women Fifty-eighth session 10-21 March 2014 Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and to the special session of the General Assembly, entitled "Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century": implementation of strategic objectives and action in critical areas of concern and further actions and initiatives Statement submitted by World Federation of Ukrainian Women's Organizations, non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 36 and 37 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. In all regions of the world, and no less in the region that embraces the countries of the former Soviet territory, recent economic crises have inflicted socioeconomic setbacks that have impacted women disproportionately, resulting in a pressing need to reaffirm State commitments to effective implementation of laws and policies that support gender equality and are intended to protect the human rights of girls and women of all ages, alongside those of men and boys. Yet, even when good legal instruments have been ratified or are in the process of being ratified, the affirmative application, implementation and enforcement of laws and policies, as well as the cultivation of public understanding of the importance of gender equity goals are still profoundly lacking. In particular, we call for the recognition of the special circumstances plaguing the post-Soviet sphere, where the current progress towards gender equality is being actively undermined by the spread of new anti-feminist and anti-gender movements. These movements are so widespread and pervasive that they may well threaten the full realization of the Millennium Development Goals. A strong disinformation strategy is a basic element of these movements, which claim that gender equality in the spheres of education, employment, health care and justice is alien to traditional culture, in conflict with religious values and will destroy the family. To confront this alarming trend, we call for committed State strategies involving legal, educational and media approaches. We urge States to charge, expose and prosecute those harassing the men and women working towards gender equality; to map and document the anti-gender movements; to require transparency of financial support so that those movements must openly identify and disclose funding sources when they use public spaces, such as university campuses, to disseminate information; to counter the misinformation of the anti-gender movement through education, media approaches and public discussion forums that would help clearly establish gender equality as the foundation for economic and social development. Across the post-Soviet region, women shoulder significantly broader social responsibility than men, taking on domestic and community caregiving roles while also engaging in professional and educational activities. While women generally have access to primary, secondary and even higher education, they are greatly outnumbered by men in the study of technology, math and science, the necessary studies for fields with strong employment trends. Furthermore, there is a pronounced disjuncture in the interaction of education and employment: across the region women earn significantly less than men, even in those sectors where female labour predominates, because men are overrepresented in those sectors' management positions. Regardless of individual circumstances, women are routinely not hired or promoted on the assumption that they will be burdened with child- or elder-care responsibilities. Across the region, women's income is heavily dependent on non-labour sources (pensions, stipends), in contrast to men's employment income. Women entrepreneurs generally achieve one third of the earnings of their male counterparts; self-employed women make less than half of the earnings reported by men in similar arrangements. Across the region, women are still grossly underrepresented in decision-making bodies in places of power, such as government, business and influential civic institutions. Ingrained traditional and stereotypical gender attitudes are implicated in all these situations. The current antifeminist and anti-gender movements reinforce harmful patterns. New anti-gender equality movements are affecting many societies across the region, but perhaps Ukraine is currently the most egregiously affected. The movement calling itself "STOPGender!" has become increasingly active, is widespread and is a well-funded campaign reaching into many spheres of Ukraine's society, including religious, student and rural communities. This movement feeds on the public's lack of knowledge of the purpose and meaning of gender equity. The campaign intentionally misinforms and disinforms about sex/gender/identities/ sexualities, conflates gender equality with homosexuality and makes unfounded claims about the consequences of gender equity, asserting that it will lead to the demographic and spiritual genocide of the nation. At a hearing on gender equality in the Ukrainian parliament on 16 October 2013, the Chair of the Ukrainian parliamentary Subcommittee on Gender Equality noted that this movement operates "under the implied consent of the State leadership and is manipulating public opinion. Certain political circles ... [that] I can only refer to as a `fifth column' ... have tied into a single knot strands of populist rhetoric about the conservation of the traditional family ... promoting slogans against gender equality, manipulating public consciousness, tricking and scaring people". According to the speaker, this anti-gender equality movement is an attempt to discredit European integration and European values related to human rights, democracy and the rule of law. This is unfortunate, the speaker concluded, because "it is precisely these values that are so lacking in modern Ukrainian society. So today, the future of Ukraine depends on our full comprehension of the current situation of women and on our understanding of our common future as human beings". There has been uneven yet real progress towards meeting the Millennium Development Goals in the countries of the post-Soviet region. Yet the strong antigender movements of recent years have the potential to inhibit awareness and inflame public attitudes to such a degree that the full attainment and sustainment of these goals is threatened. This alarming trend must be recognized, confronted, isolated and diminished. The burden of stopping this trend must not rest on the shoulders of nongovernmental organizations or individuals. We call for committed State strategies involving legal, educational and media approaches. States need to review their laws to ensure consistent conceptualization and practise of gender approaches. We urge a dedicated analysis of the sources of disinformation about the meaning and consequences of gender equality and the methods by which it is spread. We urge transparency in revealing the funding sources of these movements. We urge an education strategy in which all sectors of the State apparatus and civil society, including the religious, cultural and business leadership, would participate in an open, rational and respectful discussion of harmful stereotypes, so that the acceptance and practise of equal treatment and equal choice become naturalized and normative. 