%%%GEOSPATIAL INFORMATION MANAGEMENT|PANAMA|

Tenth United Nations Regional Cartographic Conference of the Americas New York, 19-23 August 2013 Item 6 (a) of the provisional agenda* Conference papers: invited papers on recent developments in geospatial information management in addressing national, regional and global issues Panamanian Spatial Information Infrastructure, 2013 Note by the Secretariat The Secretariat has the honour to bring to the attention of the Tenth United Nations Regional Cartographic Conference of the Americas the technical paper on the Panamanian Spatial Information Infrastructure, 2013. The technical paper is available in the original language only on the Conference website: (http://unstats.un.org/unsd/geoinfo/RCC/unrcca10.html). The Conference is invited to take note of the technical paper. Summary of the technical paper The Panamanian Spatial Information Infrastructure seeks to promote rules, standards and the targeting of resources to promote a spatial information management policy which covers the use, access to and exchange of spatial information, and at the same time guarantee interoperability between the different institutions that make up the Inter-Agency Technical Committee. Its general aim is to devise, develop, implement, administer and disseminate the national spatial information infrastructure, based on standards for applying the benefits of services, as an instrument of subject-based visualization, consultation, modification and analysis. Five components have been defined in order to achieve the objective: :: Legal and political framework. The aim of this component is to establish the inter-agency working agreements and legal frameworks to facilitate access to and use of geospatial information. This component must be broadened so that, in the future, it becomes the underlying principle of the national geospatial information policy. The Technical Committee is currently working on the revision of the operating regulations of the Panamanian Spatial Information Infrastructure and is conducting a legal analysis of the classification of information -- free of charge or with free, commercial and restricted access -- and its impact on information management in the agencies which make up the Panamanian Spatial Information Infrastructure. For this purpose, the laws are being analyzed as regards access to information, copyright and intellectual property. :: Strengthening of institutions. This component promotes technical training in relation to spatial information infrastructure, through seminars, workshops, congresses, courses and other similar activities. Its efforts are aimed at promoting and disseminating the project at all levels, from governmental and private management to general users. The Technical Committee is working to find the funding necessary for the development of research projects which allow development based on new technologies. :: Geospatial information. The aim of this component is to guarantee the ordered and standardized production of geospatial information, in addition to managing the identification and creation of a catalogue of products available to users. The Technical Committee is currently working to compile information in order to generate an interactive pilot map in which information on all the participating institutions interacts. In order to facilitate the process, the Technical Committee has decided to use the layers of data from the national atlas so as not to duplicate efforts in the use of GEONET -- a new platform which provides State institutions with the requisite geospatial collaboration through map visualization services, batches of geographical data, connections to web services, and creation of web and mobile applications, as well as the integration of interactive maps on their websites and social networks (see http://geored.maps.arcgis.com/home/). :: Standards. The aim of this component is to create and establish rules, procedures, guides and instructions for geographical information management, implementation and application of an institutional metadata profile, and provision of the requisite advice to relevant institutions. The Technical Committee is currently evaluating regional experiences of standards and how, on the basis of the analysis, Panamanian standards should be adopted, approved, documented and published. :: Technology. The aim of this component is to establish the protocols necessary to guarantee interoperability so as to facilitate the exchange, access to and use of geospatial information through the development of platforms and portals for publishing geospatial information and creating capacities for their maintenance. The Technical Committee is currently working together with the geospatial information component in developing GEONET. 