%%%LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES|ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|CLIMATE CHANGE|COUNTRY PROGRAMMES|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|

United Nations FCCC/SBI/2013/15 Distr.: General 30 September 2013 Original: English Subsidiary Body for Implementation Thirty-ninth session Warsaw, 11 - 16 November 2013 Item 9 of the provisional agenda Matters relating to the least developed countries Report on the 24th meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group Note by the secretariat Summary This document reports on the 24th meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), held in Siem Reap, Cambodia, from 26 to 29 August 2013. It contains progress on the implementation of the work programme of the LEG for 2013 - 2014, covering the following activities: regional training workshops on adaptation for the least developed countries (LDCs) for 2012 - 2013; plans for further training on national adaptation plans (NAPs); the NAP Expo; supplementary materials for the technical guidelines for the NAP process; technical guidance and support to the NAP process; collaboration in providing technical support to the LDCs; outreach on the work of the LEG, including NAP Central and the capturing and sharing of best practices and lessons learned; gender and other considerations regarding vulnerable communities within the LDCs; monitoring and evaluation of national adaptation programmes of action, the LDC work programme and the NAP process; support of coherence and synergy of adaptation related efforts under the Convention; and LEG in-depth case studies. It also provides details on discussions of the LEG with the Global Environment Facility and its agencies and other organizations on support given to the LDCs, and with the Government of Cambodia on its experience with mobilizing and managing financial resources for addressing climate change. Contents Paragraphs Page I. Mandate 1 - 3 3 II. Summary of the 24th meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group 4 - 65 3 A. Proceedings 4 - 8 3 B. Status of preparation and implementation of national adaptation programmes of action 9 - 13 4 C. Regional training workshops for 2012 - 2013 14 - 17 5 D. Plans for further training on the national adaptation plan process 18 - 21 6 E. NAP Expo 22 - 24 6 F. Supplementary materials for the technical guidelines for the national adaptation plan process 25 - 26 7 G. Technical guidance and support to the national adaptation plan process 27 - 35 7 H. Outreach on the work of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group 36 - 38 10 I. Gender and other considerations regarding vulnerable communities within the least developed countries 39 - 41 10 J. Monitoring and evaluation of national adaptation programmes of action, the least developed countries work programme and the national adaptation plan process 42 - 45 10 K. Support of coherence and synergy of adaptation under the Convention 46 - 50 12 L. Mobilization of organizations, regional centres and networks 51 - 53 12 M. Discussion with the Global Environment Facility and its agencies 54 - 60 13 N. Interaction with other organizations and experts 61 - 63 14 O. Interaction with the Government of Cambodia on the national adaptation programme of action and the national adaptation plan process 64 - 65 14 III. Modalities for implementing the Least Developed Countries Expert Group work programme for 2013 - 2014 66 15 Annex Members of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group as at 29 August 2013 16 I. Mandate 1. The mandate of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), under its current term (2011 - 2015), is defined in decisions 29/CP.7, 6/CP.16 and 5/CP.17. The LEG is mandated to provide technical support and advice to the least developed countries (LDCs) on national adaptation programmes of action (NAPAs) and the LDC work programme, and to provide technical guidance and support to the national adaptation plan (NAP) process. 2. In addition to activities under the LEG work programme for 2012 - 2013, the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI), at its thirty-seventh session, requested the LEG to undertake the following specific activities: (a) To further explore issues of some LDCs related to accessing funds from the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) for the implementation of their NAPAs, during its meetings with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and its agencies, and to include information on ways and means to enhance the implementation of NAPAs in the reports on its meetings for consideration by the SBI; (b) To organize an LDC NAP event in conjunction with SBI 38, with the support of the secretariat and in collaboration with relevant organizations. 3. In response to decision 6/CP.16, paragraph 3, the LEG developed a work programme for 2013 - 2014 at its 23rd meeting II. Summary of the 24th meeting of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group A. Proceedings 4. The 24th meeting of the LEG was held in Siem Reap, Cambodia, from 26 to 29 August 2013, immediately following the regional training workshop on adaptation for Asian LDCs, which was held at the same location from 20 to 24 August 2013. 5. The Conference of the Parties (COP), by decision 8/CP.13, mandated the LEG to invite, when deemed necessary, the GEF and its agencies to its meetings. In addition, decision 6/CP.16 requested the LEG to engage a wide range of organizations to support the implementation of its work programme. Consequently, the LEG met with representatives of three GEF agencies, namely the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and with the United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR). The LEG further solicited relevant inputs from other agencies of the GEF that could not send representatives to the meeting. Two organizations, the Global Water Partnership (GWP) and Conservation International (CI), also took part in the meeting. 6. A member of the Adaptation Committee attended the meeting as part of the collaboration between the two groups on further developing methodologies for identifying best practices and lessons learned in addressing adaptation in the LDCs. A former LEG member, Ms. Beth Lavender, also attended the meeting and participated in the discussions on best practices and lessons learned, and on gender and vulnerable communities. 7. The meeting was jointly opened with the workshop mentioned in paragraph 4 above by Mr. Mok Mareth, Senior Minister, Ministry of Environment, Cambodia. He expressed the Government of Cambodia's pleasure in hosting the workshop and the LEG meeting. 8. During the meeting, the LEG focused its work on the following: regional training workshops on adaptation for the LDCs for 2012 - 2013; plans for further training on NAPs; NAP Expo; supplementary materials for the technical guidelines for the NAP process; technical guidance and support to the NAP process; collaboration in providing technical support to the LDCs; outreach on the work of the LEG, including NAP Central and the capturing and sharing of best practices and lessons learned; gender and considerations regarding vulnerable communities within LDCs; monitoring and evaluation of NAPAs, the LDC work programme and the NAP process; coherence and synergy of adaptation related efforts under the Convention; and the implementation plan for in-depth case studies. It met with GEF agencies on latest updates on, and experiences with, support to the LDCs. In keeping with its practice of interacting with the national team of the host country responsible for NAPA and NAP process, the LEG engaged the Government of Cambodia to share its experience with mobilizing and managing financial resources for addressing climate change. B. Status of preparation and implementation of national adaptation programmes of action 1. Status of preparation of national adaptation programmes of action 9. As at 30 September 2013, 49 LDCs had successfully completed their NAPAs. Equatorial Guinea received funding in November 2012 for the preparation of its NAPA, and is expected to complete it before the end of 2013. 10. Furthermore, at least three LDCs, including Bangladesh, Bhutan and Senegal, have revised or updated their NAPAs. The LEG stands ready to continue to provide support to the LDCs, upon their request, as they continue to rely on technical guidance and advice from the expert group for revising and updating their NAPAs. 2. Status of implementation of national adaptation programmes of action 11. The GEF reported that, as of 30 June 2013, 46 LDCs had officially submitted NAPA implementation project proposals for approval for funding under the LDCF. Of these, six countries had at least one project approved, 18 countries at least two projects approved and 22 countries had three or more projects approved. 12. The GEF indicated that, in total, 119 projects (comprising seven medium-sized projects and 112 full-sized projects) had been approved by the GEF Council, with LDCF grants amounting to USD 603.4 million. Of the projects approved, 49 had been endorsed by the Chief Executive Officer of the GEF and are under various stages of implementation. 13. The GEF further reported that, as at 31 July 2013, cumulative donor pledges to the LDCF have amounted to USD 774.91 million, and that the ceiling for each LDC for implementing NAPA projects is USD 20 million, based on the principle of equitable access. C. Regional training workshops for 2012 - 2013 14. Two regional training workshops have taken place since the last meeting of the LEG: (a) The regional training workshop for African anglophone LDCs took place from 29 July to 2 August in Kigali, Rwanda. The workshop was attended by 60 participants from 13 African anglophone LDCs, two lusophone LDCs (Angola and Mozambique) and one francophone LDC (Haiti). The participants included officers from ministries and departments responsible for the environment, climate change, agriculture, planning, finance and economics, meteorology, water, land and natural resources. In addition, seven national focal points of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), funded by the CBD secretariat, attended. Representatives of the following organizations and agencies took part in the workshop and served as resource persons: the GEF and four of its agencies (UNDP, FAO, UNEP and the African Development Bank), Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and the Regional Center for Mapping of Resources for Development; (b) The regional training workshop on adaptation for Asian LDCs took place from 20 to 24 August 2013 in Siem Reap, Cambodia. That workshop was the last of the four regional training workshops and was attended by 29 participants from ministries and departments responsible for climate change, planning and finance. The workshop also included six national focal points of the CBD, supported by the CBD secretariat. Representatives of the following organizations and agencies took part in the workshop: three GEF agencies (FAO, UNDP and UNEP), UNITAR, GIZ, the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and the Southeast Asia START Regional Center. 15. Having completed all the regional training workshops for 2012 - 2013, the LEG discussed experiences and lessons learned from the workshops, including feedback received from the participants, and arrived at the following conclusions and recommendations: (a) The training workshops offered an opportunity for participating countries to share practical experiences and lessons learned on adaptation planning and implementation and an opportunity to build networks; (b) The regional nature of the training workshops allowed for each workshop to accommodate targeted input on specific challenges and opportunities for different regions; (c) Regional centres and organizations played vital roles in sharing context-specific experiences, given their experience of working with the countries in the respective regions; (d) The presence of the GEF and its agencies throughout the duration of the workshop was valuable as it provided the participants with sufficient opportunity to ask questions and get immediate feedback on issues related to funding and other technical matters; (e) The combination of presentations and practical sessions was effective in building and enhancing the participants' understanding and confidence of NAPA implementation and the NAP process; (f) Participants provided satisfactory feedback on their understanding of the training materials and their potential utilization in respective countries. 16. The LEG discussed the need for a follow-up workshop for the LDCs in the Pacific region to cover the NAP technical guidelines, since the workshop for that region took place before the NAP technical guidelines were completed. 17. The LEG further decided, in carrying out further training on the NAP process, to expand upon and revise the experiences and relevant training materials as necessary. D. Plans for further training on the national adaptation plan process 18. The LEG decided that regional training workshops are an effective means of providing training and capacity-building on adaptation to the LDCs. In particular, this modality allows countries an opportunity to come together and learn from each other and engage with the LEG, as well as international and regional organizations. 19. The LEG concluded that there is need for continued engagement through regional training workshops, to support the national-level NAP teams in the execution of the NAP process. The workshops could address issues such as access to financial resources, stocktaking, integration of adaptation into sectoral and other development planning processes, and the development of adaptation plans and programmes. In planning the series of workshops, the LEG also noted the need to consider how the Pacific LDCs can be trained on the NAPs, since their workshop happened prior to the completion of the technical guidelines for the NAP process. 20. The LEG recommended that regional training workshops be continued and that a new round of workshops be initiated in the second half of 2014. 21. The LEG also concluded that the training materials provided a good basis for the regional training workshops, and that in carrying out further training on NAPs, there will be a need to further develop and expand the training materials as necessary. It also considered developing training materials that could be packaged as e-learning materials for self-paced training and for training of trainers. E. NAP Expo 22. The LEG discussed key aspects and feedback from the NAP Expo, which was held on 11 June in conjunction with the thirty-eighth sessions of the subsidiary bodies. The LEG noted that the NAP Expo was attended by more than 150 participants, including from the LDCs and other Parties, the GEF and its agencies, United Nations organizations, international and regional organizations, development agencies, and regional centres and networks. Furthermore, the Chair of the SBI, Mr. Tomasz Chruszczow, the Executive Secretary, Ms. Christiana Figueres, and Mr. Prakash Mathema, representing the LCDs, addressed participants at the opening of the Expo. 23. The LEG also noted that the NAP Expo provided a good opportunity for the LDCs to share their experiences and needs with the LEG, LDCs and other Parties, and with the organizations and agencies present at the Expo. Similarly, agencies, organizations and Parties were able to share information on available and planned support for the LDCs for the NAP process. 24. Overall, the LEG concluded that the NAP Expo was successful in delivering its intended objectives and, in response to requests from LDC Parties, decided to organize a similar outreach event in 2014 that would aim at contributing to enhanced understanding of the NAP process and how LDCs can work with different stakeholders on their NAP processes. The LEG will further deliberate on the timing, nature and scope for the next expo. F. Supplementary materials for the technical guidelines for the national adaptation plan process 25. The LEG continued its discussions on supplementary materials to support NAP processes that build on the NAP technical guidelines. It acknowledged that a NAP is a flexible, iterative, and continuous process that will need and attract support from various sources, including sectoral experts, regional experts and expert groups. It welcomed initiatives from different organizations on providing supplementary materials that would assist the LDCs in achieving concrete steps on the NAP process. It agreed to look for ways, on a case-by-case basis, to assist in the development of supplementary materials. The LEG will concentrate on the link with NAP technical guidelines. It elaborated the following general recommendations for the development of the supplementary materials: (a) The supplementary materials need to be aligned with the LEG NAP technical guidelines, but need not follow the steps as presented in the technical guidelines. It is important to recognize the flexible nature of the NAP process; (b) They would need to focus on being useful at the practical level (i.e. be brief, be technical and provide examples on how to address the specific issue/topic); (c) Contributing organizations need to ensure broad input from all relevant organizations in developing the supplementary materials; (d) The LEG may assist in identifying examples, case studies, best practices and lessons learned to be used; (e) The LEG strongly encourages broad participation on the development of supplementary material, including the involvement of end users. 26. The LEG noted that supplementary materials on water, health, ecosystems and agriculture and food security are at various stages of development. The LEG will continue to offer its assistance to various proponents of the supplementary materials, as appropriate. G. Technical guidance and support to the national adaptation plan process 1. Information paper on how national adaptation plan processes can be supported in the least developed countries 27. The LEG worked on the outline of an information paper on how NAP processes can be supported in the LDCs, forming part of the work of the LEG on collaboration with relevant organizations in providing technical guidance and support to the LDCs on the NAP process. 28. The LEG decided that the primary audience for the paper would be the GEF and its agencies, bilateral agencies, international organizations and regional centres and networks. The paper will be anchored on the work of the LEG on support needs for the NAP process and will address financial, technological and capacity-building support, as well as aspects relating to scientific knowledge, data and analysis. 29. The LEG decided to prioritize the paper and complete it by the end of 2013. 2. Support needs for the national adaptation plan process 30. The LEG discussed progress in its activities in addressing the support needs for the NAP process listed in the report on its 23rd meeting. The LEG noted that some of the needs are being addressed, including through the work on the following: (a) Dissemination of the technical guidelines for the NAP process, as elaborated in chapter II.G.4 below; (b) Development of supplementary materials for the NAP guidelines, as described in chapter II.F above; (c) Training on introduction to the NAP process through the LEG regional training workshops for 2012 - 2013, as referred to in chapter II.C above; (d) Further development of NAP Central, as described in chapter II.G.3 below; (e) Development of a tool for monitoring and evaluation of NAPAs, the LDC work programme and the NAP process, referred to in chapter II.J below; (f) Proposed regional training workshops on NAPs, referred to in chapter II.D above. 3. Supporting the national adaptation plan process through NAP Central 31. The LEG discussed further design aspects of NAP Central, building on the discussion at the NAP Expo and the developments made since then. It agreed that the scope of NAP Central is to provide a universally accessible, web-based central repository and hub for information pertinent to the NAP process. The main target audience comprises NAP teams in developing countries, with a particular focus on the LDCs. The LEG further elaborated key content and functionalities of NAP Central, which would include the following: a database of information relevant to the NAP process; links to relevant information of organizations, regional centres and networks, non-governmental organizations and research institutions on support for the NAP process; a blog to enable sharing of stories, ideas and announcements; a wiki-based synthesis of scientific information and data by country, and other functionalities that would enable intuitive navigation through the system, such as the possibility of sorting the information by hazard, sector or region/country; and country portals. 32. The LEG finalized the terms of reference for the support group on the design and implementation of NAP Central over the next two years. The support group will be composed of four members of the LEG, a member of the Adaptation Committee, and representatives of the GEF and its agencies, other United Nations organizations and research organizations. The support group will request further input from regional centres and organizations working in the LDCs, as well as consult with NAP country teams as appropriate. The LEG will continue to enhance NAP Central through the support group. 4. Outreach and awareness raising on the application of the technical guidelines 33. The LEG has thus far released the technical guidelines, an outreach document summarizing the NAP process, a poster and a CD-ROM of those materials. These are available in three languages (English, French and Portuguese) from the secretariat and online as part of NAP Central. An online interactive version of the technical guidelines has also been developed under NAP Central. The LEG agreed to continue efforts to enhance outreach and awareness on the application of the technical guidelines, including through the following: the dissemination of the technical guidelines to Parties during the sessions of the subsidiary bodies and the COP and other related events; and enhancement of the online interactive version of the technical guidelines with relevant supplementary materials and case studies. 5. Progress report on support to the national adaptation plan process 34. The LEG discussed progress reports on support to the NAP process provided by United Nations organizations, specialized agencies and other relevant organizations, as well as bilateral and multilateral agencies, regional centres and networks, with a view to finding an effective manner in which such information could be collected and disseminated. The LEG decided not to provide fully comprehensive and complete information, but to focus on providing an overview of such support. The LEG noted that comprehensive reporting is being undertaken through other channels, such as through reports on fast-start finance. The LEG agreed that such information would need to be collected as frequently as possible, through regular interactions with organizations and groups as well as recipient countries. 35. The following are selected highlights of support given to the LDCs on the NAP process between March and September 2013: (a) The LEG has released the technical guidelines for the NAP process and is working with organizations that engage in developing supplementary materials as described in paragraph 25 above. The LEG is further developing tools, case studies and methods to support the LDCs on the NAP process. NAP Central has also been developed to house information on the NAP process and to serve as a collaboration platform. The LEG also introduced the NAP process at the NAP Expo and in the regional training workshops; (b) The GEF Council, in response to the request from COP 18 for the GEF to enable activities for the preparation of the NAP process by the LDCs, has adopted a paper operationalizing support to the LDCs for the NAP process. The GEF indicated that LDCs can start to access funds from the LDCF for their NAP processes; (c) Various organizations, including FAO, UNDP, UNEP, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the World Health Organization (WHO), have communicated ongoing programmes that would directly contribute towards strengthening the capacity of the LDCs in launching and leading the NAP process. The support ranges from data and information at the sectoral levels to sector-specific methods and tools, and includes programmes for strengthening capacity in managing the NAP process and for integrating climate change adaptation into sectoral policies and programmes, as well as into relevant planning processes and strategies; (d) A support programme on NAPs has been developed by UNDP and UNEP, together with the GEF secretariat, IFAD, the World Food Programme, UNITAR and the United Nations Office for Project Services, in collaboration with WHO. The programme establishes a support mechanism around three main pillars: institutional support, technical support and knowledge brokering. The programme goal and objective will be achieved by the following: (a) developing operational road maps and implementing training to advance NAP processes in the context of LDC national development strategies; (b) making tools and approaches available to LDCs to support key steps in the NAP process; and (c) exchanging lessons learned and knowledge through South - South and North - South cooperation; (e) Relevant support from developed country Parties presented in the reports on fast-start finance. H. Outreach on the work of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group 1. Best practices and lessons learned 36. The LEG discussed and finalized terms of reference for an advisory group for further developing methodologies for capturing best practices and lessons learned in addressing adaptation in the LDCs. The advisory group will be composed of two LEG members, a member of the Adaptation Committee and a member of the LDC Group delegated by the Chair of the LDC Group. The advisory group will work in close consultation with the GEF and its agencies, other United Nations organizations, research institutions and regional centres and organizations working in the LDCs. 37. The LEG subsequently decided to publish a third volume of the best practices and lessons learned publication once the revised methodology becomes available. 2. Outreach publication on national adaptation programmes of action: success stories 38. The LEG noted that LDCs and the GEF and its agencies have highlighted the value of sharing success stories about NAPAs, especially on the outcomes of completed projects or those under implementation. The LEG decided to develop an outreach publication on success stories. I. Gender and other considerations regarding vulnerable communities within the least developed countries 39. The LEG discussed gender considerations and considerations regarding vulnerable communities in the implementation of the LDC work programme with a view to producing publications on the issues. The LEG agreed to first develop a publication with a focus on gender, which will address the operational details of how to integrate gender into the NAP process. It will address the following issues: understanding gender-sensitive adaptation; methods for integrating gender considerations into adaptation; and integration of gender into the NAP process. 40. The LEG decided to produce a first draft of the publication by the end of 2013 and to have the publication finalized by the fortieth sessions of the subsidiary bodies. The LEG decided that the publication will be produced in close consultation with gender experts, agencies and organizations, taking into account relevant experiences and examples. 41. The LEG also decided to prepare a separate publication on vulnerable communities subsequent to the publication on gender. J. Monitoring and evaluation of national adaptation programmes of action, the least developed countries work programme and the national adaptation plan process 42. The LEG discussed early design concepts for further developing a tool for monitoring and evaluating progress, effectiveness and gaps (the PEG M&E tool) in the NAPAs, the LDC work programme and the NAP process at the national and global levels, building on its previous work on the subject. It decided to produce a draft technical paper outlining how the PEG M&E tool can be used as an immediate next step towards fully developing the tool. The PEG M&E tool is intended to provide operational guidance on monitoring and evaluation at the national level and will seek to maximize synergy with detailed monitoring and evaluation work at the project and programme levels, as well as with broader work on adaptation. 43. The PEG M&E tool will be applied to the following 10 essential functions that the NAP process should deliver to countries: (a) Helping governments to provide national leadership and coordination of adaptation efforts at all levels and to act as the main interface with regional and international mechanisms; (b) The collection, compilation, processing and dissemination of data, information and knowledge on climate change and relevant development aspects in support of adaptation planning and implementation; (c) Identifying and addressing gaps and needs related to capacity for the successful design and implementation of adaptation; (d) Assessing climate development linkages and needs and supporting the integration of climate change adaptation into national and subnational development and sectoral planning (through policies, projects and programmes); (e) Analysing climate data and assessing vulnerabilities to climate change and identifying adaptation options at the sector, subnational, national and other appropriate levels; (f) Appraising adaptation options to support decision-making on adaptation investment plans and development planning; (g) Promoting and facilitating the prioritization of climate change adaptation in national planning; (h) Facilitating the implementation of adaptation at all levels through appropriate policies, projects and programmes, taking into account opportunities for synergy; (i) Facilitating the monitoring, review and updating of adaptation plans over time, to ensure progress and the effectiveness of adaptation efforts and to demonstrate how gaps are being addressed; (j) Coordinating reporting and outreach on the NAP process to stakeholders nationally and internationally on progress to the Convention. 44. The LEG will look at how each of those essential functions needs to be supported by structural capacity in the countries and at what kind of targets and indicators countries could set, based on which progress towards the full enablement of the functions could be monitored. 45. The LEG will consider a full prototype of the tool by December 2013. The LEG will then test the tool through a case study, review it and produce a technical paper to introduce it by its next meeting (March 2014). K. Support of coherence and synergy of adaptation under the Convention 1. Linkages with other bodies under the Convention 46. Following an invitation by the Adaptation Committee, the LEG nominated one of its members to serve in the Adaptation Committee's ad hoc group on modalities and guidelines for NAPs for non-LDC developing countries. The Adaptation Committee also nominated two of its members to be part of the advisory group for further developing the methodologies for capturing best practices and lessons learned in addressing adaptation, and for the development of NAP Central, on the invitation of the LEG. 47. In addition, the LEG participated in the 5th meeting of the Technology Executive Committee, and in an expert meeting on technology road maps, which were both held in March 2013 in Bonn, Germany. 48. The LEG decided to share updates on progress in the implementation of its work programme with the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE), through its members that are also members of the CGE. 2. Revision of the technical paper on regional synergy 49. The LEG discussed an approach for the revision of its technical paper on regional synergy, which was developed in 2005, with a broadened scope to cover NAPAs, the LDC work programme and the NAP process. The LEG noted that the paper would need to address the following: (a) options for promoting common approaches in addressing adaptation; (b) access to and use of data, methods and tools at the regional level; (c) sharing of experiences, best practices and lessons learned; and (d) exploring and promoting economies of scale. The LEG noted that the paper would also need to address the role of the LEG in regional synergy and the LEG strategy for promoting regional synergy. Key partners in undertaking this work would include national institutions, regional organizations, centres and networks. 3. Revision of the technical paper on synergy among multilateral environmental agreements 50. Similar to the revision of the technical paper on regional synergy as described in paragraph 49 above, the LEG discussed an approach for revising its technical paper on synergy among multilateral environmental agreements, which was developed in 2005. The LEG discussed that the paper should draw on existing work undertaken under the three Rio Conventions, including by the Joint Liaison Group between the secretariats of the conventions. The LEG discussed that the revised paper could also look at synergy with other international agreements such as the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat (Ramsar Convention). The LEG decided to finalize the revised paper by June 2014. L. Mobilization of organizations, regional centres and networks 51. The LEG discussed its ongoing efforts on mobilization of organizations, regional centres and networks with a view to exploring ways on how to engage others that have not been engaged before, ensuring a balance across regions and issues. It decided to continue to reach out to a wide range of organizations, regional centres and networks in supporting LDCs, taking into account feedback from the participants during the regional training workshops on the value of engaging regional entities. 52. The LEG noted the need to reach out to organizations, regional centres and networks on how they could contribute to the work of the LEG, as a way to ensure that their inputs are aligned with the work of the LEG and with the work on support to the LDCs under the Convention. 53. The LEG also noted that the engagement of organizations, regional centres and networks does not only contribute to the specific activities of the LEG but also sensitizes those organizations regarding the work that LDCs are doing on NAPAs and NAPs and of the LEG, and the support needs of the LDCs in this regard. The LEG noted that this would encourage those organizations to raise awareness on the work of the LEG and to address LDC needs through their own initiatives. M. Discussion with the Global Environment Facility and its agencies 54. The LEG held discussions with representatives of three GEF agencies (FAO, UNDP and UNEP) that had taken part in the LEG regional training workshop for Asian LDCs that took place just before the LEG meeting. The discussion touched on the latest efforts in providing support to the LDCs for the implementation of NAPAs and the LDC work programme, with a focus on support for launching NAP processes at the national level in the LDCs. 55. The agencies provided an update on progress on the global support programme for the NAPs for the LDCs. It was indicated that subsequent to the approval of the project by the GEF for funding, the following activities were undertaken to move the support programme forward: (a) An online survey was administered to determine country-specific priority needs for advancing the NAP process. The survey received 150 responses from around 56 countries, of which 40 were LDCs; (b) The board of the global support programme met on 16 and 17 August in Bangkok, Thailand, to discuss its workplan and budget. At the same meeting, the board offered support to all countries that requested support; (c) A roster of international technical specialists in climate change adaptation, public administration, economics and related fields is being set up to ensure that specialists are at hand that will support efforts led by UNDP and UNEP on capacity-building in the LDCs to integrate adaptation into national and sectoral development planning; (d) Coordination is being advanced with partner agencies to ensure that all available support activities to countries that are relevant for NAPs are leveraged to support as many LDCs as possible. 56. The global support programme is planned to run for two years, starting from 2013. 57. The LEG provided feedback to the agencies to ensure that the global support programme works towards maximizing support to all LDCs and that the global support programme takes into account country-specific needs, circumstances and progress that may have already been made. 58. Representatives of UNDP and UNEP also mentioned that a second project is planned that aims at supporting the LDCs on the implementation of the other elements of the LDC work programme other than NAPAs. The agencies agreed to share the latest documents with the LEG for comments and inputs. 59. The representatives also highlighted the activities aimed at strengthening the capacities of the LDCs to address adaptation at the national level. 60. The LEG and the agencies agreed to continue to collaborate on supporting the LDCs and to continue to explore ways and means to engage other agencies that were not present at the meeting. The agencies agreed to report on progress on the global support programme to the LDCs through the LEG. N. Interaction with other organizations and experts 61. The LEG also engaged three other organizations at the meeting, namely CI, GWP and UNITAR. 62. CI and GWP were engaged on the work on supplementary materials for the technical guidelines. The two organizations presented material to the LEG that could be considered for the supplementary materials. The LEG provided feedback to the organizations in line with the guidelines for the supplements presented in chapter II.F above. 63. UNITAR was engaged in order that the LEG could learn more about its work and how it could potentially benefit the LDCs. The representative of UNITAR highlighted how it provides learning through various means. The LEG took note of UNITAR's activities for supporting learning and agreed to consider them when discussing different training approaches. O. Interaction with the Government of Cambodia on the national adaptation programme of action and the national adaptation plan process 64. Representatives of the Government of Cambodia shared their experiences on mobilizing and managing climate finance as a way to provide examples on how other LDCs may learn from their experiences in mobilizing and managing financial resources for the NAP process. They indicated that Cambodia has mobilized over USD 200 million from multilateral and bilateral agencies and from ongoing projects and programmes at the national level. Through the Cambodia Climate Change Alliance, a multidonor trust fund of USD 11 million has been established under the national climate change committee with interim management by UNDP. The fund supports a policy and knowledge management project at the national level and 20 pilot projects at the subnational level. It promotes partnerships between the government and non-governmental organizations, including universities, in order to build capacity to address climate change. The representatives explained the value of pooling resources into a trust fund, which included reduced transaction costs and management requirements, and assurance that funding is aligned with national priorities. Cambodia also highlighted its pilot activities on integrating climate finance in subnational plans and budgets. 65. The LEG took note of the experiences of Cambodia and agreed to consider them on relevant case studies to feed into the NAP process. III. Modalities for implementing the Least Developed Countries Expert Group work programme for 2013 - 2014 66. The LEG further discussed the most appropriate modalities for implementing its work programme for 2013 - 2014 in order to enhance support provided to the LDCs, strengthen collaboration with other organizations and to promote effective outreach. It decided to undertake the following specific activities, as a way to facilitate work on core technical issues, and in line with the complementary approaches for the delivery of the work programme as elaborated during its 23rd meeting: (a) Development of a comprehensive strategy for future training on NAPs that would include revision and expansion of topics to be covered, and development of training materials, including those that can be delivered through e-learning as well as materials suitable for training of trainers. Those materials would be developed in collaboration with other organizations; (b) Work to support interested organizations in their development of supplementary materials to the NAP technical guidelines, by applying the guiding recommendations in chapter II.F above; (c) Implementation of in-depth case studies in the LDCs that address topics and issues covered in the LEG work programme, in order to inform, enrich and test the various products that are under development (such as the technical papers, tools and information systems); (d) Development of technical and information papers to inform the work by the LEG on NAPAs, the LDC work programme and the NAP process; (e) Development of NAP Central to facilitate outreach and support efforts of the LEG and to offer a platform for exchange of experience and interaction among NAP teams; (f) Deliberation on some of the activities of the LEG at a technical meeting in early 2014, involving invited experts, in order to further elaborate on technical aspects. Members of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group as at 29 August 2013 Mr. Abias Huongo Angola Mr. Ibila Djibril Benin Mr. Thinley Namgyel Bhutan Mr. Matti Nummelin Finland Mr. Mphethe Tongwane Lesotho Mr. Benon Bibbu Yassin Malawi Mr. Batu Krishna Uprety Nepal Mr. Jan Verhagen Netherlands Ms. Marianne Karlsen Norway Mr. Douglas Yee Solomon Islands Mr. Fredrick Manyika United Republic of Tanzania Mr. Paul Abiziou Tchinguilou Togo Ms. Pepetua Election Latasi Tuvalu 