%%%INTERNAL SECURITY|KYRGYZSTAN|REGIONAL SECURITY|CENTRAL ASIA|TERRORISM|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/54/283 S/1999/927 30 August 1999 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH GENERAL ASSEMBLY SECURITY COUNCIL Fifty-fourth session Fifty-fourth year Item 161 of the provisional agendaA/54/150. MEASURES TO ELIMINATE INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM Letter dated 30 August 1999 from the Permanent Representative of Kyrgyzstan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit the text of a joint declaration by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan, signed on 28 August 1999 (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council and of the General Assembly under item 161 of the provisional agenda. (Signed) Z. ESHMAMBETOVA Ambassador Permanent Representative English Page Annex [Original: Russian] JOINT DECLARATION The ministers of foreign affairs and defence and the heads of national security services of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan met at Osh, Kyrgyzstan, on 28 August 1999. During the meeting a thorough exchange of views was held on the situation in southern Kyrgyzstan and a plan for joint action to suppress terrorist groups was drawn up. Basing themselves on the Treaty of Eternal Friendship between the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic and the Republic of Uzbekistan and on joint political and legal documents adopted within the framework of the Central Asian Economic Association, the sides affirmed the unity of their countries' positions regarding the criminal activities of bandit groups in southern Kyrgyzstan, which are nothing more than terrorist acts supported by organizations in other countries that are unrecognized by the international community. According to reliable information, the bandit groups are comprised of nationals not only of Central Asian countries but of a whole range of other countries, which is indicative of international terrorism and extremism. They have no ethnic affiliation and pose a general threat to all States of the region. The parties are convinced that the action of the international terrorists is aimed at destabilizing the situation in Central Asia through the use of such harsh methods as hostage-taking and the killing of peaceful civilians. The countries of Central Asia, which are endeavouring to build and develop civilized, democratic and secular societies, are fully aware that Islamic extremist ideologues and militants are attempting to turn back history, even though their efforts are clearly futile. As members of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of the Islamic Conference and other international organizations, the countries of Central Asia enjoy the broad and unwavering support of the international community in their opposition to international terrorism, organized crime and drug trafficking. The Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan strongly support the efforts of the Kyrgyz Republic to suppress the terrorist groups and stand ready to provide all forms of assistance, including military assistance, to the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. The sides appeal to the public in their countries to make, through united efforts, a fitting rebuff to the bandits' brazen raids and declare that terrorist acts, accompanied by illegal border crossings and violence against the civilian population, will be countered with the most severe and decisive measures, in accordance with the norms of international law; they also express their conviction that the world community fully supports the joint and coordinated action taken by Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan in respect of international terrorism. For the Republic of Kazakhstan: For the Kyrgyz Republic: (Signed) Kassymzhomart TOKAEV (Signed) Muratbek IMANALIEV For the Republic of Tajikistan: For the Republic of Uzbekistan: (Signed) Talbal NAZAROV (Signed) Abdulaziz KAMILOV 