%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|POLITICAL CONDITIONS|MALI|

Letter dated 25 February 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 12 February 2013 from Mr. Dioncounda Traoré, interim President of the Republic of Mali (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) BAN Ki-moon [Original: French] I would first of all like to express my gratitude for your efforts aimed at the consolidation of peace and stability in Mali. Your decision to establish a multidisciplinary United Nations presence in Bamako demonstrates your full commitment to the Malian people. As you know, the actions of the Malian armed forces, supported by the French armed forces, have led to the containment of the terrorist threat in Mali. The deployment of the African-led International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) will thus begin in this context. However, the objective of liberating the territory of Mali has not yet been reached and peace has not yet been established. The presence of terrorists in one part of our territory also remains a threat to sub-regional and even international security. It is therefore essential that the presence of the international community in Mali be designed to support first the restoration of territorial integrity, peace, and then the country's stabilization. In that regard, I request your support for the rapid deployment of AFISMA in accordance with the provisions of United Nations Security Council resolution 2085 (2012) in order to restore the authority and sovereignty of the Malian State throughout its territory. The achievement of these objectives will lead towards the transformation of AFISMA into a United Nations stabilization and peacekeeping operation. Furthermore, we remain convinced of the need for political dialogue among Malians. The adoption of the road map on 29 January 2013 represents a decisive step forward in the political process that should lead to the holding of elections, which I hope will take place before 31 July, and the continuation of the inter-Malian political dialogue, including all the communities of northern Mali in respect for territorial integrity and secularism. It is important for the United Nations Office in Mali to support us in this process through a facilitation and advisory role. Moreover, we are very pleased with the cooperation we are developing with the multidisciplinary Office you have just established in Bamako. Welcoming once again the willingness of the international community to assist Mali in coming through the current crisis, we hope that its efforts will continue in close collaboration with the Malian authorities. In that regard, I have the honour and pleasure to inform you that a high-level mission will travel in the coming days to Paris and New York to meet with the French authorities, yourself, the United Nations Secretariat and the members of the Security Council for the purpose of discussing matters relating to international support for Mali, including support from the United Nations. (Signed) Dioncounda Traoré 