%%%PEACE AGREEMENTS|DEMILITARIZED ZONES|SUDAN|SOUTH SUDAN|

Letter dated 16 April 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to convey to you a copy of the joint communiqué of the meeting between the President of the Republic of the Sudan, H.E. Omar Hassan alBashir, and the President of the Republic of South Sudan, H.E. Salva Kiir Mayardit (see annex), which took place on Friday, 12 April 2013, during the official visit to Juba by H.E. Omar Hassan al-Bashir in response to a kind invitation extended by H.E. Salva Kiir Mayardit. The two presidents affirmed their commitment to implement the cooperation agreements signed by the two States in Addis Ababa on 27 September 2012. They also expressed their satisfaction with the progress achieved in the implementation of the matrix. The two presidents also discussed the way forward regarding the remaining issues, and decided to continue their efforts to resolve the Abyei issue in accordance with the implementation matrix. I should be grateful if you would circulate the present letter and its annex as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Daffa-Alla Elhag Ali Osman Permanent Representative [Original: Arabic] Joint communiqué Today, Friday 12 April 2013, H.E. the President of the Republic of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, led a high-level delegation on an official visit to the Republic of South Sudan at the kind invitation of H.E. General Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of the Republic of South Sudan. The two presidents chaired official discussions at which were agreed all important pending aspects of the matrix that was recently signed by the two sides in a cordial atmosphere, which has had a positive outcome. During the discussions, both sides affirmed their genuine and sincere commitment to implementation of the joint cooperation agreement that was concluded in Addis Ababa on 27 September 2012 in the same constructive spirit that governs their relations. Both presidents expressed their complete satisfaction with the progress made in implementing all items on the agreement implementation matrix and commended, in particular, the smooth progress made in implementing the agreements on security arrangements, oil and cooperation between the two countries' central banks. They also requested that all joint mechanisms and committees should expedite the strengthening of relations between the two countries in all fields. The two presidents further discussed means of effecting progress on the other pending issues and decided to continue joint endeavours to resolve the Abyei issue in accordance with the agreement implementation matrix concluded by their countries. They stated that they were quite satisfied with the mechanism for their summit meetings and had agreed that a joint ministerial committee should be established, headed by the two deputy presidents and comprising a specific number of ministers, with a view to accelerating the taking of decisions designed to develop relations between the two countries. President al-Bashir expressed his thanks and appreciation to the Government and people of South Sudan for the warmth with which he and his delegation had been received and issued an invitation to H.E. Salva Kiir to visit Khartoum in the near future, in order to expedite joint efforts to strengthen relations between the two fraternal countries and promote constructive cooperation efforts. Juba, 12 April 2013 