%%%REGIONAL SECURITY|PEACEBUILDING|NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION|REPUBLIC OF KOREA|COUNTER-TERRORISM|AFRICA|ASIA|EUROPE|MIDDLE EAST|

Letter dated 26 April 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Pakistan held the presidency of the Security Council for the month of January 2013. An assessment of the work of the Council has been prepared under my supervision in consultation with other members of the Council (see annex). I should be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Masood Khan Assessment of the work of the Security Council during the presidency of Pakistan (January 2013) Introduction Under the presidency of Pakistan in January 2013, the Security Council had an intensive programme of work, covering a wide range of agenda items. The Council considered a number of issues including the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan/South Sudan, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Côte d'Ivoire, Burundi, West Africa, Libya, Cyprus, the Middle East including the Palestinian question, non-proliferation/Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Haiti, and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia. The situations in the Syrian Arab Republic and Mali also remained under the Council's attention in view of the unfolding developments there. The Council held thematic open debates on counter-terrorism (15 January) and United Nations peacekeeping operations (21 January), both significant areas of the Council's work. The debates led to the adoption of important outcomes. The Council responded to the terrorist attack in Algeria. The Council also discussed the rule of law. Also in January, the Council undertook a mission to Yemen to demonstrate its support for the transition under way in that country. The Council concluded its work for the month with a wrap-up session held on 31 January. During the month of January, the Security Council held 16 meetings and 18 consultations of the whole. The Council adopted four resolutions, one presidential statement and six statements to the press. Resolution 2086 (2013) on United Nations peacekeeping operations, adopted on 21 January, was co-sponsored by all 15 Council members and was the first substantive resolution on peacekeeping in 11 years. The Council also adopted resolution 2087 (2013) relating to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on 22 January, and resolutions 2088 (2013) and 2089 (2013) renewing the mandates of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic and the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, respectively, on 24 January. On 15 January, the Council adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/1) on a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism. The Council issued statements to the press on the Central African Republic (4 and 11 January), Mali (10 January), Algeria (18 January), Haiti (28 January) and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia (29 January). Africa Central African Republic In view of the rapidly deteriorating situation in the Central African Republic, the Security Council convened consultations of the whole on 3 January. The Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Jeffrey Feltman, briefed the Council on the security and humanitarian situation. He reported that the Seleka coalition of armed groups was closing in on Bangui. Most of the United Nations staff had been relocated to neighbouring Cameroon. Council members expressed concern at the situation and reiterated their call for an immediate end of the rebel offensive. They underlined the need for a political resolution of the crisis and urged all parties to engage in the peace negotiations in Libreville under the auspices of the Economic Community of Central African States. Some members also called for reviewing the role of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) in view of the latest developments. The Council issued a statement to the press on 4 January on the situation in the Central African Republic. On 11 January, the Council heard a briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic and on the activities of BINUCA. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of BINUCA, Margaret Vogt, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab Bangura, briefed the Council. Speaking via videoconference from Libreville, the Special Representative for the Central African Republic briefed the Council on the agreements between the Government and the opposition military and political movements signed in Libreville during the talks held there from 8 to 11 January. The Special Representative on Sexual Violence briefed the Council on her recent visit to the Central African Republic and highlighted the need for addressing the conflict-related sexual violence in the country. In the ensuing consultations of the whole, Council members welcomed the signing of the Libreville agreements and emphasized the need for their full implementation. Members also welcomed the facilitation and support provided by BINUCA during the Libreville negotiations. The future mandate of BINUCA also came under discussion. Council members called for safe and unhindered humanitarian access to the affected populations as well as ending human rights violations, particularly the targeting of ethnic minorities and violence against children, and emphasized that perpetrators of such violations must be held accountable. The Council issued a statement to the press after the meeting. On 24 January, the Council adopted resolution 2088 (2013), by which it extended the mandate of BINUCA until 31 January 2014. This was against the backdrop of the month-long crisis during which rebel groups had advanced on the capital Bangui before agreeing to a ceasefire and signing a declaration of principle and political agreements in Libreville on 11 January. Among other things, the Council called on the Government, the Seleka coalition, armed groups and the democratic opposition to abide by their commitments, and requested BINUCA to work with the parties to facilitate the full implementation of the Libreville agreements. Democratic Republic of the Congo/United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo In consultations of the whole on 8 January, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Hervé Ladsous, briefed the Council on the proposed plan to deploy unmanned aerial systems in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Consultations of the whole were convened against the backdrop of the letter dated 27 December 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council that identified additional capacities required by the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) by inter alia improving the Mission's surveillance capability through the use of external imagery/electronic equipment, including that provided by unmanned aerial systems. The Under-Secretary-General briefed the Council on the various legal, technical and operational aspects of the deployment of the unmanned aerial systems. He said that the systems would be deployed under the command and control of MONUSCO and would be used only for surveillance purposes. Several Council members sought further information and clarifications on the operational modalities and various legal and technical aspects of the deployment of the unmanned aerial systems. The need for an early deployment of the systems in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo was supported by several members. Sudan/South Sudan The Council held biweekly consultations of the whole on the Sudan and South Sudan on 8 and 22 January, pursuant to resolution 2046 (2012). The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan, Haile Menkerios, briefed the Council on 8 January. The Director of the Coordination and Response Division of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, John Ging, also briefed the Council on the humanitarian situation in the Blue Nile and South Kordofan States of the Sudan. The Special Envoy updated the Council on the outcome of the summit between the Presidents of the Sudan and South Sudan, held in Addis Ababa on 4 and 5 January. He reported that the two sides had failed to achieve a major breakthrough during the summit. However, he expressed optimism at the continued engagement of the two sides on the outstanding issues. He mentioned that some incidents had been reported on the border between the Sudan and South Sudan but the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) could not verify them. Council members had a mixed response vis-à-vis the outcome of the summit. The Director of the Coordination and Response Division, in his briefing, informed the Council regarding the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Blue Nile and South Kordofan States. He underlined the lack of progress in the implementation of the tripartite agreement and called upon the members of the Council to scale up their pressure on the Government of the Sudan and SPLM-North. Council members expressed concern at the situation and stressed the need to start direct political negotiations between the two sides as well as to address the prevailing humanitarian situation in the two areas. In consultations of the whole on 22 January, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations informed the Council that little progress had been made in the context of implementation of the agreements already signed by the two sides. Some Council members expressed frustration at the lack of meaningful progress during the negotiations and underlined the need for the involvement of the Council in order to urge and pressure the two sides to comply with resolution 2046 (2012). Some other members underlined the need for giving space and time to both sides in order to reach mutually acceptable solutions. Members were unanimous in expressing concern on the shooting down of an UNMISS (Russian) helicopter in South Sudan and in calling for an urgent investigation into the matter. African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur On 24 January, the Council held a briefing followed by consultations of the whole on the operations of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Edmond Mulet, briefed the Council about the deteriorating security situation in Northern Darfur. The Council was informed that some progress, albeit limited, had been made in the context of the implementation process of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Some Council members expressed concern at the slow pace of implementation of the Document as well as the lack of funding for it. Some members also expressed concern regarding the destabilizing activities of the militias and non-signatory armed opposition movements in Darfur. The issue of delay in visas, restrictions on the freedom of movement and the safety and security of UNAMID personnel also came under discussion. Mali On 10 January, the Council met in consultations of the whole to consider the deteriorating situation in Mali following the southward advance on the central city of Konna by a coalition of extremists and terrorist groups from a stronghold in northern Mali. The Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs informed the Council that the political climate in Bamako had rapidly deteriorated following the announcement by the President, Dioncounda Traoré, in his end-of-year speech on 31 December, that the Prime Minister would, in the following days, present a road map to the National Assembly on the two priorities to end the transition, without making any reference to the National Dialogue. This prompted a strong negative reaction from many political and civil society actors, including pro-putsch groups such as the Coordination of Patriotic Organizations in Mali, as well as other opposition elements. The security situation had further deteriorated as elements of Ansar Dine supported by Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb moved southwards and captured the town of Konna. The Malian security forces withdrew from the town after initially resisting the attack. At this juncture, Interim President Traoré sent a request to France for urgent military assistance to deal with the situation. France informed the Council that it was considering the request of Mali for immediate military assistance, in view of the serious threat posed to regional and international peace and security. Council members expressed grave concern over the serious deterioration of the situation including the terrorist threat in Mali and underlined the urgency of addressing the crisis. Expressing their determination to pursue full implementation of the Council's resolutions on Mali, in particular resolution 2085 (2012), Council members called for rapid deployment of the African-led International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) and for the immediate issuance of an agreed political road map for negotiations with non-extremist Malians in the north and for full restoration of democratic governance. Council members were in general of the view that it was the sovereign right of Mali to seek assistance from friendly countries to deal with the security situation in the country. The Council issued a statement to the press following the consultations. In consultations of the whole held on 14 January, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs informed the Council that, at the request of Mali, French air assets had been deployed to halt the advance of extremists towards the south. He noted that the United Nations-administered trust funds for contributions to AFISMA and the Malian security forces would be opened the next day. He underlined the importance of pursuing the political track and full implementation of resolution 2085 (2012) to prevent a slide into further unrest. The AFISMA Force Commander had been deployed in Bamako, and a number of West African countries were promising to contribute troops to AFISMA. A donors' conference was being envisaged late in January or early in February. France informed Council members that it had undertaken "Operation Serval" as the survival of Mali was at stake. France had sent letters to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council on 11 January informing them of the forces it had deployed in support of Mali. It was acting with international legitimacy, under the Charter of the United Nations and at the request of the President of Mali. The rebels were a dangerous and ambitious force. They were continuing the offensive despite operations by the French Air Force. France would stay in the country only as long as required, at the request of the Government of Mali, and to prepare conditions for the rapid deployment of AFISMA. Council members generally welcomed the French intervention. Expressing concern at the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in Mali, they called for the rapid deployment of AFISMA. They stressed the need to reinforce the political track and called for full implementation of resolution 2085 (2012). Some Council members reported on the support they were providing to the French military action and to the Malian authorities. One Council member noted that the French operations should be carried within the overall context of resolution 2085 (2012) and within a restricted time frame. Several Council members called for continued military planning on the modalities of the deployment of AFISMA in the light of current circumstances. On 22 January, the Council held a briefing followed by consultations of the whole on Mali. In his briefing, the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs noted that, with the initiation of French-led military operations, Mali was at a turning point. The Secretary-General had applauded France for its initiative and had asked the Secretariat to move quickly to implement resolution 2085 (2012). As a result of the French intervention, three towns, Diabaly, Douentza and Konna, were now under the control of Malian authorities. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the European Union had asked the Council for early authorization of the logistical support package for AFISMA. Troops from several African countries had already deployed in Bamako and several other countries were ready to deploy troops. Owing to the accelerated deployment of troops, urgent support was needed as the deployed contingents had limited capacity for self-sustainment. The European Union mission would be on the ground by mid-February to support the training and capacity-building of the Malian forces. In a letter submitted to the Council pursuant to resolution 2085 (2012) concerning the funding of AFISMA, the Secretary-General had identified three options, namely, bilateral funding, United Nations-assessed funding and a mix of bilateral and United Nations-assessed funding. In his letter, the Secretary-General had also raised concerns about the safety and security of United Nations personnel if the United Nations was involved in supporting combat operations. The Under-Secretary-General underlined the need for impressing upon the Malian authorities the necessity to make progress on the political process including finalization of the road map for transition and return to democracy and dialogue with groups that distanced themselves from terrorists. He stated that Mali was interested in a small United Nations presence in the country. He expressed serious concern about the humanitarian situation in the north. Besides Mali, the representatives of several countries of the region addressed the Council and expressed appreciation for the action by France in support of the Malian authorities. They requested the Council to urgently authorize the logistical support package for AFISMA. The representative of the European Union reiterated commitment to financial assistance for AFISMA through mobilization of the African Peace Facility and informed the Council that the European Union training mission, focused on the training and capacity-building of Malian forces, would be deployed by February. In the ensuing consultations, France provided an update on the actions by its forces in Mali. It noted that the operation had stopped the advance of the terrorists towards the south. French forces had taken back Diabaly, Douentza and Konna. Gradually the African forces would take over and stabilize the cities taken over from the terrorists. The Council needed to act quickly on the logistical support package, which could be based on the outcome of the donors' conference of 29 January. Council members reiterated support for the military action by France and welcomed the accelerated deployment of AFISMA. They called for the implementation of resolution 2085 (2012). While noting the options proposed in the letter from the Secretary-General concerning the funding of AFISMA, which were being examined, Council members underlined the urgency of early action in this regard. Council members also stressed the need for simultaneous progress by the Malian authorities on the political track. They called for the early finalization of the road map for transition to democracy and the need for dialogue with groups in the north that had distanced themselves from terrorists. In this regard several Council members stressed that the Malian authorities should not use the presence of foreign forces as an excuse to postpone the political process. One Council member was of the view that, in the light of the changed military situation, the Council should cohere around a shared understanding of the AFISMA mission, noting that the security situation had changed fundamentally since the Council adopted resolution 2085 (2012). The possibility of a United Nations blue helmet operation could be explored, which would address the need to support the French forces, stabilize liberated towns, and ensure a stable funding stream for AFISMA. In this regard another member was of the view that it was too early to say that the mission could be converted into a peacekeeping operation. Côte d'Ivoire On 17 January, the Council received a briefing from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI), Albert Koenders, who informed the Council that Côte d'Ivoire was making steady progress in a number of areas under the new Government. He highlighted the establishment of the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration authority as well as steps taken by the Government to implement the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme. The Government had also taken some important steps to extend State authority to all areas of the country. Economic growth indicators had been impressive during the past several months. At the same time, while cautioning that the country still faced numerous challenges, the Special Representative underlined in particular the need for addressing the underlying causes that had resulted in post-election violence 18 months previously. He emphasized that lasting stability in Côte d'Ivoire hinged on successful national reconciliation as well as effective implementation of the security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes. He called on the Security Council to remain closely focused on Côte d'Ivoire in the post-conflict, peacebuilding phase. In regard to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, he stressed that the process should be politically balanced and based on credible and reliable data. Simultaneously there was a need for effective reform of the justice sector. He also informed the Council about the steps taken to strengthen the inter-mission cooperation between UNOCI and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). The representative of Côte d'Ivoire highlighted the achievements made by the Government in the past 18 months, including in security sector reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and national reconciliation. He supported the conclusion of the report of the Secretary-General that, in view of the volatile situation and the recent attacks by pro-Gbagbo elements against the government forces, the planned drawdown of UNOCI should be deferred until the completion of the technical assessment mission. During consultations of the whole, the Council members cautiously welcomed the progress made by Côte d'Ivoire towards peacebuilding. They stressed the need for addressing the existing security and political challenges as well as the underlying causes of conflict in Côte d'Ivoire. Political reconciliation between the Government and the opposition was emphasized. Several Council members underlined the need for free and fair local elections and for effective implementation of the security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes. Council members expressed serious concern over continuing violations of human rights, in particular sexual violence against women and girls, and emphasized that such violations must cease immediately and perpetrators should be held accountable irrespective of their political affiliations. They stressed the importance of enhanced inter-mission cooperation between UNOCI and UNMIL as well as coordination between Ghana, Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire on cross-border issues. Some Council members were of the view that UNOCI could not be maintained at its current strength indefinitely and this should be reviewed after the visit of the technical assessment mission. However, some other members were of the view that the Secretary-General's decision to defer the drawdown of the Operation's strength was justified under the circumstances. Responding to questions raised by the Council members, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General mentioned the establishment of a logistical base in Côte d'Ivoire for supporting operations in Mali in the coming days. On the issue of electoral support for the holding of local elections in Côte d'Ivoire, he said that the mission's electoral teams had been disbanded in line with the decision of the Security Council and therefore the mission's role would be limited to providing technical assistance. Burundi The Council held a briefing and consultations on the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) on 24 January. In his briefing, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of BNUB, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, informed the Council that, despite notable progress in several areas, the situation in Burundi required the continued engagement of the international community through the presence of BNUB, especially in view of the shrinking "political space" for the extra-parliamentary opposition parties, the presence and proliferation of weapons and the volatility in the neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo. During consultations, Council members in general expressed support for the extension of the mandate of BNUB for another 12 months. They also called on the Government of Burundi to reach out to the extra-parliamentary opposition before the 2015 elections and to carry out investigations into the reports of extrajudicial killings and violations of human rights. West Africa (UNOWA) On 25 January, the Council received a briefing from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), Said Djinnit, who expressed concern over the situation in Mali, which had implications for the entire Sahel region. During the reporting period, he had also provided assistance to the negotiations between the Government of Mali and rebel groups in accordance with the mandate given to him by the Council in resolution 2085 (2012). The talks had to be called off after Ansar Dine revoked its commitment to non-violence. There was a need for a new framework for restarting the negotiations. The Special Representative noted that the French intervention had been widely welcomed in the region. African countries were interested in the speedy deployment of AFISMA. He urged the Security Council to provide maximum support for this purpose. He stressed that the political track in Mali should work in tandem with the military track. The Government of Mali needed to finalize the road map for transition to democracy and enter into negotiations with Malian groups with no ties to terrorism. It was important to encourage the Malian authorities to move in that direction. The Special Representative also briefed the Council about his efforts to address other challenges in the region including combating organized crime, drug trafficking, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, and providing assistance in security sector reform and the organization of elections. Council members expressed support for the role of UNOWA and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in assisting West Africa. They noted that, although several countries in the region had registered progress, the region continued to face many challenges. They expressed serious concern over the situation in Mali. There was reiteration of support for the French intervention to address the rapidly deteriorating situation in the country. Underlining the importance of simultaneously pursuing the political and military tracks, they called on the Special Representative to continue assisting Mali and ECOWAS in efforts to restart the negotiation with groups in the north. Council members expressed serious concern over the reported human rights violations by elements in the Malian army and called for prosecution of those responsible for such violations. They also called for the strengthening of the United Nations human rights monitoring presence on the ground. Several Council members enquired about the progress on the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region and emphasized its early finalization. Council members also urged the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to continue providing support to the region in dealing with other challenges, including security sector reform, the holding of elections, combating piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, organized crime and drug trafficking. Libya In the bimonthly briefing to the Council on 29 January, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Tarek Mitri, noted that, although Libya was making progress, it continued to face many challenges. The General National Congress was debating the way forward for the drafting of the constitution. The main issue was whether to elect or appoint the members of the constitution drafting body. UNSMIL had urged the authorities to make the process as inclusive as possible. The Special Representative observed that the security situation in the country, especially in Benghazi and eastern parts of the country, remained grave. Some progress had been made towards the demobilization of revolutionary brigades and 20,000 revolutionary brigade members had enlisted with the police under a programme initiated by the Ministry of the Interior. The issues of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform were considered at a conference held in London in December 2012. The reform of the security sector in Libya and coordination of international assistance would again be discussed at another conference to be held in Paris on 12 February 2013. UNSMIL was providing assistance to this process and would submit a white paper in February. The Special Representative stressed that there was a serious need to improve border security, which was key to controlling the flow of weapons and persons across Libya's borders. National reconciliation was another imperative the Government needed to pursue. The situation in Bani Walid had stabilized. The Libyan authorities also needed to make progress on the cases of conflict-related detainees and bring detention centres under their control. Expressing overall satisfaction with the current mandate of UNSMIL, he noted that he would suggest some minor adjustments. He informed the Council that the Prime Minister, Ali Zeidan, had expressed his intention to participate in the Council briefing in March. In the ensuing closed consultations, Council members acknowledged that there were positive developments in Libya. However, much more had to be done to address the challenges facing the country. Several Council members noted the commitment of the new Libyan Government to address those challenges. They appreciated the work done by UNSMIL and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Council members underlined the need for an inclusive process for drafting the constitution and taking on board the views of all regions and minorities. Several Council members enquired about the difficulties being encountered in the establishment of the constitutional body and the various options being considered. Council members expressed concern over the security situation in the country, in particular in Benghazi and the eastern part of the country. In this regard they stressed the need for demobilizing the revolutionary brigades, controlling weapons proliferation and improving border security. Some Council members expressed concern about the flow of weapons from Libya into the region and stressed that the arms embargo should be strictly implemented. Council members also expressed concern over the situation of conflict-related detainees and stressed that all detention centres should be brought under government control. UNSMIL should assist the government in this regard. They also noted the need for pursuing national reconciliation while ensuring the imperative of bringing to justice those responsible for human rights violations. Some members stressed that the Libyan authorities should extend full cooperation to the International Criminal Court. Americas Haiti On 22 January, the Council, in consultations, heard a briefing on the situation in Haiti by the outgoing Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mariano Fernández. The Special Representative updated the Council on recent developments in the political, security and justice sectors. He stated that the political situation in Haiti had worsened and it was likely that the legislative, municipal and local elections would be further delayed and that such a delay could also affect the security situation. He underlined the importance of timely elections to consolidate the political process. Relatively slow growth in the Haitian economy was due in part to limited absorptive capacity. Unemployment and economic hardships could reverse the recent gains in security and stability. In the area of security, the Special Representative noted that the situation was calm but fragile, and required the continued role of MINUSTAH, but consolidation and reconfiguration of the MINUSTAH presence should be appropriately planned and would proceed. The five-year plan to develop the Haitian National Police was moving smoothly and further progress would require additional budgetary commitment by the Government of Haiti. On the humanitarian situation, the Special Representative stated that challenges were persistent due to drought-like conditions and recent hurricanes along with health and sanitation problems compounded by cholera. Half a million Haitians require food aid and a decline in funding for humanitarian needs was a concern. Council members reiterated their continued commitment to Haiti, and emphasized that there had been some progress despite the many challenges. Many members made clear the need for timely elections and expressed serious concerns at the delay, which could precipitate a constitutional crisis. The work of MINUSTAH was appreciated. The Mission could play an important role in the electoral process. Efforts to strengthen the Haitian police should be enhanced. Council members urged continued focus on the justice sector and the rule of law. Some members called for greater focus on economic development. United Nations efforts should continue to address the humanitarian challenges, including the cholera epidemic. In follow-up to the consultations, the Council issued a statement to the press on 28 January, in which it urged all political actors in Haiti to redouble their efforts to preserve the stability and progress achieved over the past year, and underlined the importance of holding free, fair, inclusive and credible elections by the end of 2013. It recognized that MINUSTAH had been a critical supporting actor to Haiti. Middle East Middle East (Syrian Arab Republic) On 18 January, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navanethem Pillay, and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Assistance and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Valerie Amos, briefed the Council in consultations of the whole on the human rights and the humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. The High Commissioner said that the violent conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic had claimed more than 60,000 lives. She said that both the Government and the opposition were blaming each other for attacks on Aleppo University and in Homs. Reports, according to her, indicated that Government forces continued to use heavy weaponry and air strikes in civilian areas and that 34,000 persons were held in government detention centres, where many were subjected to torture. She added that the Commission of Inquiry had also received reports of torture, kidnappings and abductions by anti-Government armed groups, which failed to adequately distinguish themselves from the civilian population, thereby increasing the risk of civilians being killed and injured by government forces. War crimes and crimes against humanity may have been committed by both sides, although the High Commissioner made clear that the scale of Government human rights violations was far greater and the fighting was assuming an increasingly sectarian nature. She called for a referral of the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to the International Criminal Court. She asked the Council to call upon parties to the conflict to respect international humanitarian and human rights law and urged action to protect civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic. The Under-Secretary-General briefed the Council on the assistance provided to those in need both inside and outside the Syrian Arab Republic. She said that increasing violence and harsh winter conditions had worsened the situation. Insecurity, attacks against humanitarian workers, funding challenges and bureaucratic constraints were major impediments to the aid effort. She informed the Council that a system-wide humanitarian emergency response, known as Level 3, had been activated for the Syrian Arab Republic. She called on both sides to allow safe access to humanitarian workers. While acknowledging that, under General Assembly resolution 46/182, humanitarian action must be undertaken with the consent of the relevant State, she called on the Syrian Government to grant permission for cross-border humanitarian access through neighbouring countries. Welcoming improved government support, she underlined the need for more international actors to be authorized to operate in the Syrian Arab Republic. She also informed the Council about the donors' conference scheduled for 30 January in Kuwait and expressed the hope that the international community would be able to raise the US$ 1.5 billion required for the coming six months. Council members condemned continued violations of human rights and humanitarian law by both sides. Several members condemned the use of ballistic missiles and heavy weapons by the Syrian Government and expressed concern about the increasing regional consequences of the Syrian crisis. Some others condemned terrorist and criminal activities of armed groups and lawlessness in the so-called "liberated areas". Members called for the beginning of a political process and expressed support for the efforts of the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for Syria, Lakhdar Brahimi, in this regard. Some members called for a referral of the Syrian Arab Republic to the International Criminal Court while others felt that it would harden positions and further complicate the diplomatic efforts of the Joint Special Representative. Many Member States also welcomed the holding of the donors' conference. The Joint Special Representative briefed the Council on 29 January. He touched on all aspects of the Syrian crisis -- political, military and humanitarian. Warning that the country was breaking up before everyone's eyes, he called on the Security Council to intervene. He recounted some of the recent gruesome manifestations of the conflict and said that they amounted to war crimes and crimes against humanity, which needed to be investigated. The Joint Special Representative said that the humanitarian situation, inside and around the Syrian Arab Republic, was deteriorating, and the refugee influx alone could debilitate some of the neighbouring countries. Recalling that lack of funding was crippling the humanitarian effort, he called on the international community to generously pledge at the donors' conference in Kuwait on 30 January. He was of the view that, while humanitarian action was indispensable and urgent, aid alone would not address the issue. A lasting political solution was required. He said that, while parties to the conflict had started speaking timidly of a political solution, they were not ready to give up their fundamental preconditions. Prospects for a resolution of the conflict at the regional level were not very promising either. Council action, broadly based on principles contained in the Geneva communiqué, was therefore required. He spelled out the following principles in this regard: 1. Preservation of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. 2. Recognition that the ultimate objective was to enable the Syrian people to have a say in the manner in which they were governed. 3. Formation of a transitional Government with full executive powers, and clarification of the terms before the Syrian parties came together to discuss the formation of a transitional government. The Joint Special Representative said that he thought it was largely understood that "governing body with full executive powers" meant that the President would have no role in the transition. 4. Beginning of negotiations between a fully representative team of the opposition and a strong civil-military delegation from the Government. 5. Such negotiations should begin outside the Syrian Arab Republic, take place within an agreed timetable, and lead to a democratic process, including elections, constitutional reform and a referendum. 6. Unequivocal support for the right of each citizen to be equal before law. Council members reiterated their full support for the efforts of the Joint Special Representative in finding a peaceful solution to the conflict and pursuing a political transition in the Syrian Arab Republic. They expressed grave concern at the deteriorating humanitarian situation. Many welcomed the convening of a donors' conference in Kuwait. Some called for a change in the mindset that the conflict could be settled militarily and for both sides to move towards common ground. Some members also felt that the speech of President Assad on 6 January was another clear sign that the Government was not willing to commit itself to a political solution. Some considered the anti-crisis programme proposed by the Syrian Government as a step towards a dialogue that was ignored by the opposition. Some members called for enforcement measures while others were of the view that the focus should be on promoting a political solution. Many members also reiterated the importance of accountability. The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question At the quarterly open debate held on 23 January, the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Robert Serry, briefed the Council. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations, Riad Malki, addressed the Council. The Permanent Representative of Israel, Ron Prosor, also made a statement. In his briefing, the Special Coordinator said that the Secretary-General had repeatedly highlighted that 2013 could be a decisive year for the two-State solution and concerted action was vital in that regard. He deplored the dramatic increase in new settlements announced by Israel, including in the E-1 area, and the withholding of tax revenues owed by Israel to the Palestinian Authority since the General Assembly had accorded Palestine the status of non-member observer State. Urging both sides to refrain from actions that could make resumption of meaningful negotiations harder, he noted the warning by President Abbas that building of settlements in E-1 was a "red line". He also recalled demonstrations against the barrier as well as the establishment by the Palestinians, of an encampment named Bab al-Shams in the E-1 area, and their subsequent eviction. He expressed concern at increased violence in the occupied Palestinian territory and at the fate of Palestinian prisoners under administrative detention in Israeli jails. The Special Coordinator expressed the hope that, following the Israeli elections, the new Government would engage the Palestinians in the pursuit of peace. Noting that the Quartet envoys had met in Amman on 10 January, he expressed concern that a clear and realistic path ahead was still lacking and said that he looked forward to renewed United States engagement in that regard. On the Syrian Arab Republic, the Special Coordinator underlined the deep disappointment and anguish expressed by the Secretary-General and the Joint Special Representative at the appalling levels of killing and destruction carried out by both the Government and the opposition, fuelled by outside Powers providing weaponry to both sides. He expressed concern at the lack of international unity behind the transition agreed under the Geneva communiqué. He called for increased humanitarian assistance to bridge the funding gap and referred to the high-level donors' conference in Kuwait on 30 January in this regard. He said that the situation in Lebanon had remained relatively quiet. In the ensuing debate, many Council members and non-members called for immediate resumption of direct negotiations with clear benchmarks and deadlines, condemned the construction of illegal settlements, including in the E-1 area, and called on Israel to halt this activity. They also called on Israel to release the tax revenues it had withheld from the Palestinian Authority and welcomed continued international support to the Palestinian Authority in this regard. Many speakers welcomed the adoption of General Assembly resolution 67/19, according the status of non-member observer State to Palestine, while some cautioned that the only way to establish a real Palestinian State is through direct negotiations on final status issues, without preconditions, between the Israelis and Palestinians, and that General Assembly resolution 67/19 cannot be viewed as establishing terms of reference or as prejudging any final status issues, notably with respect to territory. Many also warned that the year 2013 was critical for the two-State solution, as the window of opportunity was closing, and called on the parties to exhibit leadership. They also called for international action in this regard. Some members also referred to the continuing blockade of Gaza as well as Israel's continued occupation of Lebanese territories and the Syrian Golan. On the Syrian Arab Republic, many Council members and others expressed serious concern at the situation and the increased militarization of the conflict, called for the beginning of a political process based on the Geneva communiqué, and expressed full support for the efforts of the Joint Special Representative. They also called for increased humanitarian assistance and many welcomed the convening of a donors' conference in Kuwait. Calls were also made for stopping arms supplies to both sides. Middle East (Yemen) The Council undertook a mission to Yemen on 27 January. The primary purpose of the mission, as set out in the terms of reference, was to reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council for the ongoing political transition process, in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and implementation mechanism leading towards elections in February 2014. On 11 January, ahead of the Council's mission, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, Jamal Benomar, briefed the Council in consultations, and welcomed the planned visit as timely. He said that, although the transition was largely on track, a number of challenges remained and the focused attention of the Council on Yemen would help. He suggested that Council discussions in Sana'a could concentrate on the National Dialogue, military restructuring and potential spoilers. Asia United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia On 29 January, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, Miroslav Jenča, briefed the Council in consultations on the activities of the Centre. The Special Representative stated that the situation in the five Central Asian States was stable during the reporting period. He welcomed the growing trend towards multilateral and bilateral interaction among the countries concerned. This resulted in enhanced dialogue and understanding. The Centre continued to address transboundary challenges among the five Central Asian countries. The Centre liaised with respective Governments on their domestic situation, specifically on sustainable development, counter-terrorism/extremism, security, counter-narcotics and the management of water and energy resources and environmental degradation. Progress on energy cooperation would improve through the mechanism of river water sharing, particularly between Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, and the situation in the Farghana Valley. Border cooperation was essential to promote stability. The Special Representative also referred to the impact of the situation in Afghanistan on the five Central Asian States. In this regard, areas of cooperation included prevention of transnational organized crime; countering narcotics, extremism and terrorism; and transboundary projects. The Centre was mindful of the emerging situation in the wake of the withdrawal of the International Security Assistance Force from Afghanistan and supported the sustained engagement of Central Asian States with Afghanistan. The Special Representative noted the Centre's growing interaction with a number of international organizations, namely, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building in Asia, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The Member States appreciated the role of the Centre in preventive diplomacy, confidence-building, economic connectivity and regional security. The importance of consensual approach and national/regional ownership, which underpin the activities of the Centre, was welcomed. The Centre's initiatives on settling energy issues and handling water resources would pave the way for long-term stability and economic growth and the Centre should continue to facilitate dialogue on these issues. Preventive diplomacy initiatives of the Centre also helped to address inter-ethnic issues. Members were supportive of counter-narcotics initiatives by the Centre and noted the value of its close engagement with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The Centre's interaction and dialogue with other international and regional organizations was welcomed. Regional cooperation should be encouraged through dialogue. Member States underlined the importance of the Centre for Afghanistan, particularly in the context of the ongoing transition process and the transformation decade (2015-2024). The Council also issued a statement to the press, appreciating the work of the Centre in implementation of its mandate. It stressed the need for further coordination among the regional Governments, the Centre and the regional organizations. It also welcomed the Centre's role in facilitating assistance by Central Asian States to normalizing the situation in Afghanistan. Europe Cyprus On 16 January, a private meeting of the Council was held with the countries contributing troops and police to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). The Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNFICYP, Lisa Buttenheim, briefed the Council. On 17 January, the Council held consultations of the whole to discuss the report of the Secretary-General concerning the United Nations operation in Cyprus (S/2013/7). In her briefing, the Special Representative stated that the situation in the buffer zone had remained generally calm and stable. She stressed the need for the active engagement of both sides with UNFICYP. Council members commended the role of UNFICYP and took note of the general calm and stability in the buffer zone. They also expressed hope for progress on the political track following the elections in Cyprus in February 2013. They supported the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the mandate of UNFICYP for six months. On 24 January, the Council adopted resolution 2089 (2013), by which it extended the mandate of UNFICYP until 31 July 2013. The resolution was adopted by 14 votes in favour, with 1 abstention. Thematic and other issues Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts: a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism On 15 January, the Council held an open debate on a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism, presided over by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Hina Rabbani Khar, and attended by high-level representatives of several Council members. In his briefing, the Secretary-General said that no counter-terrorism policy could be effective without addressing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. He highlighted the importance of dialogue and understanding and emphasized the need for countering intolerance and extremism with sound calls for compassion and moderation. He said that terrorists and extremists were exploiting social media networks to radicalize people. In this arena, the international community needed to replace the terrorist narrative with messages of peace, development, and human welfare. In her statement, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan said that Pakistan's initiative for the debate was rooted in the international community's shared objective of global peace, security, stability and development. She said that terrorism would not be defeated solely by law enforcement measures, or intelligence operations, or military and security strategies. That was why the international community needed a comprehensive approach. She stated that, for sustainable solutions, the international community needed to intensify its efforts to resolve long-festering conflicts. Member States stressed the importance of a comprehensive approach -- a combination of security, political, developmental, human rights and legal dimensions -- to tackle the threat of terrorism more effectively. Terrorism was the result of many complex factors and could be defeated only by a holistic approach. Representatives of many Member States said that deterrence, development and dialogue were part of their counter-terrorism efforts. Many speakers referred to the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as a consensus document for coordinated and effective responses of the international community to terrorism. The role of the United Nations in evolving consensus, delivering assistance, and establishing the normative framework for Member States' collaboration was appreciated. Member States agreed that terrorism posed a serious threat to peace, security and stability in various parts of the world and no single country or organization could alone counter the scope and diversity of the threat. There was a need for reinforcing international cooperation for effective counter-terrorism. Terrorism was a global scourge that required the collective efforts of the international community to tackle it in an effective manner. Speakers also agreed that terrorism must be fought in the framework of the rule of law and respect for fundamental freedoms and human rights. It was emphasized by many that youth employment, eradication of socioeconomic marginalization and strengthening of good governance could reduce the sense of victimization that promoted extremism. Many speakers underlined that stemming the financing of terrorism was key to the counter-terrorism efforts. There was a need for concerted efforts to deal with the risks of terrorist financing. A comprehensive presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/1) was adopted at the conclusion of the debate. Terrorist attack in Algeria On 18 January, the Council adopted a statement to the press on the terrorist attack in In Amenas, Algeria, launched on 16 January. The members of the Council condemned the attack in the strongest terms, which had resulted in numerous deaths and injuries, and expressed their deep sympathy and sincere condolences to the victims of these heinous acts and their families and to the people and Governments of Algeria and those countries whose nationals had been affected. Peacekeeping On 21 January, the Council held an open debate on the theme "United Nations peacekeeping: a multidimensional approach", presided over by the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan, Jalil Abbas Jilani. The Council also unanimously adopted resolution 2086 (2013). Co-sponsored by all members of the Security Council, this was the first comprehensive resolution on peacekeeping in 11 years. In it, the Council commended the critical role of United Nations peacekeeping operations in the maintenance of international peace and security. Its particular focus was on multidimensional peacekeeping missions, and ways and means of further improving their overall planning and management for effectively carrying out their mandates, including facilitating post-conflict peacebuilding, prevention of relapse into armed conflict and progress towards sustainable peace and development. In his briefing to the Council, the Secretary-General provided an update on efforts by the United Nations Secretariat to improve peacekeeping operations, including through better planning and coordination. He sought the support of the Member States for United Nations peacekeeping endeavours. He appreciated the debate for highlighting the contributions of United Nations missions towards enhancing security and building sustainable peace as well as for its emphasis on the role of national Governments. He underlined the importance of institution-building, particularly in the security sector and the rule of law, and called for the political commitment of the host Governments to fulfil responsibilities in these areas. In his statement, the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan commended the services and sacrifice of peacekeepers for global peace and security. He enumerated different aspects of multidimensional missions, including their ability to address the twin goals of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In the ensuing debate, Member States stressed the importance of multidimensional peacekeeping missions in managing complex crises. They called for proper planning, adequate resource allocation and the smooth implementation of multidimensional mandates. The value of integrated planning and integrated response was stressed, to improve overall coordination and to have smooth transition and withdrawal. Many delegations underlined the importance of national ownership and responsibility. They appreciated the role of peacekeepers in peacebuilding, focusing on their contribution to security sector reform, the rule of law, political processes, civilian protection, human rights, and humanitarian support. The importance of triangular cooperation and consultations with troop-contributing countries was stressed. Pre-deployment training, professional skills and meeting standards of conduct and discipline were essential for enhancing overall effectiveness. Participation of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding was necessary for an effective response to the situation of armed conflict. A number of delegations underlined the importance of protection of civilians, including women, children and other vulnerable groups. The role of peacekeeping missions was important in addressing all forms of violence, including sexual violence. The United Nations and regional and subregional organizations were called upon to further strengthen mutual cooperation on peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Paying tribute to the sacrifices of peacekeepers, the participants called for improving the safety and security of United Nations missions and personnel. Speakers welcomed resolution 2086 (2013) and expressed appreciation to the presidency for the initiative. Non-proliferation/Democratic People's Republic of Korea On 22 January, the Council adopted resolution 2087 (2013) by which it condemned the launch on December 2012 by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and strengthened the measures imposed in resolution 1718 (2006), as modified by resolution 1874 (2009). Rule of law On 30 January, the Council received an interim briefing on the rule of law, as the report requested in its presidential statement of 19 January 2012 (S/PRST/2012/1) had been delayed. The Deputy Secretary-General, Jan Eliasson, briefed the Council on the institutional changes introduced by the United Nations to bolster its support for rule-of-law activities in conflict and post-conflict situations. He said that the Secretary-General had designated the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations Development Programme as the joint global focal point for the police, justice, and correction areas in post-conflict and other crisis situations. The joint global focal point would support the United Nations leaders in the field in carrying out their responsibilities. Moreover, the Secretary-General had strengthened and reorganized the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group. In the closed consultations that followed, Council members generally expressed appreciation for the briefing and offered preliminary remarks while awaiting the report of the Secretary-General. Many members noted that the rule of law cut across the three pillars of the United Nations, namely, security, development and human rights. Member States hoped that issues related to the realigning of United Nations institutions to realities on the ground would be addressed in a balanced manner in the upcoming report of the Secretary-General. Implementation of the Note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507) wrap-up session On 31 January, the Council held a wrap-up session on the work of the Council for the month of January, in pursuance of the note of 12 December 2012 by the President of the Security Council (S/2012/922). Held in the format of a private meeting, it was open to attendance by non-Council members. The meeting was devoted primarily to the work of the Council during the month of January. It also served as an opportunity to reflect on and look ahead at the agenda and priorities of the Council. In his opening remarks, the President provided an overview of the work done during the month. Council members reiterated their positions on a wide range of issues including the thematic debates that were taken up during the month. The crises in Mali and the Syrian Arab Republic received particular attention. A communiqué was issued by the Council, in accordance with its previous practice, at the end of the private meeting. 