%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|MALI|

Letter dated 3 May 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 19 April 2013 from Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, on behalf of Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union Commission and Mr. Kadré Désiré Ouédraogo, President of the Commission of the Economic Community of West African States, on the process of transforming the African-led International Support Mission in Mali into a United Nations stabilization mission (see annex). I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the Security Council. (Signed) BAN Ki-moon Security Council process towards the rehatting of the African-led International Support Mission in Mali into a United Nations stabilization mission in Mali The African Union and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) welcome the steps under way in the Security Council to expedite action on the transformation of the African-led International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA) into a robust United Nations stabilization mission in Mali under a Chapter VII mandate. In this regard, the two organizations, which are at the heart of the international efforts to help Mali to recover its territorial integrity and complete the process to restore constitutional order, take note of the draft Security Council resolution on Mali, which has been in circulation among Council members and other interested parties in the past week. The African Union and ECOWAS note that the content of the draft resolution broadly reflects the desire of both organizations, as contained in the relevant decisions of the African Union Peace and Security Council and the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government on Mali. We are pleased that the nature and mandate of the proposed United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the "parallel force" are consistent with the required force capability to meet the security and political challenges currently faced by Mali and the international community. In this spirit, the African Union and ECOWAS are keen to ensure that the anticipated resolution builds on the successes already achieved by AFISMA and its allies, and that it fully incorporates the contributions that the two organizations will continue to make towards the definitive resolution of the security and institutional crises facing Mali, in particular, and the effective development of the Sahel region, in general. In this regard, the "division of labour" being contemplated in the draft resolution may result in restricting the effective contribution of the African component to the fight against terrorism and transnational organized crime in Mali and the Sahel. The African Union and ECOWAS, therefore, request the members of the Security Council to reconsider the role of the two organizations, as well as the envisaged cooperation mechanism between them and MINUSMA, in the envisaged resolution, based on the principles of subsidiarity and comparative advantage. They also call on the Security Council to explicitly request the disarmament of all non-State armed groups and militias in Mali, in particular the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad, and the deployment of the Mali Defence and Security Forces throughout the territory of Mali, including Kidal. Pending the deployment of MINUSMA, the two organizations request the Security Council to instruct the Secretary-General to speed up action on the provision of financial and logistical support from the United Nations trust fund for Mali to ensure the effective operations of AFISMA as mandated in Security Council resolution 2085 (2012), and to facilitate the upgrading of the standards of AFISMA troops and police units in preparation for their rehatting. Finally, the African Union and ECOWAS expect the resolution to capture the mediation and facilitation roles by the two organizations through the ECOWAS mediation process and the Support and Follow-up Group on the Situation in Mali. They also expect it to capture their strong determination and desire to pursue their engagement in Mali in close cooperation and coordination with MINUSMA, which needs to be fully integrated in the regional dynamics and processes. The African Union and ECOWAS reiterate their commitment to deepening their cooperation with the United Nations and other partners towards sustainable peace and security in Mali and express deep appreciation to the United Nations for the enduring interest in the fate of democracy, development, peace and security in Africa. Our suggested amendments have been communicated to all the Security Council members through a note verbale from the African Union Commission. (Signed) Ramtane Lamamra African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security On behalf of Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma Chairperson of the African Union Commission (Signed) Kadré Désiré Ouédraogo President of the ECOWAS Commission 