%%%BOUNDARIES|BORDER TRAFFIC|INTERNAL SECURITY|SOUTH SUDAN|SUDAN|

Letter dated 24 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council I have the honour to enclose herewith the joint communiqué issued at the conclusion of the visit of the President of the Republic of the Sudan, Omer Hassan Ahmed Al Bashir, to Juba on Tuesday, 22 October 2013, in response to a kind invitation extended to him by the President of the Republic of South Sudan, General Salva Kiir Mayardit (see annex). I have the honour to inform you that the two leaders held very important meetings that were frank, cordial and fruitful and covered various aspects of the nine cooperation agreements signed by the two countries in September 2012. The two leaders agreed, inter alia, to expedite the identification of the zero line in order to create the safe demilitarized border zone before mid-November 2013; the ceasing of support and harbouring of rebel movements in either country; to immediately start coordination to establish an integrated border management mechanism to facilitate the movement of people and goods across the borders; and to continue together in the joint effort to achieve debt relief and the lifting of economic sanctions and the enhancement of development in the two countries. The two countries also agreed to organize a meeting of all the bordering states in the two countries in mid-December 2013 in order to consolidate the principle of soft borders. With regard to Abyei, the two leaders agreed to expedite the establishment of Abyei Administration, Council and Police organs and reaffirmed that the 2 per cent share of Abyei Areas in oil revenue, including arrears, will be paid to the Abyei Administration. Having brought these positive developments to your attention, I would be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Daffa-Alla Elhag Ali Osman Permanent Representative [Original: Arabic] [22 October 2013] Joint communiqué On Tuesday, 22 October 2013, in response to a kind invitation from General Salva Kiir, President of South Sudan, Marshall Omer Hassan A. Al-Bashir, President of the Sudan, made an official visit to South Sudan, accompanied by a high-level delegation. This visit was part of the exchange of visits by the Presidents, who are the supreme heads of the mechanisms responsible for implementing the cooperation agreements, to discuss all matters of mutual concern. During the one-day visit, bilateral discussions were held at the presidential and ministerial levels. Discussions were also held on cooperation with the private sector and civil society organizations, particularly with regard to business, investment and exchange of experience, as well as on various aspects of the working relationship between the countries. During the discussions, the Sudan expressed its solidarity with and support for the Government and people of South Sudan in view of the catastrophic rains and floods that had caused widespread damage in South Sudan. Acting in coordination with the relevant authorities of South Sudan, the Sudan has begun sending food, medicines and shelters by air, land and river. This aid is being delivered in keeping with the friendly relations that prevail between the two countries and their peoples. The discussions were conducted in a positive atmosphere and the parties agreed to: 1. Expedite delimitation of the zero line in order to create the safe demilitarized border zone before mid-November 2013, and to coordinate with one another with a view to halting the harbouring and provision of support to armed movements. 2. Expedite the opening of the border crossings between their countries as soon as the zero line has been delimited. In that connection, the two sides expressed their satisfaction regarding the flow and export of oil. 3. Begin coordination immediately between their countries with regard to comprehensive border management, with a view to facilitating communication and promoting mutual interests and projects. 4. Continue to work together in order to cancel debts, promote development in the two countries and lift economic sanctions by strengthening and improving the relevant mechanisms. 5. Signed an agreement exempting holders of diplomatic and official passports from visa requirements as a first step in facilitating the movement of persons between the two countries. 6. Organize, in mid-December 2013, a conference of the border states of the two countries, in order to create a soft border, facilitate the exchange of experience and build the capacities of local governments and agencies. 7. Speed up the work of the joint committees on the monitoring and export of oil. 8. Strengthen cooperation between their central banks and banking sectors, in order to facilitate payments and coordinate their monetary and bank supervision policies. 9. Direct their central banks to facilitate trade, transfers of funds, pensions payments and commercial transactions. 10. Expedite the establishment of the Abyei Administration, legislature and police, and reaffirmed that the 2 per cent of oil revenues that are being set aside for the Abyei region, including arrears, will be paid to the Abyei Administration. President Kiir of South Sudan thanked President Al-Bashir for sending humanitarian assistance by air to the victims of the floods in South Sudan. President Al-Bashir of the Sudan thanked President Kiir of South Sudan for the warm reception and hospitality he had received during his visit and invited President Kiir to visit the Sudan, in order to give further impetus to relations between the two countries. Juba on Tuesday, 22 October 2013 