%%%PEACEBUILDING|SPECIAL MISSIONS|GUINEA-BISSAU|DRUG TRAFFIC|HUMAN RIGHTS|SECURITY SECTOR REFORM|STAFF SECURITY|PUBLIC INFORMATI﻿ON|

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2103 (2013), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and requested me to submit regular reports to it on the implementation of that resolution every 180 days. The report focuses exclusively on the status of implementation of the mandate of UNIOGBIS since my last report of 6 May 2013 (S/2013/262). Information on major political, security, human rights, humanitarian and socioeconomic developments in Guinea-Bissau is contained in my report of 19 November 2013 on the restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau (S/2013/680). II. Status of implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau A. Support for the establishment of effective and efficient law enforcement and criminal justice and penitentiary systems 2. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS continued to provide policy advice and support to national security institutions through the co-location of United Nations police officers with those institutions. The mission participated in coordination meetings with the national Policing and Internal Security Coordination Group, which has responsibility for coordinating all internal security institutions, and met frequently with the leadership of national security institutions. It participated in the review of the national training strategy approved by the Ministry of Interior on 1 August 2013 and in the development of modalities and implementation mechanisms to support training in electoral security for policing and internal security institutions. 3. On 12 September 2013, UNIOGBIS organized an event to showcase the importance of community policing at the model police station in the Bissau suburb of Bairro Militar, which was established in 2011 with the support of the mission. During the event, UNIOGBIS presented and shared with the local community the recommendations of a survey conducted in 2012 to assess the impact of the model station and community policing on perceptions of public security within the community. The survey was conducted by the police and UNIOGBIS, with technical assistance from the University of Porto, based in Portugal. The findings pointed to a perceived reduction of crime in Bairro Militar. 4. On 9 and 10 October 2013, UNIOGBIS organized a training workshop for 55 high-ranking officers from the National Guard, the Public Order Police and the Judiciary Police, which was aimed at preparing the officers to provide security for the forthcoming presidential and legislative elections. B. Support for security sector reform and the rule of law 5. On 9 May, the permanent secretariat of the national security sector reform steering committee provided member States of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in Guinea-Bissau with an assessment report, outlining education and training needs of the armed forces. The report takes into consideration the data contained in the census of military personnel completed in 2012 and the future organizational chart for the armed forces. The assessment, which was conducted with the support of UNIOGBIS, was done in compliance with a provision contained in a memorandum of understanding on security sector reform signed by ECOWAS and the transitional government in November 2012. 6. On 16 May 2013, the Chief of General Staff of the armed forces, General António Indjai, submitted to the permanent secretariat of the national security sector reform steering committee a preliminary list of 1,776 service personnel to be demobilized. Following a review conducted by the permanent secretariat, with the support of UNIOGBIS, to ensure that the personnel on the list fell within the established demobilization criteria, the list was reduced to 1,553 personnel, including 1,404 from the army, 45 from the air force and 104 from the navy. 7. On 24 July 2013, the Ministry of Defence, the Secretary of State of Veterans and the permanent secretariat, with the assistance of UNIOGBIS, finalized the census of veterans of the liberation war, which had started in 2009 with the support of the European Union. The operation enabled the screening of 1,500 men and women, out of whom 701 persons, recognized as former veterans of the liberation war, were provided with biometric identification cards. To date, the total number of registered former veterans in Guinea-Bissau is 6,596. C. Assisting national authorities to combat drug trafficking and transnational organized crime 8. From 19 to 21 August 2013, UNIOGBIS facilitated a mission of the West Africa Commission on Drugs, led by former President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria. The delegation consulted with national and international stakeholders on the impact of drug consumption and related problems in West Africa. It should be recalled that the Commission was launched by Kofi Annan, former Secretary-General of the United Nations, in Accra, in January 2013, to tackle the drug problems in the subregion and the impact of illicit drug trafficking and consumption on security, governance and public health. 9. An expert on transnational organized crime from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), who was recruited with the financial support of the Department of Political Affairs, arrived in Guinea-Bissau on 9 September 2013. The expert is working closely with the Transnational Crime Unit established in 2011 within the framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative, as well as with the Public Order Police and the Judiciary Police, in support of national efforts to combat drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. The expert is responsible for providing technical advice and training with respect to the fight against illicit drug trafficking and transnational organized crime and for supporting regional efforts aimed at combating these threats. Working in close cooperation with UNIOGBIS, the expert is also providing technical advice to the United Nations country team. 10. On 16 September 2013, UNIOGBIS, UNODC and the leadership of the Public Order Police approved a training programme for 330 participants on transnational organized crime. UNIOGBIS and UNODC have been jointly carrying out the training programme since 23 September in the towns of Mansoa, Bafata, São Domingos, Buba and Bissau. The training is expected to be completed in December 2013. 11. From 23 September to 10 October 2013, with financial and technical support from UNIOGBIS and UNODC, 180 national security officers completed a comprehensive training course on anti-drug trafficking techniques, investigation and reporting. In addition, UNIOGBIS and UNODC organized a two-day training workshop on transnational organized crime on 8 and 9 October in the Bafata region, targeting a total of 30 police officers from the National Guard, the Public Order Police and the Security Information Services. 12. Notwithstanding the lack of adequate resources to effectively combat drug trafficking at the international airport of Bissau, including specific technology to detect drugs carried by passengers in their bodies, the Judiciary Police and the Transnational Crime Unit carried out successful joint operations during the reporting period. As a result, eight persons were detected carrying cocaine in their bodies, and about six kilograms of cocaine were seized at the airport. On 4 September 2013, two military officers were arrested in the border area between Guinea-Bissau, Guinea and Senegal in the sector of Contubuel, Bafata region, carrying two kilograms of cocaine. Three civilians, including two nationals and one Senegalese citizen, were also reportedly arrested. On 7 October, at the airport in Bissau, the Judiciary Police and the Transnational Crime Unit arrested a citizen of Guinea-Bissau, arriving on a flight from São Paulo, Brazil, carrying about one kilogram of cocaine (67 capsules). In addition, on 9 October, four men, nationals of Guinea-Bissau, suspected of trafficking cocaine were arrested in Bissau. The suspects, who arrived in Bissau from São Paulo via Lisbon, had two and a half kilograms of cocaine in the form of capsules concealed in their bodies. D. Undertaking human rights promotion, protection, monitoring and reporting activities 13. On 7 June, with the support of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), a delegation from Guinea-Bissau travelled to Geneva to meet with the Committee on the Rights of the Child to discuss the second report on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Child in Guinea-Bissau. The participants reviewed progress made in the area of legislation, institutional and policy measures and bottlenecks impeding implementation of the Convention. The discussions highlighted areas of concern requiring special attention, including pro-child budgeting, the protection of children with disabilities, juvenile justice, the intensification of efforts to eliminate all harmful practices, the fight against discrimination and violence against children and the implementation of the national health policy. 14. Within the framework of the "Children's fortnight" organized in Guinea-Bissau from 1 to 16 June 2013, UNICEF provided support to the "Children's Parliament" for the holding of a session in the National Assembly on 1 June with the theme: "Eliminate social and cultural harmful practices affecting children: Our collective responsibility". UNICEF also supported and participated in other initiatives culminating in the celebration of the Day of the African Child in the Gabu region on 16 June. 15. From 17 to 21 June 2013, UNIOGBIS organized a one-week capacity-building programme in the Bijagós archipelago, on human rights for 30 human rights focal points from six islands. The training programme was launched with a view to creating human rights monitoring and defenders networks. 16. The first forum of Guinea-Bissau civil society organizations was held on 26 and 27 September 2013 in Bissau, with the support of the non-governmental organization SWISSAID, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women). The Forum was focused on issues related to elections and human rights and on the establishment of a Human Rights Defenders Network. E. Mainstreaming a gender perspective in peacebuilding in line with Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) 17. From 20 to 23 May 2013, UNIOGBIS organized a mediation skills training course for 16 representatives (4 women and 12 men) of the leaders of the Catholic Church, the National Council of the Evangelical Church, the High Council on Islamic Affairs and the National Islamic Council. The course was organized within the framework of a capacity-building programme developed by UNIOGBIS and religious leaders in February. Subsequently, the National Islamic Council requested UNIOGBIS to assist in developing a capacity-building programme for its members on gender equality issues and to enhance its contribution to conflict resolution within their communities. UNIOGBIS is funding a needs assessment exercise to identify entry points for gender and mediation capacity-building. 18. During the reporting period, UN-Women provided technical and financial support to the specialized parliamentary committee on women and children for the passage of a domestic violence bill, which was adopted by the National Assembly on 18 July 2013. The adopted law was disseminated in the towns of Gabú, Buba and Cachungo. UN-Women also assisted the National Committee for the Abandonment of Harmful Practices in raising public awareness about the need to fight female genital mutilation and sexual and gender-based violence in the towns of Bafata, Gabú, Oio and Quinara. 19. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS and UN-Women continued to provide technical and financial support for efforts to legalize and operationalize the Women's Political Platform and the Regional Network on Women, Peace and Security. These efforts contributed to creating greater public awareness of the situation of women, promoting in-depth reflection on women's issues and greater cohesion among women's organizations, as well as enhancing the capacity of women, who were provided with coordination and fundraising instruments. 20. On 16 and 17 July 2013, the Women's Political Platform held its first general assembly, which was attended by 45 women from the main political parties. Subsequently, from 26 to 29 July, 43 members of the Platform participated in a strategic planning exercise aimed at enhancing women's participation in formal politics and governance, and adapted a four-year action plan with a strong gender agenda to improve the status and role of women in society. The Platform is composed of pre-eminent women who are gender advocates. The exercise contributed to enhancing cohesion among women's organizations, and among women from political parties. It also provided an opportunity to undertake a comprehensive review of the role of women, including their empowerment needs. The platform has engaged in resource mobilization efforts to raise funds for the implementation of its action plan and in order to facilitate the participation of women as voters and candidates in the upcoming elections. 21. On 5 and 6 September 2013, a general assembly to create the Guinea-Bissau branch of the Regional Network on Women, Peace and Security took place in Bissau, with technical and financial support from UNIOGBIS. Members of the network include human rights, youth and women's organizations from various regions and the capital, representatives of the Ministries of Interior, Education and Commerce and other civil society organizations and religious groups. The Network carried out strategic planning and other key activities from 20 to 26 September, including the dissemination of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), as well as action on capacity-building throughout the regions, the establishment of an early warning system, prevention and mediation of conflicts at the local and national levels, the promotion of gender equality and the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence. F. Working with the Peacebuilding Commission in support of Guinea-Bissau's peacebuilding priorities 22. On 22 July 2013, the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office agreed to make available a support package of $5 million from the Peacebuilding Fund's Immediate Response Facility to cover critical activities that need to be initiated in the pre-electoral period, including support for the elections, women's participation in the electoral process and strengthening media capacity. The support package will also be used in the fight against drug trafficking and socioeconomic development. In addition, on 22 July, the Support Office decided to unfreeze the gender promotion initiative on "Quick and multilevel impact for women's economic empowerment and the improvement of working conditions, amounting to $1 million, at the request of the United Nations Resident Coordinator and following the re-establishment of the Ministry of Family, Women and Children. The fact that the two main implementing partners of the initiative were civil society organizations also facilitated the decision of the Support Office. In the meantime, the Peacebuilding Fund's priority plan, amounting to $16.8 million, remains suspended. 23. At the initiative of my Special Representative, on 10 September 2013, the Department of Political Affairs and the Support Office approved a joint project costing $678,265 to support the National Commission for Planning and Strategic Coordination, which is responsible for defining the priorities for the remainder of the transition and its immediate aftermath. The Department of Political Affairs provided $208,000 from its extrabudgetary mechanism, while the Peacebuilding Fund provided $470,265 from its Immediate Response Facility. G. Mobilization, harmonization and coordination of international assistance, including for the implementation of national security sector reform and the rule of law strategies 24. My Special Representative remained in constant dialogue with Guinea-Bissau's international partners, including the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS, the European Union and bilateral partners, on the efforts of the United Nations to implement defence and security sector reform strategies for the modernization and professionalization of the defence and security forces in Guinea-Bissau. 25. On 11 September 2013, while in Nigeria, the Special Representative held consultations with Nigerian authorities and had a meeting with the Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau and the special representatives of ECOWAS and the African Union on the implementation of key reforms in the defence and security sectors. He also travelled to Brasilia from 4 to 6 October to engage with national authorities in support of the reform process and other peacebuilding priorities. UNIOGBIS also continued to assist national stakeholders in preparing for the organization of an inclusive seminar on security sector reform, in cooperation with ECOWAS. III. Cross-cutting issues A. Integration of the United Nations system 26. Following the swearing-in of a new inclusive transitional government in June 2013, which subsequently defined its main priorities for the transition in its governmental programme, the United Nations extended the current United Nations Development Assistance Framework for an additional two years, to 2013-2014, and it is currently considering a second extension of the UNDAF for another year, until 31 December 2015, in order to provide the Organization with the time needed to review relevant planning instruments for the Executive Boards of the respective agencies in 2014. 27. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes adopted their respective annual workplans for 2013. A United Nations joint workplan was also developed by the United Nations joint Strategic Unit and presented to the chairpersons of the United Nations Working Coordination Groups in charge of the implementation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework on 24 October. 28. On 1 September, UNIOGBIS inaugurated a new field office in São Domingos, in the north of the country, as recommended by the United Nations inter-agency technical assessment mission in March. Two additional offices will be opened by the end of 2013 in Bafata and Buba. 29. In order to reinforce joint programming in the areas of security, justice, police and corrections, UNIOGBIS convened a retreat in Bissau on 4 October 2013 with the participation of the United Nations country team and national stakeholders. Participants recommended, inter alia: (a) the establishment of a United Nations global focal point arrangement to support rule of law efforts, with the support of United Nations Headquarters; (b) the widening of the debate on security and defence matters to civil society organizations and the overall population; and (c) support to electoral security plans. They also highlighted the need to prepare a joint strategic workplan for 2014. B. Public information 30. During the period under review, the ability of the local media to perform their core function of informing the population continued to be hampered by a shortage of basic equipment and supplies. On 1 August, my Special Representative visited seven community, religious and private radio stations in Bissau, with a view to assessing their needs. He encouraged the radio stations to submit project proposals in support of media activities to appropriate United Nations funding mechanisms. 31. UNIOGBIS continued to work towards strengthening its partnerships with media organizations and practitioners. In preparation for the upcoming presidential and legislative elections, the mission initiated a series of workshops for community radio stations under the theme, "Contribution to a peaceful environment during the electoral process". The first workshop was organized on 27 and 28 September 2013, in Buba, and the second on 12 and 13 October 2013, in Gabú. A total of 35 participants attended both workshops. C. Staff safety and security 32. During the reporting period, there were no direct threats made against United Nations staff in Guinea-Bissau. However, on 9 October 2013, a UNIOGBIS national human rights officer was one of the many individuals who were attacked and beaten by armed men in four neighbourhoods in Bissau. The perpetrators reportedly claimed that the attack was in retaliation for the previous day's attack against the Nigerian Embassy in Bissau, and that the four neighbourhoods had been targeted because some of the participants in the previous day's attack lived in those neighbourhoods. On 15 October, UNIOGBIS reminded the transitional authorities of their obligations to take all appropriate measures to ensure the safety and security of UNIOGBIS and its personnel, as well as to ensure the prosecution of those responsible for attacks against members of the mission or their private accommodations. On 17 October, my Special Representative convened a town hall meeting of all United Nations staff members in Guinea-Bissau, inter alia, to remind them of their rights and responsibilities, particularly in security situations. IV. Observations 33. The work of the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau continues to be hampered by delays in completion of the transitional process. Without an elected interlocutor to formalize long-term assistance plans for the country, several of the key initiatives of the Organization have had to be put on hold. In addition, resource constraints linked to the continued suspension of assistance from traditional donors, with the exception of support for humanitarian projects, are undermining the ability of the United Nations to provide adequate support for long-term institutional reforms. 34. It is imperative that national, regional and international stakeholders continue to work, with resolve, towards the completion of the transition through the early holding of credible general elections. It is also critical that they commit to achieving tangible progress in addressing all remaining challenges, including reforming the country's justice sectors, modernizing the defence and security forces in accordance with international standards, promoting genuine inclusive national dialogue and respect for human rights and the rule of law and combating illicit drug trafficking, transnational organized crime and impunity. 35. The United Nations remains committed to contributing to the creation of an enabling environment for the holding of credible elections, on the one hand, and to addressing peacebuilding and State-building challenges to prevent any relapse to conflict, on the other. In this regard, I urge the transitional authorities to continue to work collaboratively with the United Nations, as well as with other regional and international stakeholders, to ensure a conducive pre-electoral environment and a credible and peaceful outcome to the election. 36. I reiterate my call to all national stakeholders to adopt a new culture of politics by ending the cyclical political-military conflict and the pursuit of individual interests and by placing national interests at the core of their actions. Moving forward, this will require more focus on building consensus and inclusion to ensure that the State can be rebuilt to serve the interests of all citizens. 37. The recent security incidents, targeting defenceless civilians, highlight once again the critical need for the authorities in Guinea-Bissau to take a stand against impunity in the country. The people of Guinea-Bissau must feel that justice will be meted out to offenders who victimize them. I call on the transitional government to make all efforts to ensure that the perpetrators of the criminal attacks on 8 and 9 October 2013, as well as of the attack against a member of the transitional government on 5 November 2013, are brought to justice, and that their acts do not go unpunished. I also urge the leadership of the defence and security forces to reinforce their role in ensuring internal security and the protection and security of State institutions and the population. 38. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and the United Nations country team, under the leadership of my Special Representative, José Ramos-Horta, as well as to Guinea-Bissau's regional and international partners for their contributions to the efforts to restore constitutional order and to promote peacebuilding in the country. 