%%%MARITIME TRANSPORT|YEMEN|IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)|CARGO SHIPS|ARMS TRANSFERS|ILLICIT ARMS TRAFFICKING|

Letter dated 12 February 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council Upon instructions from my Government, I have the honour to write to you with regard to the baseless allegations concerning the seizure of a ship containing armaments originating from the Islamic Republic of Iran destined for Yemen. In this regard I would like to draw your attention to the following: 1. Preliminary investigations indicate that the ship seized in Yemen does not belong to the Islamic Republic of Iran. The ship is registered in Spain and navigating under the flag of Panama. 2. According to the Yemeni officials, eight individuals among the ship's crew are citizens of Yemen and there is no Iranian citizen among the arrested people. 3. If there is a claim that the ship was loaded and embarked from an Iranian port, it is necessary that the information regarding the GPS of the navigation route be delivered to Iran for further investigations. It should be noted that even some Yemeni officials have suggested the probability that the ship might not have embarked from Iran. 4. It has been further claimed that the items seized on board the ship were produced in Iran. Even if some of these items were made in Iran, this does not provide any evidence that Iran was involved in the shipment of arms to Yemen. 5. Unfortunately, this is not the first time that some Yemeni officials have levelled allegations of arms transfer against the Islamic Republic of Iran. During the Presidency of ousted President Ali Abdullah Saleh, similar unfounded allegations were made against the Islamic Republic of Iran, and later they were refuted by the Yemeni Government officials. 6. As is the practice, if there is any evidence regarding the illegal transfer of arms to Yemen, such evidence should be provided to the Iranian officials for investigations. Obviously accusations could not be based on the confessions of some arrested Yemeni citizens. In this regard, I wish to bring to your attention that the allegations, whether about the ship's ownership or arms shipment from Iran to Yemen, are absurd fabrications and have no basis or validity. They are, therefore, categorically rejected by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran. It is my Government's expectation that the Security Council and its relevant sanctions Committee will address this prima facie politically motivated move. My Government is prepared to fully cooperate and investigate the case by providing necessary information and evidence. I should be grateful if this letter could be circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Mohammad Khazaee Ambassador Permanent Representative 