%%%SANCTIONS|NUCLEAR WEAPON TESTS|DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|LITHUANIA|

Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) Note verbale dated 1 July 2013 from the Permanent Mission of Lithuania to the United Nations addressed to the Chair of the Committee The Permanent Mission of Lithuania to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) concerning the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and has the honour to transmit herewith the report of the Republic of Lithuania on measures taken to effectively implement the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 2094 (2013) (see annex). Report of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania regarding the implementation of Security Council resolution 2094 (2013) 1. The framework for the implementation of international sanctions in the Republic of Lithuania was established by the Law on the Implementation of Economic and other International Sanctions (2004) (see http://www3.lrs.lt/pls/ inter3/dokpaieska.showdoc_l?p_id=256251). The Ministry of Foreign Affairs coordinates the implementation of international sanctions in the Republic of Lithuania and provides natural and legal persons with information about the issues pertaining to the implementation of the international sanctions. 2. The international sanctions are imposed in accordance with the directly applicable regulations of the European Union and the resolutions of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania, which implements other legislation of the European Union, as well as resolutions of the United Nations Security Council and decisions of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. 3. Security Council resolution 2094 (2013), by which the Council imposed sanctions on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, previous Security Council resolutions on this subject and additional sanctions imposed by the European Union are implemented through the legislation listed in the following table. Have concrete measures, procedures or legislations in place in order to Yes/No Indicate source(s) legalization Additional information Remarks Prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of: all arms and related materiel (except small arms and light weapons)? Yes Council of the European Union Decision 2013/183/CFSP (Official Journal of the European Union, L 111, 23 April 2013) On the national level, the arms embargo is implemented by Government resolution No. 237, "On the approval of the list of the States to which the export or transit of the goods listed in the common military list is prohibited and for which brokering in negotiations and transactions in the goods listed in the common military list is prohibited" (2005, last amended in 2011).a European Union and Lithuanian legislation foresees both (i) sanctions imposed by relevant Security Council resolutions; and (ii) additional sanctions imposed by the European Union, i.e. full arms embargo. determined nuclear, ballistic missile or other WMD-related items? On the national level, Council of the European Union Regulation (EC) No. 329/2007 (Official Journal of the European Union, L 88, 29 March 2007) is directly applicable. European Union legislation foresees both (i) sanctions imposed by relevant Security Council resolutions; and (ii) additional sanctions imposed by the European Union, such as prohibition of certain types of aluminium used in ballistic missile-related systems. luxury goods? Prohibit the procurement from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of: all arms and related materiel? On the national level, articles 6 and 10 of the Law on the Implementation of Economic and other International Sanctions (1995, last amended in 2011)a are applicable. Prevent the transfer from or to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of financial transactions, technical training, advice, services and assistance related to: all arms and materiel (except small arms and light weapons to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea)? Freeze assets of, and block financial transactions related to, designated persons or entities? (i) sanctions imposed by relevant Security Council resolutions; and (ii) additional sanctions imposed by the European Union, i.e., designation of additional entities and individuals. Prevent entry into or transit through Member States territories of designated persons? (i) sanctions imposed by relevant Security Council resolutions; and (ii) additional sanctions imposed by the European Union, i.e., full arms embargo. Additionally, the Government resolution "On the implementation of political sanctions that prohibit the entry or transit of individuals through the territory of the Republic of Lithuania" (2008)b establishes a procedure for including the individuals in a national travel ban list. (i) sanctions imposed by relevant Security Council resolutions; and (ii) additional sanctions imposed by the European Union, i.e., designation of additional individuals. Prevent provision of financial services or transfer of any financial or other assets or resources that could contribute to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea WMD programmes? (i) sanctions imposed by relevant Security Council resolutions; and (ii) additional sanctions imposed by the European Union, i.e., provision of gold, banknotes and coins, establishment of bank branches or joint ventures, etc. Not enter into new commitments for grants, financial assistance or concessional loans to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, except for humanitarian and developmental purposes, and to reduce current commitments? Not provide public financial support for trade with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea that could contribute to its WMD programmes? Abbreviation: WMD, weapons of mass destruction. a Available in Lithuanian from www3.lrs.lt/pls/inter3/dokpaieska.showdoc_l?p_id=414925. b Available online in Lithuanian from www3.lrs.lt/pls/inter3/oldsearch.preps2?a=320766&b=. 