%%%SANCTIONS|NUCLEAR WEAPON TESTS|DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA|SANCTIONS COMPLIANCE|SAUDI ARABIA|

* Reissued for technical reasons on 8 January 2014. Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) Letter dated 1 November 2013 from the Chargé d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations addressed to the Chair of the Committee The Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations presents its compliments to the Secretariat of the United Nations, and has the honour to transmit herewith a report of the Government of Saudi Arabia addressed to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) (see annex). (Signed) Dr. Abdulmohsen Alyas Chargé d'affaires a.i. [Original: Arabic] Report on the implementation by Saudi Arabia of Security Council resolutions 1874 (2009) and 2094 (2013) concerning the Democratic People's Republic of Korea Introduction Saudi Arabia implements all Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Such resolutions are implemented by a national committee that is composed of the relevant competent authorities. Those authorities have instructed their relevant units to take the measures required to implement Security Council resolutions 1874 (2009) and 2094 (2013), in accordance with the procedures that are followed for all such resolutions. Procedures followed by the competent authorities With a view to ensuring their rapid implementation, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informs all members of the national committee of any resolution the Security Council adopts and provides them with the text thereof. That committee may also call a meeting to discuss how to implement and follow up such a resolution. The competent Saudi Arabian authority has stated that, with regard to civil aviation, there are no transactions or direct shipments between North Korea and Saudi Arabia. The competent Saudi Arabian authority has instructed all land, sea and air border points to scrutinize all shipments from and to North Korea, as well as shipments passing through Saudi Arabian territory, in order to ensure that they do not contain items, equipment or goods that violate the relevant Security Council resolutions. It has also included in the list of suspects the names of those nationals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea who appear in the sanctions lists, while the entities have been added to the "do not transact business with" blacklist of the customs computer system. The competent authority has circulated the above-mentioned resolutions to all ports for implementation. It should be noted that the North Korean-flagged ship that docks at Jeddah Islamic Port only carries livestock. The competent authority has also instructed all of its subsidiary authorities and the Saudi Council of Chambers to take the measures required to implement the requirements of annex II, paragraph 2, concerning companies and annex IV concerning luxury goods. In addition, the competent authority has informed all banks and licensed exchange bureaus of the resolutions. The banks and exchange bureaus indicated that they have no relations and do not conduct business with North Korea or its nationals. They also indicated that they have added North Korea to the list of high-risk States. The competent authority has also stressed to all banks and licensed exchange bureaus that they must take heed of all that is issued by the relevant authorities and take all necessary preventive measures. Following are some of the measures taken by the competent authorities in Saudi Arabia: The names of 12 nationals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea have been included in the list of persons who are prohibited from entering Saudi Arabia and subject to a travel ban (see enclosure) pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1817 (2006), 1874 (2009) and 2094 (2013). The Government of Saudi Arabia has informed the relevant Government authorities and the private sector of the resolutions' provisions, so that they might comply with them. The Government would like to inform the Security Council Committee that it has instructed the relevant Government authorities to implement the requirements of the resolutions that are set out in the following paragraphs: :: Paragraph 17, in which the Security Council requires any State that has been refused by a vessel to allow an inspection to promptly report the incident; :: Paragraph 19, in which the Council requests all States to communicate any information available on transfers of aircraft or vessels to other companies in order to evade the sanctions set out in resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087 (2013) or 2094 (2013), including renaming or re-registering of aircraft, vessels or ships; :: Paragraph 26, in which the Council calls upon all States to supply information at their disposal regarding non-compliance with the measures imposed in resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009), 2087 (2013) or 2094 (2013). List of names of individuals prohibited from entry or transit in accordance with paragraph 8 of Security Council resolution 1718 (2006) as amended by Security Council resolution 1874 (2009) Name Nationality Date and place of birth Comments Other information YUN HO-JIN North Korea 13 October 1944 Director of Namchongang Trading Corporation; oversees the import of items needed for the uranium enrichment programme. A.k.a. YUN HO-CHIN RI JE-SON Director of the General Bureau of Atomic Energy (GBAE), chief agency directing DPRK's nuclear programme; facilitates several nuclear endeavours including GBAE's management of Yongbyon Nuclear Research Centre and Namchongang Trading Corporation. A.k.a. RI CHE-SON HWANG SOK-HWA Not available Director in GBAE; involved in DPRK's nuclear programme; as Chief of the Scientific Guidance Bureau in GBAE, served on the Science Committee inside the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research. RI HONG-SOP Former director, Yongbyon Nuclear Research Centre, oversaw three core facilities that assist in the production of weapons-grade plutonium: the Fuel Fabrication Facility, the Nuclear Reactor, and the Reprocessing Plant. HAN YU-RO Director of Korea Ryongaksan General Trading Corporation; involved in DPRK's ballistic missile programme. PAEK CHANG-HO Born 18 June 1964 in Kaesong. Passport: 381420754; Passport date of issue: 7 December 2011 Senior official and head of the satellite control centre of Korean Committee for Space Technology. A.k.a. PAK CHANG-HO, PAEK CH'ANG-HO CHANG MYONG-CHIN 1965 or 1966 General Manager of the Sohae Satellite Launching Station and head of launch centre at which the 13 April and 12 December 2012 launches took place. A.k.a. JANG MYONG-JIN RA KY'ONG-SU Ra Ky'ong-Su is a Tanchon Commercial Bank (TCB) official. In this capacity he has facilitated transactions for TCB. Tanchon was designated by the Committee in April 2009 as the main DPRK financial entity responsible for sales of conventional arms, ballistic missiles, and goods related to the assembly and manufacture of such weapons. KIM KWANG-IL Kim Kwang-il is a TCB official. In this capacity, he has facilitated transactions for TCB and the Korea Mining Development Trading Corporation (KOMID). YO'N CHO'NG NAM Chief Representative for KOMID. KOMID was designated by the Committee in April 2009 and is the DPRK's primary arms dealer and main exporter of goods and equipment related to ballistic missiles and conventional weapons. KO CH'O'L-CHAE Deputy Chief Representative for KOMID. KOMID was designated by the Committee in April 2009 and is the DPRK's primary arms dealer and main exporter of goods and equipment related to ballistic missiles and conventional weapons. MUN CHO'NG-CH'O'L Mun Cho'ng-Ch'o'l is a TCB official. In this capacity he has facilitated transactions for TCB. Tanchon was designated by the Committee in April 2009 and is the main DPRK financial entity for sales of conventional arms, ballistic missiles, and goods related to the assembly and manufacture of such weapons. 