%%%OFFICE BUILDINGS|CONSTRUCTION|INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS|

Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 146 Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals Report of the Fifth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Ken Siah (Singapore) I. Introduction 1. The previous recommendation made by the Fifth Committee to the General Assembly under agenda item 146 is set out in the report of the Committee contained in document A/68/683. 2. The Fifth Committee resumed its consideration of the item at its 28th and 34th meetings on 6 and 28 March 2014. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee's consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records (A/C.5/68/SR.28 and 34). 3. For its further consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following documents: (a) Report of the Secretary-General on the construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch (A/68/724); (b) Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/68/777). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.5/68/L.29 4. At its 34th meeting, on 28 March, the Committee had before it a draft resolution entitled "Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch" (A/C.5/68/L.29), submitted by the representative of Poland and Vice-Chair of the Committee on the basis of informal consultations. 5. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.5/68/L.29 without a vote (see para. 6). III. Recommendation of the Fifth Committee 6. The Fifth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch The General Assembly, Recalling its resolutions 66/240 B of 21 June 2012, 67/244 A of 24 December 2012, 67/244 B of 12 April 2013 and 68/257 of 27 December 2013, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch, and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch;1 2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;2 3. Notes with appreciation the continued efforts of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania in facilitating the construction project; 4. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to include local knowledge and capacity in the implementation of the project; 5. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to mitigate potential risks and to ensure that the construction project is monitored closely and is completed within the approved timeline and resources; 6. Notes the ongoing consultations with the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia with respect to the use of useable furniture and equipment of the Tribunals for the Residual Mechanism, and in this regard encourages the Secretary-General to continue to explore the possibilities for the use of such furniture and equipment and to report thereon in the context of future progress reports; 7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to apply flexible use of office space in the Arusha branch project, upon approval by the General Assembly of flexible workspace arrangements in the Secretariat; 8. Notes that an environmental impact assessment will be carried out to assess the potential hazards and impact of the construction, and looks forward to receiving updates in this regard in the context of the next progress report; 9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the procurement of goods and services for the construction project is carried out in strict compliance with the existing regulations, rules and relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions governing procurement in the United Nations; 10. Reaffirms paragraph 33 of its resolution 62/269 of 20 June 2008; 11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to update Member States regularly, through the Office of Central Support Services of the Department of Management of the Secretariat, on the progress of the construction project; 12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the first part of its resumed sixty-ninth session a progress report on the implementation of the project, outlining, inter alia, the project expenditures and total costs. 