%%%PROGRAMME EVALUATION|RESOURCES MOBILIZATION|PEACEBUILDING|

Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 112 Report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund The Peacebuilding Fund Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report, which covers the period from 1 January to 31 December 2013 is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 63/282, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit an annual report on the Peacebuilding Fund. In 2013, a total of $86.7 million was allocated to 14 countries, a significant increase over the 2012 level. The increase was made possible largely by expanding Peacebuilding Fund support to the design phase of programmes at the country level, as well as by more prioritized work planning. Of the allocations made, 57 per cent were to countries on the Peacebuilding Commission agenda, while four countries, Myanmar, Niger, Papua New Guinea and Somalia, were formally declared eligible to access the Fund. The first-ever Peacebuilding Fund global workshop for field practitioners further provided a platform to improve Fund effectiveness with the launching of enhanced application guidelines. Looking forward, the General Assembly-mandated periodic review of the Peacebuilding Fund that was commissioned in July 2013 will guide the revision of the Fund's business plan in 2014. Donors contributed $40.8 million in 2013, with contributions made by 18 Member States, as the Fund's support base continues to grow. The Fund aims to mobilize a significant replenishment at its next annual stakeholders meeting, scheduled for June 2014, taking into account the results of the 2013 Peacebuilding Fund review. 1. The sixth annual report for the period 1 January to 31 December 2013 is submitted pursuant to the request of the General Assembly in its resolution 63/282. This report will be complemented by a more detailed annual progress report on activities implemented under the Peacebuilding Fund, with a thematic focus to be jointly produced by the Peacebuilding Support Office and the Multi-Partner Trust Fund Office. Additional information is available at www.unpbf.org. II. Global performance and lessons learned 2. The investments of the Peacebuilding Fund in 2013 rose to $86.7 million, a significant increase over the previous year. Financing supported integrated political, security and developmental programmes to consolidate peace and avoid violent conflict in 22 countries. Interventions supported by the Peacebuilding Fund result from deep collaboration between national Governments, the United Nations system, the Peacebuilding Commission and national civil society actors. 3. The heightened levels of disbursements were made possible by expanding Peacebuilding Fund support to the design phase of programmes at the country level, as well as by more prioritized work planning. The Peacebuilding Support Office deployed staff and used video-conferencing to assist the conflict analysis and programme design efforts of the United Nations and national authorities in Kyrgyzstan and Yemen. The Peacebuilding Fund team also participated with the Peacebuilding Commission in priority setting exercises for Liberia and Burundi. In Papua New Guinea, a joint Department of Political Affairs-Peacebuilding Support Office mission helped launch the national peacebuilding Steering Committee that will oversee the Fund financing. The Support Office employed partnerships with PeaceNexus Foundation and Interpeace, in order to mobilize additional expertise in support of programme planning in Kyrgyzstan, Niger and Papua New Guinea. 4. The Peacebuilding Fund country selection strategy continued to prioritize two types of situations: immediately following a peace agreement or political transition where rapid response is a priority; and, over the medium term, in settings where Governments are demonstrating a commitment to confront peacebuilding challenges. 5. The Fund prioritizes countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. In its work regarding these countries in 2013, the Fund advanced on two main fronts. First, the Fund increased its use of its flexibility to help countries in crisis. In particular, the Immediate Response Facility has been called upon in the Central African Republic, Guinea and Guinea Bissau to support priorities identified by the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General to aid in the return to constitutional order. Second, in Burundi, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the Fund has looked to a new generation of national development plans, all of them increasing their focus on governance and peacebuilding, as the critical reference for investment. In Liberia and Burundi, the Fund is encouraging that the existing Fund-specific steering committees amend themselves to merge into the governance structures of these new national strategies. 6. In total in 2013 the Fund made new investments in 14 countries. But there are ongoing activities in many more, and results are often seen only later, during implementation, or even after projects have closed. While the Peacebuilding Fund monitoring system aims to capture this systematically (see sect. IV), one key measure of success is the level of confidence of people in State institutions. An example of progress in 2013 is Liberia, where perception surveys have shown increased appreciation of security services in counties covered by a new justice and security hub, which is financed by the Peacebuilding Fund. This is an important achievement, but it also reflects the time it takes to build institutions. Results are now evident, even though the Secretary-General first reported on this decision in 2010. 7. In September 2013, the Fund reviewed the progress of its new priority country approach. Several lessons emerged. First, the additional assistance during the programme design stage was bearing fruit. Second, the level of familiarity of country-level actors -- among both national and development partners -- with peacebuilding as a concept was an important determinant affecting the ease and quality of programme design. In countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, the level of peacebuilding knowledge was considerably higher. Also, the United Nations leadership played a determinative role. When Representatives of the Secretary-General or Resident Coordinators were actively interested in pursuing a peacebuilding agenda, the Fund's efforts moved more swiftly. Gender and women's empowerment for peacebuilding 8. The Peacebuilding Fund seeks to meet the target of the Secretary-General of allocating at least 15 per cent of peacebuilding funds to projects that have gender equality as the main objective. In 2013, however, only 7.4 per cent of funding of the Fund met this target, despite the fact that the approval rate by the Peacebuilding Support Office of projects focused on gender equality in peacebuilding is very high. In 2012 the figure was higher, 10.8 per cent, owing largely to the "Gender Promotion Initiative" of the Fund, highlighting the value of proactive approaches. In an effort to stimulate more demand, in 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office increased the provision of technical guidance to partners, including through expanded treatment in the new Peacebuilding Fund guidelines and the launching of a new training programme in partnership with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), piloted in June with 30 practitioners from 18 countries. In addition, in 2013 the Support Office organized a thematic review on gender and peacebuilding, looking at both policy issues and Fund practice, with recommendations due in February 2014. Global portfolio 9. The Peacebuilding Fund business plan 2011-2013 established a target of allocating $100 million annually. In 2013, $86.7 million were allocated to 14 countries (see table 1). Fifty-seven percent of allocations were made to countries on the Peacebuilding Commission agenda. Four new countries, Myanmar, Niger, Papua New Guinea and Somalia, were declared formally eligible to access the Fund, allowing them to receive more than $3 million. Mali will be considered soon. An Immediate Response Facility grant was made to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and another is being considered for Colombia. Programmes are closing in the Sudan and Uganda. The Fund continues to aim at focusing its engagement on no more than 20 countries at a time and to support a diversity of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes (see table 2). Setting an interesting example, this year the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) undertook a review of all its activities financed by the Peacebuilding Fund. Roughly three quarters of cumulative financing has gone to countries with a Security Council-mandated United Nations presence, with the majority of that going to countries with special political missions. 10. Donors contributed $40.8 million in 2013 (see figure below). The support base remains broad, with contributions made by 18 Member States. The lower level compared to recent years likely reflects the sound financial status of the Fund at the beginning of the year. In 2014, however, the Peacebuilding Support Office aims to mobilize a major replenishment of the Fund, taking into account increased allocations in 2013, the results of the 2013 Peacebuilding Fund review and the development of a new business plan to be launched mid-year. While forecasts already suggest an increase, the Fund will actively seek higher contributions. Table 1 Peacebuilding Fund allocations by country and type in 2013 (Millions of United States dollars) Date of approval of priority plan Cumulative to date 2013 Allocations Immediate Response Facility Peacebuilding and Recovery Facility Total Peacebuilding Commission countries Burundi February 2008, May 2011 Central African Republic June 2008, February 2010 Guinea April 2009, December 2011 and 2013 (multiple) Guinea-Bissau June 2008, January 2011 Liberia February 2008, May 2011, October 2013 Sierra Leone October 2008, December 2010 Subtotal Peacebuilding Commission countries Countries not on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission Bosnia and Herzegovina Chad Comoros December 2008, May 2013 Côte d'Ivoire July 2008 Democratic Republic of the Congo July 2009 Guatemala November 2010 Haiti Kenya Kyrgyzstan September 2013 Lebanon Libya Myanmar Nepal July 2008, May 2012 Niger Papua New Guinea Somalia Sri Lanka Sudan South Sudan February 2013 Timor-Leste Uganda August 2010 Yemen Peacebuilding Fund review Subtotal Non-Peacebuilding Commission countries Source: Peacebuilding Support Office, December 2013. Figure Table 2 Peacebuilding Fund -- transfers to and expenditures by United Nations agencies, 2010-2012 Transfers Expenditure 2013a FAO ILO IOM UNCDF UN-Habitat UNODC UNEP UNESCO UNFPA OHCHR UNHCR UNICEF UNIDO UN-Women UNOPS UNRWA WFP UNDP WHO Department of Political Affairs Department of Peacekeeping Operations Abbreviations: FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; ILO, International Labour Organization; IOM, International Organization for Migration; OHCHR, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; UNCDF, United Nations Capital Development Fund; UNDP, United Nations Development Programme; UNEP, United Nations Environment Programme; UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; UNFPA, United Nations Population Fund; UN-Habitat, United Nations Human Settlements Programme; UNHCR, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; UNICEF, United Nations Children's Fund; UNIDO, United Nations Industrial Development Organization; UNODC, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; UNOPS, United Nations Office for Project Services; UNRWA, United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East; UN-Women, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women; WFP, World Food Programme; WHO, World Health Organization. Source: Multi-Partner Trust Fund Office Gateway, Peacebuilding Fund financial data, January 2014. a Interim financial data for selected agencies (January-September 2013). III. Country-specific engagements of the Peacebuilding Fund A. Countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission Burundi: addressing risks to peacebuilding prior to next election (2015) 11. The Peacebuilding Fund has been engaged in Burundi since early 2007, starting with an initial three-year $40 million investment. Fund support continued in 2011, with another three-year allocation of $9.2 million, focused on the reintegration of internally displaced, repatriated refugees and ex-combatants in Bubanza, Cibitoke and Bujumbura Rural, three north-western provinces at risk of relapse owing to extreme poverty, inter-group tensions and cross-border movement between Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo. In early 2013, in partnership with the Peacebuilding Commission, the Fund began discussions with the United Nations Office in Burundi and the Government of Burundi to launch a third round of funding as part of a joint commitment to support the consolidation of peace in the country. 12. Evidence from a November 2013 survey in the Peacebuilding Fund's targeted provinces suggests that the two rounds of Peacebuilding Fund support have borne fruit, with an overwhelming 96 per cent of respondents noting improvements in inter-group relations over the six years of investments of the Fund. Implemented through UNDP, UNFPA, FAO, UNHCR, ILO and UN-Women, an integrated package of projects delivered through the second Fund allocation has worked to revitalize productive sectors, improve basic services, increase access to housing and resolution of land disputes, as well as train and materially support revenue-generation among vulnerable populations. The third Fund tranche extends these achievements by addressing four strategic priorities: (a) political dialogue and social cohesion; (b) youth participation in political and social life; (c) democratic exercise of human rights; and (d) peaceful resolution of land disputes. The Fund anticipates submission of the new priority plan in January 2014. Central African Republic: responding to relapse into violent crisis 13. In 2013, the Central African Republic relapsed into crisis. Until that time, the Peacebuilding Fund had invested more than $30 million in peacebuilding in the country, alongside other efforts of the United Nations and the international community. While some successes at the individual project level were achieved, the collective result must nevertheless be recognized as having been insufficient. Renewed efforts and different approaches are required. 14. As at early 2013, the Peacebuilding Fund had few active projects in the Central African Republic, as the earlier allocations had largely been expended. Active Fund projects included only the construction of barracks in the east, suffering heavy delays even before the crisis, and a project for the reintegration of ex-combatants in the north-west, which was initiated in 2012 and is close to completion. In March 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office suspended its activities as a result of the unconstitutional change of Government. 15. By the second half of the year, the transitional arrangements put in place offered the only path towards a peaceful resolution of the crisis. Accordingly, following the priority request of the Special Representative and with the support of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office, in September, agreed to finance the rehabilitation of functional capacities of police and gendarmerie stations, in collaboration with the European Union. After the deepening violence in December 2013, the Fund allocated $0.9 million to OHCHR to support the deployment of human rights officers to the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic, in support of Security Council resolution 2121 (2013) and my new "Rights Up Front" agenda. Guinea: addressing risks to peace 16. Since Guinea's placement on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2011, the Fund has allocated a cumulative total of $39 million in three areas: (a) security sector reform; (b) national reconciliation; and (c) youth and women's employment. Guinea participates in the gender promotion initiative, under which UNDP, UNFPA and UNICEF are working with security sector forces on gender-based violence and women's leadership issues. In 2013, the Fund utilized the full range of its instruments in support of peace, extending fast and flexible Immediate Response Fund support to ease the political crisis surrounding legislative elections, and approving a new Peacebuilding and Recovering Facility allocation of $15.3 million. Such assistance is crucial for Guinea, the only country on the Commission agenda without a Security Council-mandated United Nations mission and comparatively lower levels of development assistance. 17. The Fund helped ensure that the elections of 28 September were largely peaceful by filling crucial financial gaps, addressing sources of tension and supporting the mediation efforts of my Special Representative for West Africa. Specifically, projects with UNDP, the National Democratic Institute and the International Foundation for Electoral Systems aimed at creating a conducive environment for elections by promoting trust between political parties, enhancing monitoring by civil society and women, deploying special security forces, and encouraging legal recourse for disagreements instead of resort to violence. Additionally, in collaboration with the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes and the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding, funding supported community conflict prevention initiatives, and, in collaboration with the United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire, the establishment of additional polling stations to address political opposition concerns. In total, the Fund investment of just over $9 million significantly contributed to the acceptance of the results by all but one political party, the establishment of a parliament, and the absence of destabilizing violence. The Fund also managed to catalyse additional donor funds to fill critical gaps and, more importantly, support United Nations efforts to unblock a political stalemate that had triggered violence owing to delayed elections. 18. In order to support the consolidation of post-election peace, on 6 December 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office approved a new allocation of $15.3 million. This allocation emphasizes two priority areas that previously received less attention, namely, national reconciliation and youth and women employment. Support for the latter will be given in partnership with the World Bank's public work sector support. The Fund will contribute $2 million to a $25 million programme to support the Productive Social Safety Net, benefiting an estimated 500,000 vulnerable persons. Guinea-Bissau: building momentum for the transition and elections 19. Following the military coup d'état in April 2012, the Peacebuilding Support Office suspended its support of $16.8 million. Although constitutional order has not yet been fully restored, positive political developments include the adoption by the Parliament of the transitional regime pact, the formation of a more inclusive government in June, and increasing consensus on the timing of elections. 20. To build on these positive developments, as well as act on the recommendations of the joint African Union/European Union/Economic Community of West African States/United Nations mission in December 2012 and a United Nations technical assistance mission in March 2013, and in response to requests by the Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau, the Fund has begun to partially reengage. While the Peacebuilding and Recovering Facility portfolio will remain suspended until the full restoration of constitutional order, the Peacebuilding Support Office will make available up to $5 million for Immediate Response Fund projects to support the transition process and promote a conducive environment for elections. The funding will support the following activities: a high-level strategic planning commission, to be assisted jointly by the Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS); the employment of women and youth, to be assisted by UNDP; and the coming elections, with special focus on ensuring security, as well as media support, to be assisted by UNIOGBIS. Meanwhile, the gender promotion initiative project on women's economic empowerment resumed in July. Liberia: extending security and justice coverage; advancing reconciliation 21. Liberia was placed on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2010. Since then, Fund support has focused on justice, security, and reconciliation, priorities that have been agreed on between the Government and the Commission. In the area of justice and security, the Fund supports the establishment of five regional justice and security hubs. The first hub, established with $5.3 million in Gbarnga town, and implemented by UNDP and UNOPS is almost fully operational and is already showing results, with the Police Support Unit having effectively responded to 18 security incidents in 2013, compared to 11 in 2012. In a "User satisfaction survey" undertaken by the Government of Liberia in August 2013, community leaders credited the programme with preventing loss of life in Lofa county, $2.5 million has been released for each of the next two hubs in the south-east, and, learning from the first experience, they will focus more on services and less on construction in the early phases. Furthermore, the Government will contribute $500,000 from its capital budget for each of the next two hubs, in addition to covering recurrent costs. 22. In the area of reconciliation, an alternative land dispute resolution mechanism, funded by the Peacebuilding Fund and designed by the Land Commission and UNHabitat, has been responding to citizen demands for services that are more accessible, reliable and cost effective. Every week, between 100 and 125 people visit five land coordination centres, which work through traditional leaders, local officials and the judiciary, as well as women and youth leaders, to offer a one-stop-shop for alternative resolutions to land disputes. In their first year, the land coordination centres have taken up 148 cases, 17 of which have been resolved. According to the Chair of the Land Commission, evidence of early success has induced other donors to provide additional funding. 23. On 3 October 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office approved an additional contribution of $15 million, which is fully aligned with the Government Agenda for Transformation. This contribution is helping to kick-start the implementation of the National Reconciliation Roadmap, launched in June 2013, and focusing on community-level conflict management, including the Palava Hut process, women-targeted conflict resolution mechanisms (the "peace huts"), conflict sensitive management of land and natural resources, sustainable livelihoods, and constitutional and legal reform. Key implementing partners for this allocation include UNDP, UN-Habitat, UNICEF and UN-Women. Sierra Leone: maintaining peacebuilding support during the transition of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone 24. Since it was placed on the Peacebuilding Commission agenda in 2006, the Fund has supported Sierra Leone with funding amounting to $47 million through the end of 2012. After the third successful post-conflict elections in late 2012, the Security Council, acknowledging the helpful role of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Fund, extended the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) until 31 March 2014. Priorities of the final mandate of UNIPSIL include facilitating political dialogue to prevent conflict, including support to the Government, particularly related to the planned constitutional review; security sector support; and the strengthening of human rights institutions and their long-term sustainability. These priorities are consistent with the Government's Agenda for Prosperity, launched in June 2013. 25. To implement activities for these priorities, gap-filling funding was sought from the Fund. Given the tight timeline of the UNIPSIL drawdown Immediate Response Fund funding support was released in late 2013 to kick-start (a) phase 1 of the Constitutional Review ($298,061), implemented by UNIPSIL, and (b) security sector reforms ($2,780,000), implemented by UNDP, to help build effective and accountable institutions for increased citizen security. The latter project benefited from support from the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections. The Peacebuilding Support Office is working to finalize two more projects, one on conflict prevention with UNDP and a second on human rights with OHCHR. 26. The Peacebuilding Commission will remain engaged throughout 2014 beyond the expiration of the mandate of UNIPSIL. During a peacebuilding assessment mission undertaken in late 2013, partners in Sierra Leone requested that the Fund consider additional financing to accompany the continued engagement of the Commission, which will be aligned to support the objectives of the Agenda for Prosperity relating to justice, peace and security. B. Other recipient countries Bosnia and Herzegovina: advancing reconciliation and trust-building 27. In the summer of 2012, the three members of the joint Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina appealed to me for the United Nations to assist reconciliation and trust-building efforts. Two decades after the war, the peacebuilding process remains incomplete, with some worrying signs that inter-ethnic relations are not improving. In this context, in November 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office approved $2 million for the project Dialogue for the future: promoting coexistence and diversity in Bosnia and Herzegovina, implemented by UNDP, UNICEF and UNESCO. As part of its approval, the Support Office requested the Department of Political Affairs to play an active role in assisting the efforts of the United Nations country team. A joint Department of Political Affairs/Peacebuilding Support Office mission to Sarajevo in December underscored the importance of (a) continued engagement of the presidency; and (b) that the various project activities, including increased outreach to youth, more cross-ethnic dialogue space and media work, focus on advocating real policy options that can reverse the increasing isolation of ethnic groups. Chad: conflict prevention through peaceful coexistence 28. In 2013, peacebuilding efforts in Chad continued to address persistent intra- and inter-communitarian conflict, including in violent regions bordering Libya and the Sudan. The Fund's active project in Chad, Conflict prevention through community stabilisation (implemented by IOM and UNDP: $2 million), supports peaceful coexistence and conflict resolution programmes, including income generation activities as peace dividends. The project saw the establishment of 13 regional and local Peacebuilding Committees, covering a population of 1 million, including 48,000 returnees from Libya. The project has so far fostered increased dialogue at the community level, whereby chiefs of communities previously hostile to each other have begun holding regular discussions on issues surrounding conflicts. There is also evidence of increased women participation in dialogue activities. Comoros: consolidating peace 29. Despite relative political stability in the Union of the Comoros since the transfer of power in 2011, the political situation remains fragile, meriting continued efforts towards national reconciliation. This has been highlighted by the national authorities, and in April 2012, President Ikililou Dhoinin requested further assistance for peacebuilding from the United Nations in a letter to me. As a result, in July 2013, the Fund approved a $2.5 million allocation, building on the $9 million in financing provided in 2009. Activities will focus on women in peacebuilding, security sector reform, civic education and at-risk youth skills development. In addition, funding will offer targeted support to build the peacebuilding capacity of the Government. The capacity-building initiative will benefit from the services of an international peace and development adviser, to be co-financed by the Fund and the Department of Political Affairs/UNDP joint programme on conflict prevention. Democratic Republic of the Congo: reviewing Peacebuilding Fund lessons for the future 30. In 2009, the Peacebuilding Support Office allocated $20 million to assist peacebuilding in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the Government's programme for the reconstruction of areas of armed conflict in the east (Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (STAREC)) and the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy (ISSSS). In July 2013, an independent evaluation found that the Fund had played an important role in mobilizing attention for STAREC and ISSSS. Most projects were seen to be relevant to stabilization and peacebuilding, with just over half of projects achieving their immediate objectives. Achievements in 2013 included the construction and rehabilitation of five tribunaux de Paix accompanied by the deployment of 13 justice officials and the construction of four prisons. 31. Despite the successes of some activities, however, the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy, and the Peacebuilding Fund within it, struggled to have a tangible effect on peace. While the Peacebuilding Support Office explicitly recognized the risks from the outset, the evaluation found that the effectiveness of activities funded by the Fund were further impeded by insufficiently clear links to the national political dialogue and peace process and weak ownership of the stabilization process by both the Government and the United Nations. In 2014, the Fund will consider further support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in line with the new ISSSS, which puts political dialogue at its centre. Côte d'Ivoire: support to restore public order and security 32. Since 2011, the Peacebuilding Fund has provided a total of $11.05 million to support the Government of Côte d'Ivoire in its efforts to ease tensions and create an environment conducive to peacebuilding and national reconciliation. Funding supports UNOCI and United Nations country team efforts to restore State authority and public security, and strengthen national reconciliation, which are well anchored in Government efforts to consolidate peacebuilding and implement its national development plan for 2012-2015. 33. In the final year of its current allocation (2011-2013) the Fund support for the reconstruction of administrative buildings in 34 western prefectures/subprefectures has enabled the redeployment of civil servants and the resumption of core State functions benefiting 650,000 people. Public security has gradually improved in this region and in Abidjan with enhanced service provision through 27 police and gendarmerie stations serving 1.5 million people. A critical 71 per cent of the population is now aware of the importance of timely birth registration for reducing tensions around citizenship claims through a project funded by the Fund and implemented by UNICEF, UNFPA and UNHCR in 371 communes. United Nations monitoring also finds an increasing number of people turning to local administrations to mediate local conflicts, an encouraging sign of increased confidence in institutions. UNHCR also notes the growing number of refugees and IDPs who have returned home. 34. The Fund has also supported the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which rolled out a nationwide network of local commissions in 2013, following a slow start in 2012. While it is still too early to judge the impact of the work of the Commission, the Fund looks forward to the results of an independent evaluation of its overall programme in 2014. Guatemala: fighting impunity and supporting transitional justice 35. Since May 2011, the Fund has aimed to address peacebuilding priorities through an allocation of $10 million by focusing on strengthening judicial and police capacity (to complement the work of the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala) and transitional justice efforts, in particular through women's groups and civil society. 36. In 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office undertook two joint missions with UNDP to address delays in implementation. Activities are now on track. Capacity-building support to the Public Prosecutor's Office and the National Civil Police, provided by UNDP, UNODC and UN-Women, has helped advance criminal investigation techniques, enabling investigations to go beyond case-by-case efforts to look at broader phenomena such as femicide and the dismantling of criminal networks. The Criminal Analysis Unit of the Public Prosecutor's Office has been strengthened through the hiring of 10 analysts, who subsequently will be absorbed by the budget of the Public Prosecutor's Office. In addition, a 38-member Financial Investigation Unit has been established. These advances have contributed to the decrease of impunity rates for homicide, dropping from 95 per cent in 2010 to 72 per cent in 2013. 37. The Peacebuilding Fund funds also supported a broader international effort on strengthening transitional justice, where a significant number of victims exhumed from mass graves have been identified as a result of Fund-supported DNA technology. In 2013, the Guatemalan Forensic Anthropology Foundation, with support from the Fund through UNDP and other donors, identified more than 30 victims of disappearances, fulfilling a fundamental human right of family members and other relatives. As the son of a woman who disappeared in 1982 stated, "After the massacre ... we had to live in the mountains for two years with other survivors. But I feel happy today. Congratulations and thanks to the organizations involved ... Alone I would never have found her." Kyrgyzstan: providing longer term support for rule of law and social cohesion 38. The Fund first aided Kyrgyzstan after inter-ethnic violence erupted in 2010 with a package of $10 million for activities covering the transition until elections in November 2011. In 2012, President Atambaev requested additional, longer-term assistance through the Fund's Peacebuilding and Recovery Facility. In September 2013, the Fund approved $15.1 million to support (a) the rule of law, justice and human rights; (b) local self-governance and peacebuilding; and (c) multilingual education and civic identity. By the end of 2013, nine projects corresponding to these three outcomes had been approved by the Joint Steering Committee, which will be implemented through OHCHR, UNHCR, UNODC, UNFPA, UN-Women, UNICEF and UNDP starting in early 2014. 39. In 2013, leading up to the new allocation, the Fund in Kyrgyzstan put into practice its decision to increase surge support during the design phase. The Peacebuilding Support Office, in consultation with the United Nations country team in Kyrgyzstan and with support from the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, facilitated an in-depth consultation of multiple stakeholders in the country to further develop and transform the priorities identified by the President into a robust priority plan. It included an early conceptualization mission that benefited from the participation of Dan Smith, the former Chair of the Advisory Group for the Fund. PeaceNexus, a Peacebuilding Support Office partner, was actively involved by providing technical assistance, assisting with conflict analysis and co-facilitating with the United Nations Staff College training on programming for peacebuilding. 40. In 2013, UNDP and UN-Habitat began the implementation of a $1 million joint programme to build capacities of communities and Government structures to manage conflict in hotspots in Beirut and Saida. A conflict mapping was undertaken in both cities, and a joint United Nations task force has been set up, and is implemented by UNDP, OHCHR and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, to assist the Lebanese Armed Forces implement civil-military and human rights components of its five-year plan. Also in 2013, UNRWA was able to raise follow-up funding from the European Union to complement an earlier Peacebuilding Fund project focusing on Palestinian youth. In late 2013, during a monitoring visit, the Peacebuilding Support Office also began to explore whether assistance could be provided to help Lebanon manage the risk of exacerbation of sectarian tensions by the war in the Syrian Arab Republic. Libya: flexible tool to draw on civilian capacity 41. Since violent civil unrest in 2011, peacebuilding efforts have continued despite post-conflict factional violence. In 2013, the Fund had only two small activities. One, developed under the United Nations civilian capacity programme, enables the United Nations to deploy short-term civilian expertise in a rapid manner. This flexible activity, which can be used by different agencies working in Libya, was used in 2013 to build capacity to deliver health and psychosocial support to ex-combatants and their families. Although innovative, this project has suffered delays, owing largely to project selection procedures. The second project (implemented by UNSMIL, UNDP and UN-Women), started in 2012 as a civic education project for the election, has concentrated on citizens' participation in the constitution-building process. Mali: integrated approach to peace consolidation support 42. Following the conduct of successful post-crisis elections in July 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office initiated an informal reflection with members of the Mali Integrated Task Force on how to support peace-consolidation programmes in an integrated manner. The Support Office received an official request in December to support an urgent cantonment project, to be implemented by UNOPS, for 1,000 still armed National Movement for the Liberation de Azawad ex-combatants around the city of Kidal as part of the implementation of the Ouagadougou Peace Agreement. Since then, Mali has requested to be declared eligible for additional financing from the Peacebuilding Fund. Areas for support are likely to include national reconciliation, rule of law and security institutions, restoration of State authority and inclusive governance, and IDPs and refugees reintegration. Together with other partners, the Support Office is exploring the best means for conducting a conflict analysis to guide future programming. Myanmar: supporting programmes in the south-east ethnic States 43. Myanmar continues to pursue vigorously its peace process with ethnic armed groups as a critical component of national reconciliation and the political transition taking place. The Peacebuilding Fund aims to support Government efforts to dedicate resources to this complex process, and use the flexibility of the Fund to support work in ceasefire areas and enhance inclusion. 44. Early in 2013, the Fund helped to equip the Myanmar Peace Center through procurement assistance ($500,000) from UNOPS. In July 2013, Myanmar was declared formally eligible to access funding of the Peacebuilding Fund, paving the way to receive additional resources. In August 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office approved a project of $1.6 million, which is implemented by UNHCR, UNICEF, IOM, UN-Women, UNESCO and UNDP in Mon and Kayin States in the south-east. The project aims to contribute to peacebuilding by increasing the engagement of communities with local governments in service delivery, promoting social cohesion and fostering the involvement of youth and media in the pursuit of peace. In November 2013, the Support Office undertook a joint mission with the World Bank with a view to developing a small grants initiative to accompany the joint peacebuilding needs assessment being undertaken by the Government. 45. In 2014, the Peacebuilding Fund aims to assess how an additional package of support may be designed in collaboration with national actors, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on Myanmar and the United Nations country team. One possible priority would be to address the communal conflict issues originating in Rakhine State. Nepal: pre- and post-election peace consolidation 46. About eight years after the signing of the comprehensive peace agreement concluded between the Government of Nepal and the Communist Party of Nepal, the peace process in Nepal has not yet been completed. Most notably, Nepal has not yet adopted a new post-war constitution, although it did successfully conduct national elections on 19 November 2013, the first since the abolition of the monarchy. In 2013, the United Nations and its partners in Nepal were in the midst of implementing the Peacebuilding Fund's 2012 allocation of $8 million. Peacebuilding Fund support is ensuring that the United Nations is catalytic on some of the most politically sensitive issues of the peacebuilding agenda, e.g., planning for land reform and State restructuring; security; and justice transformation. With a key Fund objective to create conducive environments for the resolution of outstanding peace issues, Fund support, for example, will target leaders of political parties and community-based social organizations to encourage "meaningful dialogue" to resolve political differences (UNDP and UN-Women), and help ensure the democratic rights of the public to have access to information by improving the security of journalists and media professionals in Nepal. Additional Fund support is for the provision of niche technical, policy, coordination and advocacy assistance, among others, to implement action plans on Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), and children affected by armed conflict, which so far have not received adequate attention. Niger: reinforcing Government efforts to act on/respect peace agreement commitments 47. Over the last decade, the Government of the Niger has successfully negotiated informal approaches to address tensions and conflict within its borders, notably between Tuareg and other communities. It also managed a political crisis in 2010, emerging with stronger democratic institutions. The Government has established the High Authority for the Consolidation of Peace, as well as a Sahelo-Saharan strategy for security and development. The Peacebuilding Support Office aims to respond supportively to this Government leadership, in close collaboration with my Special Representative for West Africa, by financing programmes to reduce the risk of volatility in the region reversing peacebuilding gains. 48. Based on the findings of a joint Peacebuilding Support Office/Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West Africa mission, in March 2013, the Support Office approved $3 million, which is implemented by IOM, UNDP, UNICEF and UNFPA, to promote socioeconomic reintegration of youth at risk in the Taouha region, bordering Mali. The project has explicitly aligned itself with efforts of the European Union. Later in 2013, the Government expressed interest in receiving longer-term support through the Peacebuilding and Recovery Facility, for which the Secretary-General declared the Niger eligible in December. A programme will be developed in 2014. Papua New Guinea: enabling the Bougainville peace process 49. In May 2013, the Secretary-General declared Papua New Guinea eligible for Peacebuilding Fund funding to assist the peace process. The 2001 Bougainville Peace Agreement established autonomous arrangements, set for the provisions on weapons disposal and good governance, and called for a referendum on the political status of Bougainville, which is expected to take place between 2015 and 2020. Grievances and unresolved issues, however, remain. Not all armed factions have signed up to the Agreement, operations at the Panguna copper mine continue to polarize the population and the approaching referendum may further heighten tensions. 50. In this context, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Department of Political Affairs are working closely, and launched a joint mission in October 2013 to support United Nations country team efforts to address tensions and outstanding issues. The Fund is well positioned to assist, having played a key role in Bougainville since the original Peace Accords, and maintains broad support to continue as a neutral guarantor of stability. Preparatory financing was approved in October to assist the Autonomous Bougainville Government and partners to undertake a peace and development analysis in partnership with Interpeace. Under the guidance of the Joint Steering Committee, a peacebuilding priority plan is expected to be completed during the first half of 2014. Somalia: support for New Deal Compact implementation 51. The successful end of the transition in 2012, the formation of a new Government and the recovery of the main cities of Somalia from Al-Shabaab together offer the best hope for peace in decades. However, an array of long-standing conflict drivers continues to confront Somalia, while the country continues to face immediate political and security challenges. The Government has several initiatives to address these challenges, including the President's six-pillar policy for peacebuilding and State-building (2012), its Vision 2016 and the Somalia New Deal Compact, agreed in September 2013. The Secretary-General, in response to a request from President Hassan Sheika Mohamoud, on 24 December, declared Somalia eligible for rapid disbursement funding of the Peacebuilding Fund despite significant pledges of assistance. The request emphasized priority consideration for the newly recovered areas of South Central Somalia. Fund activities will be designed in the first quarter of 2014, and will aim to enhance the United Nations ability to support the New Deal Compact. First-phase financing is likely to focus on confidence-building measures between the Government and the population, followed by longer-term support through the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia for Somalis to lay the foundations of a more inclusive political framework by 2016. South Sudan: relapse challenges for peacebuilding 52. At the end of 2013, South Sudan suffered a relapse into conflict. Although all Peacebuilding Fund projects were scheduled to start with the dry season, the impact of the renewed conflict on peacebuilding projects is yet to be seen. 53. In the first quarter of 2013, the Fund approved a contribution of $10 million to support two priorities targeting rural and underserved areas within the peacebuilding support plan developed by the Government and the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan in 2012: (a) improved economic and employment opportunities for young people; and (b) access to water resources for both human and livestock consumption. These activities, all implemented in Jonglei State, respond to identified conflict drivers relating to lack of coverage of services in rural areas and competition over natural resources. 54. At the end of December 2013, four projects were approved and scheduled to begin with the start of the dry season, including a $5.9 million project addressing water resources with UNOPS; a $1.5 million employment project with UNIDO/ILO; $0.8 million towards literacy and livelihood opportunities for youth with UNICEF; and an FAO/UNEP-led $0.5 million project for improved management of natural resources and livelihoods. Efforts to improve women's grass-roots peacebuilding efforts and the gender responsiveness of community-level conflict resolution mechanism were also carried out by UN-Women, under the framework of the gender promotion initiative. Yemen: national dialogue and planning for support beyond Sana'a 55. Yemen, one of only two Arab Spring countries with a negotiated transition framework, has received assistance from the Fund since the 2012 presidential elections. In 2013, the Fund supported the work of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General and the United Nations country team's assistance to the country's Comprehensive National Dialogue, launched in March. With $2.6 million in financing implemented by UNOPS, UNFPA and UN-Women, the Fund has assisted with preparatory and outreach activities focused on inclusion and redress through, for example, support for Government-led commissions addressing land and civil service disputes to address grievances in the south. 56. The National Dialogue Conference, composed of 565 delegates, represented a cross-section of Yemeni society, including the Al-Houthi movement in the north, the southern Hiraak movement, youth (representing 20 per cent of delegates) and women (representing 30 per cent of delegates). Now completed, the dialogue has produced important agreements, despite the challenging context, on more open, accountable governance. These include 30 per cent participation of women across the three branches of Government and improved protection of human rights. The interventions of the Peacebuilding Fund were catalytic. In the face of a liquidity shortage for immediate activities, they helped remove political and financial obstacles for implementation of the transition agreement. Funding subsequently became available from other sources for both the Conference and the work of the two commissions in the south. IV. Results in 2013 by the Peacebuilding Fund outcome and thematic areas 57. The year 2013 marked the end of the first business plan period, offering an opportunity to take stock. As in the past, the 2013 performance assessment was based on a review of 68 projects, the total of active projects in 2013. The number of active projects in 2013 was relatively low, making the results more sensitive to the scores of higher and lower performers. Scores were obtained through a consultative process, utilizing periodic reports of Fund users, Joint Steering Committee annual reports, evaluations and mission reports, as well as in-depth knowledge of Peacebuilding Fund programme officers and in-country management. Projects were ranked in a two-step process: first, whether they were on track to deliver expected outputs (for which recipient United Nations organizations are fully accountable) and, second, whether they have generated additional evidence of contributing more meaningfully to peacebuilding "outcomes". 58. Overall, 79 per cent of projects are on track with respect to delivering outputs. Of the projects not on track, reasons for that vary from management delays to changes in the context undermining performance. In the more demanding category of those with additional evidence of contributing to significant peacebuilding outcomes, the picture is more nuanced. 59. In 2013, the most concerning score was in priority area 2, regarding peaceful coexistence, where only 32.1 per cent of projects in 2013 evidenced a significant contribution to peacebuilding outcomes, compared to 60 per cent in 2012. In the specific outcome area of reconciliation, however, 56 per cent of projects began implementation only in late 2012 and 2013, indicating that one year of project implementation may be too short a period to expect evidence of peacebuilding outcomes. Such results underscore the methodological challenges of measuring peacebuilding results that may occur well after project implementation has ceased. 60. One notable area of improvement in 2013 was support for the establishment or re-establishment of administrative services. While this outcome has historically been a weaker performer, in 2013 42.8 per cent met the higher score, up from zero the year before. The good marks were driven largely by Côte d'Ivoire, and follow a trend noted elsewhere that many of the Fund's greatest contributions in 2013 were through projects that strengthen the role of the State in formerly unstable or marginalized areas. Table 3 Trend analysis of the Peacebuilding Fund global performance, 2011-2013 Priority area assessment Peacebuilding Fund priority areas Total number On track to deliver agreed project outputs (percentage) Projects with supplemental evidence of contributing to peacebuilding outcomes (percentage) Outcomes for priority area 1 1.1 Security sector reform 1.2 Rule of law 1.3 Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration Total 2013 Total 2012 Baseline 2011 Outcomes for priority area 2 2.1 Reconciliation 2.2 Legacies Outcomes for priority area 3 3.1 Income generation 3.2 Livelihood Outcomes for priority area 4 4.1 Administration 4.2 Public services Source: Scores based on Peacebuilding Support Office project assessments, periodic reports, and independent country evaluations, December 2013. V. Peacebuilding Fund oversight and management A. Advisory Group 61. The Peacebuilding Fund Advisory Group met in April and October 2013 to consider progress on the following priority focus activities: (a) Peacebuilding Fund/international financial institutions relations; (b) strengthening monitoring and evaluation; and (c) improving the strategic positioning of the Fund. Overall, the Group endorsed the efforts of the Fund in 2013, noting initiatives to strengthen monitoring and evaluation and ongoing efforts to find ways to work with international financial institutions. A significant task in 2013 was to guide the 2013 independent review (see below). The Group also conducted a number of visits, including to Guinea and Nepal, to observe the Fund operations, and a visit in November by the Chair of the Advisory Group to the World Bank headquarters to further explore ways to collaborate. B. Management focus on priority countries 62. Management decisions to prioritize support for a few priority countries throughout the year yielded increased allocations over 2012, and improved the design and implementation of projects. Specifically, early in 2013, the Peacebuilding Support Office identified seven priority countries to receive focused staff attention and support missions at critical planning moments throughout the year. As a result, the Fund was able to increase allocations and strengthen the foundation for quality programming going forward. C. Overhead budget 63. The Peacebuilding Support Office budget for managing the Peacebuilding Fund is derived from only 3 per cent of donor contributions. The 2013 budget was $2,835,198, with the largest allocations going to posts, rent and mission travel. As noted elsewhere, in 2013 the Support Office heeded donor and Advisory Group recommendations to expand its level of programming and monitoring and evaluation support to recipient countries, despite a budget reduction of more than 5 per cent compared to 2012. 64. Looking ahead to 2014, the projected budget of the Fund will drop to $2,525,384, in line with funds available from the 3 per cent overhead. Peacebuilding Fund operations until now have benefited from a reserve of overhead funds built through generous contributions made in the Fund's early years, a reserve that is now exhausted. Despite declining budgets, partnerships with organizations such as Interpeace and PeaceNexus, as well as support of UNDP and UNHCR, which seconded staff, and Australia, which contributed a Junior Programme Officer, have enabled the Peacebuilding Support Office to expand its support with diminishing resources. The Support Office remains committed to the timely delivery of quality support, despite resource constraints, but is apprehensive about its ability to sustain these efforts against reducing budgets, a concern echoed by the Advisory Group in its October meeting. D. Peacebuilding Fund global workshop 65. The Peacebuilding Support Office and the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes co-hosted the first-ever global workshop, funded by the Government of Finland. Participants from 10 Fund-recipient countries met in Cape Town, South Africa, to discuss the effectiveness of Fund support, with particular focus on improving the draft Peacebuilding Fund application guidelines. Participants engaged in dedicated sessions on conflict analyses, theories of change, and monitoring and evaluation frameworks that translated complex conceptual notions into concrete, hands-on exercises. E. Enhanced monitoring and evaluation 66. In 2013 the monitoring and evaluation unit received additional staffing resources, enabling it to expand country-level support and initiate policies for improved programme performance and knowledge about peacebuilding. Through its expanded capacity, the Peacebuilding Support Office deployed monitoring and evaluation support missions to Burundi, Kyrgyzstan and Papua New Guinea, and piloted a cost-savings workshop for counterparts in Yemen by video-teleconference. In addition to greater assistance in the design phase, the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit initiated training and guidance for monitoring and reporting by Joint Steering Committees. 67. While expanding its support, the Peacebuilding Support Office has continued to ensure broad evaluation coverage, supporting evaluations in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Lebanon and Liberia. Beginning in 2014, the Support Office will directly manage evaluation resources, enabling it to implement higher quality evaluations. The Support Office has also strengthened its monitoring by establishing a more systematic review of project reports and rolling out annual reporting at the programme level by joint steering committees. The Monitoring and Evaluation Unit also started conceptualizing more efficient knowledge management practices, laying the groundwork for a community of practice targeting Fund users to be launched in 2014. F. Updated application guidelines 68. In 2013 there was an opportunity to test and further refine the Peacebuilding Fund application guidelines, a process that began in 2012. The update has benefited from consultation with the field and the Cape Town workshop. Key changes include greater clarity on Immediate Response Facility funding ceilings; a streamlined but strengthened results framework for the Peacebuilding and Recovery Facility to emphasize collective, strategic results; detailed guidance on the establishment of joint steering committees; the elaboration of various opportunities for programme design support; and guidance on design projects and tracking progress on gender equality for peace. G. 2013 Peacebuilding Fund review 69. In line with its terms of reference and complementing monitoring and evaluation work at the country level, the Peacebuilding Support Office launched an independent global review of the Peacebuilding Fund. Implemented throughout the second half of 2013, the review team visited seven Fund recipient countries, pairing visits with other data-collection efforts to determine how fit-for-purpose the Fund's first business plan was at supporting nationally led peacebuilding efforts. The final report of the Review is expected in the first quarter 2014, and will inform target-setting for the business plan 2014-2016. V. Conclusion 70. Seven years after its establishment, the Peacebuilding Fund has marked considerable growth. In line with the requirements of the General Assembly, the time was right in 2013 to launch a global review. During the first half of 2014, after its findings are delivered, the Peacebuilding Support Office will consult with partners and draft the next business plan, positioning the Fund for the period 2014-2016. In June, the Secretary-General will present the plan, and encourage Member States to replenish the finances of this important instrument in the toolbox of the United Nations for building sustainable peace. 