%%%AIRSPACE|TERRITORIAL SEA|CYPRUS|TURKEY|CYPRUS QUESTION|

General Assembly Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 42 Question of Cyprus Security Council Sixty-ninth year Letter dated 7 March 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 6 March 2014 addressed to you by Mehmet Dânâ, Representative of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (see annex). I would be grateful if the text of the present letter and the annex thereto could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 42, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Y. Halit Çevik Permanent Representative Upon instructions from my Government, I am writing in response to the letter dated 20 February 2014 addressed to you by the Greek Cypriot representative in New York and circulated as a document of the General Assembly and the Security Council (A/68/765-S/2014/119), which yet again contains false assertions similar to those made in his previous letters. In order to set the record straight, I would like to bring the following to your kind attention. At the outset, regarding the claims of so-called "infringements of international air traffic regulations" and "violations of the national airspace of the Republic of Cyprus by Turkey", I wish, once again, to reiterate that flights within the sovereign airspace of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC) take place with the full knowledge and permission of the relevant authorities of the State, over which the Greek Cypriot administration in South Cyprus has no jurisdiction or right of say whatsoever. The civil aviation authority of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is the sole competent authority to provide air traffic and aeronautical information services within its own national airspace. Similarly, the allegation raised in the above-mentioned letter in relation to Turkish Cypriot ports is also unfounded, given the fact that the Greek Cypriot administration has no jurisdiction or right of say over Northern Cyprus. This represents yet another attempt aimed at distorting the facts and the realities of the island. As noted in our previous letters, such assertions are based on the false and illegal claim that the sovereignty of the Greek Cypriot administration extends over the whole island, including the territory, national airspace and territorial waters of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. This pretentious contention by the Greek Cypriot side ignores the present realities on the ground, namely, the existence of two independent, self-governing States on the island of Cyprus, each exercising sovereignty and jurisdiction within its respective territory. As for the repeated false allegations regarding the Ercan airport in the north, it should once again be underlined that the technologically up-to-date Ercan area control centre and airport in Northern Cyprus have been providing constant, reliable and safe air traffic services since the Greek Cypriot refusal in 1977 to provide air traffic services in the northern part of the island in line with its isolation policy imposed on the Turkish Cypriot people. Ever since, all flights within the sovereign airspace of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus take place with the full knowledge and consent of the TRNC Civil Aviation Department, over which the Greek Cypriot administration in South Cyprus has no jurisdiction or control. The TRNC legislation on aeronautical safety meets all standards and recommendations of the International Civil Aviation Organization, providing safe and swift navigation of aircraft landing at or taking off from Ercan airport as well as using TRNC airspace. All airports in Northern Cyprus are in full conformity with international standards, and necessary investments have been made to keep up with the developing technology. The number of air traffic controllers has been increased in accordance with the increasing number of flights over the years, and the Ercan area control centre is in constant and close cooperation with the Ankara area control centre in order to ensure the safe conduct of all flights in the region. In 2013 alone, the number of passengers who used Ercan airport stood at almost 3 million, while the projected number for 2014 is 3.2 million. Moreover, in 2013, around 22,000 planes used Ercan airport for arrival and departure and 150,000 planes used Ercan advisory airspace. These numbers are expected to be around 23,000 and 165,000, respectively, for 2014. The Turkish Cypriot side is committed to upholding the highest standards in the field of air navigation safety in full conformity with the Chicago Convention of 1944 and is ready to cooperate with the Greek Cypriot authorities on this very important issue. Continuous attempts by the Greek Cypriot side, through often-repeated false accounts, to confer legitimacy upon the long-defunct "Republic of Cyprus" are futile, since the Turkish Cypriot people will never give in to their unjust demands. What would indeed contribute to a better atmosphere on the island is for the Greek Cypriot side to stop misappropriating for itself the rights and responsibilities that it does not legally have, and to cease its hostile and offensive acts against the Turkish Cypriot people. Moreover, the Greek Cypriot administration should once again be reminded that its counterpart is, and has always been, the Turkish Cypriot side, not Turkey, and that its insistent denial of the Turkish Cypriot rights in the north of the island does not bode well for the prospects of finding a lasting settlement of the Cyprus conflict in line with the established United Nations parameters, which envisage a new partnership on the basis of the political equality of the two peoples of the island within the framework of a bizonal, bicommunal federation with two constituent States of equal status. Availing myself of this opportunity, I would like to call on the Greek Cypriot side to discontinue its well-known propaganda tactics and focus on the full-fledged negotiations conducted under your good offices mission for a comprehensive settlement in Cyprus without further delay. As the Turkish Cypriot side, we are committed to maintaining our constructive and positive stance and encourage our Greek Cypriot neighbours to follow a similar path. I should be grateful if the text of the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 42, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Mehmet Dânâ Representative Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus 