%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC|TERRORISM|

General Assembly Sixty-eighth session Agenda item 110 Measures to eliminate international terrorism Security Council Sixty-ninth year Identical letters dated 8 May 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council Further to our letters regarding the systematic and deliberate crimes committed by armed terrorist groups with the intent of destroying archaeological and religious sites and historical and cultural monuments in Syria and replacing that legacy with a tyrannical ideology that has no connection with any civilization, I should like to inform you that, on the morning of 8 May 2014, another terrorist attack occurred in the city of Aleppo. In this latest attack, armed terrorist groups bombed the historical Carlton Hotel, killing a number of persons and destroying the building completely. Several nearby archaeological sites were also severely damaged. It is worth noting that this crime is not the first directed against Aleppo's cultural and religious legacy. The Carlton Hotel was the target of two prior attempts to destroy it, both of which were thwarted by the Syrian Arab Army. Armed terrorist groups had also previously burned the city's market, the oldest in the world, and attacked the Great Umayyad Mosque. The armed terrorist group calling itself the Islamic Front has taken responsibility for this crime. This action is yet further evidence in support of the request that Syria submitted to the Security Council for the inclusion of the so-called Islamic Front in the list of terrorist organizations. The methods used in this terrorist attack are in line with the terrorist tactics of Al-Qaida. While the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic affirms its resolve to counter terrorism in Syria and its determination to defend the Syrian people and their cultural and historical legacy, it calls on the Security Council and the Secretary-General of the United Nations to condemn these crimes in a clear and stern manner. It also calls on them to act quickly to include the Islamic Front in the List maintained by the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) a concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. The Government furthermore calls on them to take immediate action against those States that support and sponsor these terrorist organizations and hold them accountable for providing financial and logistical to those organizations, and compel them to desist from doing so. I should be grateful if the present letter could be circulated as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 110 on measures to eliminate international terrorism, and of the Security Council. (Signed) Bashar Ja'afari Ambassador Permanent Representative 