%%%HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY|DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA|RECOMMENDATIONS|

United Nations A/HRC/27/10/Add.1 General Assembly Distr.: General 12 September 2014 Original: English Human Rights Council Twenty-seventh session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Democratic People's Republic of Korea Addendum Views on conclusions and/or recommendations, voluntary commitments and replies presented by the State under review The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) regards the UPR as an important and effective mechanism for reviewing the human rights situation of all countries in impartial and objective manner as well as for facilitating the protection and promotion of human rights throughout the world. 2. Proceeding from this perspective, the DPRK respects the UPR mechanism and sincerely took part in its first review in December 2009, followed by its participation in the second UPR in May 2014. The DPRK, in the light of its commitment to the protection and promotion of human rights, gave serious consideration to the comments made by many countries during its second review. 3. Of 268 recommendations received during the review, the DPRK rejected 83 recommendations on the ground as they seriously distorted the reality of and slandered the country driven by sinister political motivation. It stated that it would, in accordance with UPR procedure, examine 185 remaining recommendations and give its view on them in due time. 4. The DPRK Government, with a sincere attitude, carefully reviewed the recommendations in broad consultations with relevant national institutions and organizations. 5. As a result, out of 185 recommendations, the DPRK decided to accept 113 recommendations. Most of the elements in these recommendations are already being implemented or concrete measures shall be followed for their implementation in the future. 6. The DPRK decided to partially accept 4 recommendations. For instance, recommendations such as 124.7 contain elements not acceptable; however, it decided to accept other elements contained therein such as ratification of the CRPD proceeding from its position to respect views of those countries that made these recommendations and in the hope that deepening the understanding of the DPRK would help to remove the prejudiced misunderstanding in the future. 7. The DPRK decided to take note of 58 recommendations. At this stage, the circumstances or environment of the country do not allow taking action on these recommendations, however, continued efforts will be made to look into the possibility of their implementation in the future. Some issues mentioned in the recommendations including 124.98, 124.108, 124.124, 124.139 do not exist in the DPRK at all, however, it decided to take note of them with a view to directing continuous efforts to prevent the occurrence of such phenomena. 8. The DPRK decided not to accept 10 recommendations, as they are incompatible with the social system and domestic law of the DPRK. Moreover, some recommendations like 124.93, 124.123 are either untrue or based on distortion and fabrications of the true picture of the DPRK for the purpose of impairing its image; therefore, it rejects these recommendations. 9. The DPRK is fully committed to make further efforts for the contribution of maintaining and promoting sincere and constructive dialogue and cooperation among countries through UPR mechanism on the basis of respect for sovereignty and equality. And it will continue to fulfill faithfully its obligation in the international field of human rights. 10. The DPRK position on the recommendations made during its second UPR are as follows: (a) Recommendations that enjoy the support of the Government of the DPRK; (b) Recommendations that have been partially accepted by the Government of the DPRK; (c) Recommendations that have been noted by the Government of the DPRK; (d) Recommendations that do not enjoy the support of the Government of the DPRK. 