%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|ALBANIA|NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS|

United Nations A/HRC/WG.6/19/ALB/3 General Assembly Distr.: General 24 January 2014 Original: English Human Rights Council Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Nineteenth session Geneva, 28 April-9 May 2014 Summary prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21 Albania* The present report is a summary of 12 stakeholders' submissions to the universal periodic review. It follows the general guidelines adopted by the Human Rights Council in its decision 17/119. It does not contain any opinions, views or suggestions on the part of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), nor any judgement or determination in relation to specific claims. The information included herein has been systematically referenced in endnotes and, to the extent possible, the original texts have not been altered. As provided for in Resolution 16/21 of the Human Rights Council, where appropriate, a separate section is provided for contributions by the national human rights institution of the State under review that is accredited in full compliance with the Paris Principles. The full texts of all submissions received are available on the OHCHR website. The report has been prepared taking into consideration the periodicity of the review and developments during that period. The stakeholders listed below have contributed information for this summary; the full texts of all original submissions are available at: www.ohchr.org. Civil society Individual submissions: AI Amnesty International, London, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; ARCT Albanian Rehabilitation Centre for Trauma and Torture, Tirana, Albania; APG23 Associazione Communità Papa Giovanni XXIII, Rimini, Italy; OIEC Catholic International Education Office, Brussels, Belgium; Joint submissions: BKTF/JS1 Joint submission 1 submitted by the United for Child Care and Protection Coalition, Albania; JS2 Joint Submission 2 submitted by: PINK Embassy/LGBT Pro Albania (Albania), Legal Representative Alliance Against Discrimination of LGBT (Albania) and ILGA-Europe (Belgium); BKTF-Youth/JS3 Joint Submission 3 submitted by the United For Child Care and Protection Coalition, Youth Advocacy Group with the input of 28 children (Albania); JS4 Joint Submission 4 submitted by the Albanian National Council of Disabled People (Albania) with the support from the European Disability Forum (Belgium) and the International Disability Alliance (Switzerland); JS5 Joint Submission 5 submitted by the Albanian Coalition against Child Trafficking and the Sexual Exploitation of Children(Children's Human Rights Centre of Albania, Information and Research Centre on Children's Rights in Albania and Albanian National Child Helpline ) in collaboration with ECPAT; JS6 Joint Submission 6 submitted by the Child Led Groups `Voice 16+' and Peer Educator's Group (Albania ) with the support of Save of the Children and World Vision. Regional intergovernmental organization (s): CoE Council of Europe, Strasbourg (France). Attachments: (CoE-ACFC) Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention For the Protection Of National Minorities, Strasbourg, 4 Jane 2012, ACFC/OP/III (2011) 009. (CoE-ECRI) European Commission against Racism and Intolerance report on Albania, adopted in December 2009 and published in March 2010, CRI (2010)1. (CoE-ECRI: Conclusions) European Commission against Racism and Intolerance conclusions on the implementation of the recommendations in respect of Albania subject to interim follow-up, adopted on 4 December 2012, CRI (2013) 3. (CoE-CPT) Report to the Government of Albania on the visit to Albania carried out by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment from 10-12 May, 2010, CPT/Inf (2012)12. (CoE-GRETA) - Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, Report concerning the implementation of the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings by Albania, First Evaluation Round, Strasbourg, 2 December, 2011; GRETA (2011)22. (CoE-Commissioner) Letter of Mr. Nils Muiznieks, Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe to the Minster of Justice of Albania, Strasbourt, 15 October, 2012, CommHR/EB/sf 107-2012. (CoE-Commissioner: Press release) Press release of the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe Albania entitled `Commissioner urges quicker progress to establish the truth on 2011 events ', issued in January, 2013. OSCE/ODIHR Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe, Warsaw, Poland; (OSCE/ODIHR: Report 2011) Election Assessment Mission Final Report, Local Government Elections on 8 May 2011, Warsaw, 15 August 2011. (OSCE/ODIHR: Report 2013) Election Assessment Mission Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions, Parliamentary Elections on 23 June, 2013. A. Background and framework 1. Institutional and human rights infrastructure and policy measures 1. Amnesty International (AI) was concerned that in recent years the authorities failed to implement, or indeed respond to, the recommendations of the Ombudsperson (People's Advocate). AI referred to the recommendation of the Human Rights Committee in 2013, calling on Albania to "intensify its efforts in responding diligently and promptly to the Ombudsman's recommendations". 2. The Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention For the Protection of National Minorities of the Council of Europe (CoE-ACFC) urged Albania to continue providing the Office of the People's Advocate with the appropriate level of financial and human resources, in order to allow it to fulfil its duties effectively and independently. 3. CoE-ACFC welcomed the appointment of the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination, who was empowered to enforce the Law on the protection against all forms of discrimination, examine complaints from individuals, conduct administrative investigations, impose sanctions, and represent complainants before judicial bodies in civil cases. It encouraged Albania to continue providing the Office of the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination with appropriate resources to allow it to fulfil its duties effectively and independently, and increase the monitoring of alleged cases of discrimination. B. Cooperation with human rights mechanisms N/A C. Implementation of international human rights obligations 1. Equality and non-discrimination 4. European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (CoE-ECRI) and CoE-ACFC welcomed the adoption of the Law on the protection against all forms of discrimination in 2010. CoE-ECRI stated that the Law covered direct and indirect discrimination based on race, colour, religion, language and ethnic origin. However, CoE-ECRI noted that the Law failed to prohibit discrimination based on nationality; a proclaimed intention to discriminate, incitement to discrimination; and aiding and abetting discrimination. 5. CoE-ACFC stated that while a general climate of tolerance and understanding prevailed between national minorities and the majority, Albania recorded its first major hate crime in the form of an arson attack against Roma dwellings inhabited by some 40 families in Tirana in February 2011. The attack resulted in some serious injuries and the displacement of large numbers of people. CoE-ACFC was concerned that law enforcement bodies had not taken the necessary steps to protect the victims of the attack. It encouraged Albania to prevent, investigate and prosecute perpetrators of offences committed with racial or xenophobic motives. 6. Joint Submission (JS) 2 stated that the Government's Plan of Measures against discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity had brought together, in the last two years, several ministries, organizations working on the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) persons, the People's Advocate, the Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination and the international community in an effort to effect positive changes regarding the rights of LGBT persons. The political parties, on the other hand, had shown diverging trends in their approach towards LGBT persons. During the 2013 parliamentary elections campaign two political parties publicly opposed the rights of LGBT persons. JS2 noted other similar cases of discriminatory speech in the media. 2. Right to life, liberty and security of the person 7. Associazione Communità Papa Giovanni XXIII (APG23) referred to cases of blood feuds and noted that international organisations had appealed to Albania to adopt effective measures to put an end to this phenomenon. It recommended that Albania elaborate guidelines and plans to address the phenomenon of blood feuds by involving civil society in their formulation and implementation, as well as guarantee the security of victims of feuds. 8. The Albanian Rehabilitation Centre for Trauma and Torture (ARCT) stated that the risk of torture during pre-trial detention remained high. The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CoE-CPT) referred to a significant number of allegations of physical ill-treatment of criminal suspects by the police, and noted that the allegations related mostly to ill-treatment inflicted at the time of questioning with a view to obtaining a confession. CoE-CPT was particularly concerned about allegations of ill-treatment received from young persons who alleged that they had been subjected to physical ill-treatment by the police at the time of apprehension and/or during interrogation as well as ill-treatment of a psychological nature. 9. CoE-CPT reiterated its recommendation that Albania pursue its efforts to combat all forms of ill-treatment by the police. All police officers should be reminded that any form of ill-treatment of detained persons is not acceptable and will be punished accordingly. ARCT recommended that Albania ensure effective and impartial investigations into all alleged cases of torture and provide sanctions which commensurate with the seriousness of the crime. 10. ARCT stated that excessive use of pre-trial detention constituted a serious problem. Although gaps in legislation contributed to excessive use of pre-trial detention, the key problem remained inadequate implementation of the existing legal standards. Judges had failed to consider the use of such alternatives. The duration of pre-trial detention was another common problem. 11. ARCT stated that penitentiary centres continued to operate above their capacity and that overall conditions remained below standard. It referred to reports documenting inadequate detention conditions and treatment of detainees in police cells. CoE referred to findings of CPT's visit indicating that: (i) material conditions of detention were poor in most of the police establishments visited and in many cells at Burrel Prison and at the Shkodra Psychiatric Hospital; (ii) conditions were appalling at the Kukes Pre-Trial Detention Centre; and (iii) some units at Prison No. 313 were overcrowded. 12. ARCT recommended that Albania improve the conditions of detention for those held on remand and convicted persons by allocating sufficient resources for their construction and operation. 13. AI continued to be concerned at Albania's failure to prevent family violence and protect the victims of such violence. It stated that despite reforms, domestic violence continued to be a major scourge. 14. AI stated that the amendments to the Criminal Code criminalized violence in the family as a separate criminal offence. In 2013, Parliament adopted further amendments to the Code, which included a provision for heavier sentences for certain offences, among which is the "intentional killing of a person who is a spouse, former spouse, cohabitant or former cohabitant, or a close relative of the offender by blood or marriage". Another amendment criminalized forced sexual relations with a spouse or cohabitee, effectively criminalizing rape within a marriage or a cohabitating relationship. AI recommended that Albania ensure that the Ministry of Justice monitors and reports on the implementation of the Criminal Code relating to domestic violence and the Law on Violence in Family Relations. 15. AI stated that the Law on Violence in Family Relations enabled victims of domestic violence to apply to the courts for an order guaranteeing them some form of protection from the perpetrator. However, although the number of petitions had increased, relatively few protection orders had been granted by the courts. It remained concerned that where protection orders had been granted, mechanisms to ensure their implementation remained weak and it was not uncommon for perpetrators to break the conditions of the order and to attack their victim again. The legal sanctions for perpetrators who break the conditions of protection orders were not consistently implemented. The United for Child Care and Protection Coalition (BKTF/JS1) made a similar observation. 16. AI recommended that Albania identify and overcome the factors which result in the majority of petitions for protection orders being withdrawn, ensure that, when granted, protection orders effectively secure the safety of victims, and that perpetrators who break such orders are sanctioned in accordance with the law. AI recommended that Albania ensure that all reports of domestic violence are thoroughly investigated and perpetrators are brought to justice. 17. BKTF/JS1 stated that domestic violence continued to affect the life and development of children. It referred to a high percentage of physical and psychological violence against children. According to JS6, violence was used in families as a means to educate and discipline children. JS6 recommended that a child protection mechanism be promoted and strengthened, and that cases where children experience violence be identified and referred to the responsible authorities. 18. JS6 stated that children of the Roma community were often forced to beg for money. BKTF/JS1 referred to documented cases of children begging in the streets in Tirana and stated that children were also used for begging in neighbouring countries. Most of the children involved in begging came from extremely poor and socially marginalized families, who often migrate - internally or externally - for economic reasons. The United For Child Care and Protection Coalition, Youth Advocacy Group (BKTF-Youth/JS3) made a similar observation. BKTF/JS1 stated that no protection or reintegration measures were provided, especially in the cases of exploitation of children by their own parents or siblings. As CoE noted, the European Committee of Social Rights (CoE-ECSR) found that measures taken to assist and protect street children were not sufficient. 19. JS5 stated that despite some efforts to bring legislation in line with international treaties, children continued to be victims of prostitution, pornography and sexual exploitation. It stated that the National Action Plan did not address the different manifestations of commercial sexual exploitation of children, including child prostitution, child pornography and sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism. JS5 stated that even though referral mechanisms existed to support child victims of sexual exploitation, no specific institutions and social services were available to accommodate and provide adequate care, protection and assistance to child victims of prostitution, pornography or sexual exploitation online. 20. BKTF/JS1 recommended that Albania establish a national referral mechanism for child victims of exploitation and provide family strengthening programmes to empower families and reduce child exploitation. 21. JS5 stated that children involved in prostitution were not exempt from criminal responsibility and therefore, in principle, they could be prosecuted for being victims of child prostitution. It recommended that the Penal Code be amended to contain a specific provision which would expressly state that child victims of prostitution should not be prosecuted. JS5 also recommended that the Penal Code expressly criminalize the following offences: offering, obtaining, procuring or providing a child for child prostitution. 22. As CoE noted, CoE-ECSR considered that the prohibition of employment for those under the age of 18 in dangerous or unhealthy activities, as well as the effective protection of children subject to compulsory schooling from work which would deprive them of the full benefit of their education was not guaranteed in practice. 23. CoE-ECRI was concerned about the phenomenon of trafficking in children, of whom a disproportionate number of victims were Roma and Egyptian children. As CoE noted, CoE-ECSR found that measures taken to combat trafficking in children were not sufficient. JS5 made similar observations. The Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (CoE-GRETA) stated that one of the major challenges to preventing trafficking in children was to combat the elevated school drop-out rate, particularly among children in Roma and Egyptian communities. 24. JS5 recommended that Albania allocate sufficient resources for the implementation of the Plan of Action on the Fight against Child Trafficking and the Protection of Child Victims of Trafficking. It recommended that Albania ensure that child victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation receive free legal assistance from the State during criminal proceedings. During the criminal case, the child should be able to testify through a video recording system in order to avoid any confrontation with the perpetrator which could be a source of re-victimization for the child. 25. CoE-GRETA stated that traffickers were turning increasingly to national trafficking. JS5 stated that the number of arrests, prosecution and conviction of traffickers appeared to remain low. CoE-GRETA welcomed the Government's efforts in establishing the anti-trafficking legal and institutional framework. To be efficient, legislation and strategies should be duly implemented. 26. CoE-GRETA considered that Albania should pursue its efforts to identify victims of trafficking, by ensuring that the norms and procedures are duly followed by all the actors concerned. The authorities should also strengthen co-operation with destination and transit countries, in order to improve identification of Albanian victims abroad and the consequent measures of assistance to be provided to such victims. 27. CoE-GRETA urged the authorities to ensure that victims of trafficking actually benefit from free legal assistance and that all assistance measures for victims of human trafficking provided for by law was guaranteed in practice. It considered that the authorities should ensure that victims of trafficking can effectively exercise their right to be compensated by the perpetrators. 3. Administration of justice, including impunity and the rule of law 28. ARCT stated that expensive court fees were an issue of concern. As CoE noted, the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe (CoE- Commissioner) considered the system of court fees in civil proceedings as a potential obstacle to accessing justice. He stated that the requirement to pay 3 per cent of the value of a claim in civil disputes in advance and 3 per cent of the value adjudicated by a court to have a judgment enforced could be a disproportionate measure limiting access to courts. He concluded that because of these costs some persons had been prevented from pursuing their rights in civil proceedings because of economic difficulties. 29. The CoE-Commissioner stated that certain shortcomings in the functioning of the legal aid system remained. As CoE noted, the CoE-Commissioner was concerned by the low rate of approval of requests for free legal aid by the State Commission for Legal Aid. He noted that, lack of public awareness of the availability of legal aid appeared to be one of the reasons for the low number of applications. CoE-Commissioner urged Albania to provide adequate financial resources for awareness-raising campaigns about availability of free legal aid. The CoE-Commissioner stated that due to the very restrictive selection criteria a limited number of lawyers were designated, which was inadequate to ensure appropriate legal aid. Additionally, the lack of transparency in the selection process, and the excessive lawyers' fees had been reported as issues that require serious consideration by the authorities. 30. CoE-CPT called upon the authorities to ensure that all persons detained by the police are fully informed of their fundamental rights from the very outset of the deprivation of their liberty. 31. CoE-ECRI noted with regret that no progress had been made towards the introduction of a system guaranteeing that all allegations of ill-treatment by the police would be subject to a thorough investigation by an independent body. 32. Two years passed after the regretful events in Tirana during which four demonstrators were shot dead and a number of policemen and protesters were injured, the CoE-Commissioner remained concerned at the fact that persons responsible for these violent acts and human rights violations had not yet been held to account. He urged the Government to proceed to the completion of a thorough, impartial and credible investigation and fair judicial proceedings, thus giving a clear signal that impunity for serious human rights violations is not acceptable. 33. CoE-CPT noted allegations received from juveniles that they had been subjected to police questioning without the presence of a lawyer or a parent, and in a few cases, had also been made to sign statements. It recommended that the authorities ensure that juveniles deprived of their liberty by the police do not make any statement or sign any document without a lawyer and ideally another trusted adult being present to assist them. 34. CoE-CPT noted with concern that it was common practice in several of the police stations visited to hold juveniles together with adult detainees in the same cell. ARCT made a similar observation. CoE-CPT recommended that steps be taken in all police establishments to ensure that juveniles are no longer held in the same cell as adult detainees. 35. BKTF/JS1 stated that Albania demonstrated progress in bringing the juvenile justice system into greater compliance with international standards and principles, including the through creation of specialized sections for minors in district courts; specialized prosecutors and a specialized police unit; renovation of existing facilities, elimination of overcrowding, and greater access for juvenile detainees to education. Nonetheless, there was no comprehensive juvenile justice law and strategy in place. There were gaps in legislation specifically addressing children under 14 years old, with a minimum age of criminal responsibility, which render proper treatment of juveniles challenging. There were no comprehensive national re-integration programs as educational, recreational and psycho-social services remained fragmented. BKTF/JS1stated that the juvenile justice strategy was drafted by the Ministry of Justice in 2011 in cooperation with a civil society organization but it had not been finalized. 4. Right to privacy, marriage and family life 36. JS2 stated that the Family Code prohibited marriage between people of the same sex. LGBT persons could adopt a child as individuals but not as a couple. 37. BKTF/JS1 referred to information indicating an increasing number of `social orphans" in child care institutions coming from families with one parent, from families with social-economic difficulties or parents with health problems. BKTF/JS1 stated that young people were leaving childcare institutions at the age of 16, without any further monitoring and financial resources. 38. BKTF/JS1 recommended that Albania develop alternative forms of care such as foster care and improve conditions in existing residential institutions and capacity of their staff. It also recommended the extension of the age of leaving public care to 18 years. BKTF-Youth/JS3 made similar recommendations. 5. Freedom of religion, and right to participate in public and political life 39. CoE-ACFC urged Albania to intensify its efforts to return property belonging to religious communities and grant fair and equitable compensation. 40. The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE/ODIHR) stated that legislation provided for a minimum 30 per cent representation of women in all public-sector institutions at national and local levels. However, women remained under-represented in public and political life, especially in decision-making positions. 41. OSCE/ODIHR stated that each candidate list was legally required to include at least one male and one female in the top three positions and must consist of at least 30 per cent of each gender. During 2013 elections, many parties included women at the bottom of the lists in unwinnable positions. OSCE/ODIHR stated that the provision that obliged the Central Election Commission (CEC) to deny registration for non-compliant lists was repealed in 2012, reducing the effectiveness of the gender quota requirement. The three largest parliamentary parties were issued fines for failing to meet the gender quota during the 2013 elections. Although the CEC allowed these parties an opportunity to correct the gender quota breaches, they chose not to do so, and the non-compliant lists were registered. 42. CoE-ACFC encouraged Albania to improve the representation of national minorities in elected assemblies by removing all undue obstacles, including those enshrined in law. Substantial efforts should also be made to promote a better representation of the Roma at all levels. Particular attention should be paid to the representation of persons belonging to numerically-smaller minorities. OSCE/ODIHR recommended that efforts to ensure effective participation of Roma communities in public and political life, especially in elections be increased. 43. OSCE/ODIHR noted concern over alleged vote-buying attempts in Roma and Egyptian communities during the 2011 elections and referred to reports of pressure exercised on some Egyptian and Roma voters by state authorities. 44. JS4 stated that persons with disabilities were not represented in political life and decision making processes. The Constitution denied the right to vote to persons with psychosocial or intellectual disabilities. The Electoral law contained a non-discrimination provision that included physical but no other disabilities. JS4 recommended that Albania ensure the full participation and representation of persons with disabilities in the local and central governments and in the Office of the People's Advocate. 6. Right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work 45. As CoE noted, CoE-ECSR found that civil servants and employees in electricity and water supply services were denied the right to strike. 7. Right to social security and to an adequate standard of living 46. AI stated that, despite legal provisions guaranteeing the right of orphans to priority access to social housing, young people leaving social care remained at risk of homelessness. Many continued to live for years in dilapidated school dormitories in degrading conditions and others struggled to pay for low-grade rented accommodation, in some cases with limited and temporary financial support from international humanitarian organizations. 47. AI was concerned that considerable numbers of people may be, or have already been, rendered homeless as a result of the restitution of property to former owners. It recommended that Albania protect citizens from forced evictions carried out without due process of law, and ensure that those lawfully evicted who would otherwise be homeless, are provided with adequate alternative housing. 48. AI recommended that Albania ensure that central government and local authorities implement legislation granting priority access to social housing to vulnerable groups and individuals, allocating housing without discrimination and according to transparent, fair and expeditious procedures. 8. Right to health 49. JS6 stated that hospitals in urban areas and health centres in rural areas lacked adequate infrastructure and specialized doctors. Patients in rural areas had to apply to the hospitals of big cities in order to get a specialized service. It stated that patients had to pay money to receive public health services, while all those who pay health insurance to the State were entitled to receive free health services and thus, this amount of money was an illegal payment made `according to the patient's inclination and financial means'. 50. JS6 noted the lack of health professionals in schools and stated that even in schools where health professionals were appointed, they did not work full time. 9. Right to education 51. Issues on the right to education were raised by JS6, the Catholic International Education Office (OIEC) and BKTF-Youth/JS3. JS6 referred to findings revealing that a significant number of children dropped out of compulsory education due to, inter alia, financial reasons. It reported that classes were overcrowded in the cities and that there was a lack of high schools in rural areas. 10. Cultural rights 52. CoE-ACFC stated that the financing of cultural activities of national minorities remained inadequate and that there were no provisions relating to support for the publication of books in national minority languages. It urged Albania to develop a policy on supporting minority cultures and set up a fund to promote minority cultural identities. 11. Persons with disabilities 53. JS4 stated that many persons with disabilities lived in isolation and social exclusion, and lacked services to enjoy the right to live independently and be included in the community. JS4 stated that women with disabilities were in a particularly disadvantaged situation and were subject to multiple discriminations. Women with disabilities in remote and rural areas, and older women with disabilities were, in particular, socially isolated and often faced violence and abuse within the family. 54. JS4 stated that the Government did not provide access to a range of in-home, residential and other community support services and that most services were provided by nongovernmental organizations. Many persons with intellectual and psychosocial disabilities were living in institutions. Many persons with disabilities residing with their families lived in apartment buildings without lifts and lacked wheelchairs. 55. BKTF/JS1stated that most of children with disabilities were excluded from education, appropriate health and rehabilitation services and that these problems were especially acute in rural areas where there was a dearth of services, or little acknowledgement of the issues facing children with disabilities. It also noted a lack of awareness and competency amongst professionals charged with the development, health, education and care of children with disabilities, and a lack of direct investment and budget allocation for the implementation of inclusive education for children with disabilities. 56. JS4 stated that even though legislation contained the principle of inclusive education for children with disabilities, implementation was not satisfactory and that children with disabilities did not have access to mainstream primary and secondary education. It stated that the Government must implement the legislation on inclusive pre-university education for all persons with disabilities and ensure that all children with multiple disabilities have access to inclusive and quality education on an equal basis with others in the communities in which they live. 57. JS4 recommended that the existing law containing a quota of 4 per cent of persons with disabilities to be employed in every private and public organization had not been implemented. It recommended enforcement of the existing quota system for employment of persons with disabilities. A national employment fund should be established to support the employment opportunities for persons with disabilities. 58. JS4 stated that existing pensions for persons with disabilities who were not able to work did not cover the basic needs and that the lack of recognition of certain groups of persons with disabilities falling within the definition of people with disabilities excluded them from receiving the benefits. It stated that all persons with disabilities should have access to social protection programmes and appropriate and affordable services and other assistance for disability-related needs. JS4 recommended that persons with disabilities, including deaf persons, persons with intellectual and persons with psychosocial disabilities and others be recognized as persons with disabilities under legislation. 12. Minorities 59. CoE-ACFC stated that there was no progress in the adoption of a law on national minorities. Problems should be addressed in a number of areas, including the legal criteria required for recognition as a national minority and the use of minority languages in relations with the administrative authorities. CoE-ACFC recommended that Albania consider adopting comprehensive legislation on national minorities to fill identified legal gaps. 60. CoE-ECRI stated that the Greek, Macedonian and Serbo-Montenegrin minorities had the status of national minorities and that Vlach/Aromanian minority was recognized as an ethno-linguistic minority because, like the Roma minority, it was considered not to have a kin state. Bosniacs were not recognized as a minority. CoE-ECRI highlighted that the Egyptian community's request to be recognized as a minority continued to be turned down by the authorities, who argued that the existence of a kin state and a specific language were essential elements without which a community could not be recognized a national or `ethno-linguistic' minority. CoE-ECRI noted the view that the distinction drawn between `national' and `ethno-linguistic' minorities engendered a strong sentiment of being treated as inferior. 61. CoE-ACFC stated that the possibilities for learning minority languages and receiving instruction in these languages remained insufficient. Whereas a small number of primary and high schools, with Greek and Macedonian as languages of instruction, operated in the "minority zones" inhabited by a significant number of persons belonging to these minorities, numerous requests for tuition to be organized in these and other minority languages had not been favourably received by the authorities. No classes with Serbian, Montenegrin, Vlach/Aromanian and Romani as languages of instruction were organized. 62. CoE-ACFC noted efforts that were undertaken to open and support pre-school education facilities in neighbourhoods inhabited by substantial numbers of Roma. It welcomed the introduction of scholarships specifically earmarked for Roma children. However, CoE-ACFC was concerned about studies indicating that the number of Roma children remaining outside the education system remained alarmingly high. CoE-ACFC noted that the number of illiterate Roma, both children and adults, remained unacceptably high. 63. CoE-ACFC encouraged Albania to increase its efforts to tackle the difficulties facing Roma pupils in the education system. It called on Albania to take urgent measures to tackle the problem of adult illiteracy among the Roma. 64. In 2009, CoE-ECRI recommended that Albania step up the creation of new nursery schools so that Roma children could improve their knowledge of the Albanian language before starting primary school, and support the functioning of such schools. It also invited the authorities to support non-governmental initiatives, which had produced useful results in this field. In 2012, CoE-ECRI referred to information that Albania adopted the Law on pre-university schooling and that under this Law, all children were entitled to one-year free pre-school education before starting elementary school. Therefore, in connection with the first part of its recommendation, CoE-ECRI considered that the new Law should further promote the integration of Roma children from the pre-school level onwards. In connection with the recommendation as a whole, CoE-ECRI considered that Albania's efforts on the legislative front must be followed up in practical terms by the creation of an adequate number of nursery schools and the recruitment of sufficient numbers of teachers. Therefore, CoE-ECRI considered that its recommendation had been only partly implemented. 65. CoE-ACFC referred to information indicating that unemployment among the Roma minority continued to be unacceptably high. The disproportionate number of unemployed Roma indicated that there were discriminatory practices in the employment sector. CoE-ECRI made similar observations. 66. CoE-ECRI remained concerned about the extreme poverty and social and economic marginalization of large numbers of Roma and Egyptians. Many were living in precarious conditions and in areas with very limited health care provisions. 67. CoE-ACFC was concerned that the housing situation of Roma remained worrying. It was concerned about inadequate living conditions faced by the Roma inhabitants of some settlements, such as a lack of access to running water, a sewage system and insufficient infrastructure. In 2009, CoE-ECRI recommended that Albania ensure that each Roma family has access to decent accommodation, including through the connection of Roma settlement sites to electricity, drinking water, sewer and road networks. In 2012, CoE-ECRI concluded that its recommendation had not been fully implemented. 68. CoE-ECRI stated that representatives of the Roma and Egyptian communities reported that members of their communities had been discriminated against by being evicted from their homes. It noted that the Roma were particularly at risk of being evicted without being rehoused. AI referred to documented cases of forced evictions or threat of forced eviction of Roma in 2011, 2012 and 2013. 69. CoE-ECRI recommended that Albania investigate all reports of discrimination connected with evictions and that Roma or Egyptians who were evicted from their homes receive the same possibilities of alternate accommodation and housing credits as other Albanian citizens. It encouraged Albania in its efforts to regularize illegal housing situations and recommended that the Roma and Egyptian communities are duly included in such initiatives. 70. CoE-ACFC urged the authorities to exert more effort to prevent, combat and sanction the inequality and discrimination suffered by the Roma, to improve the living conditions of Roma and promote their integration into society. It urged Albania to guarantee the funding necessary for the effective implementation of the National Action Plan 2010-2015 for the Decade of Roma Inclusion. 