%%%HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY|NORWAY|

United Nations A/HRC/WG.6/19/NOR/1 General Assembly Distr.: General 3 February 2014 Original: English Human Rights Council Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Nineteenth session 28 April - 9 May 2014 National report submitted in accordance with paragraph 5 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21* Norway I. Introduction A. General remarks on Norway's UPR follow-up: institutional responsibility and organisation of work 1. Universal Periodic Reviews (UPRs) play an important role in the efforts to ensure that human rights are observed in practice. Following up the UPR recommendations provides an opportunity for critical review of the human rights situation in key areas of society. This report gives an account of Norway's follow-up on the recommendations from the previous review, as well as its efforts to address key human rights challenges in Norway today. 2. Norway's first review in the UN Human Rights Council took place in 2009 and resulted in 115 recommendations. These were compiled into 91 numbered recommendations, of which 66 were accepted in full, five were partially accepted and two were made into voluntary commitments. In June 2012 Norway submitted, on its own initiative, a mid-term report describing what it had done in response to the 2009 recommendations. This second national report should be viewed in the context of the mid-term report. 3. After its first review, Norway set up an inter-ministerial coordination group for human rights issues under the leadership of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The purpose of the group is to strengthen the implementation of Norway's human rights obligations and improve its reporting to UN human rights monitoring mechanisms. B. Methodology and consultation process 4. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for coordinating Norway's efforts to follow-up the UPR recommendations in close cooperation with other relevant ministries. In preparing this report, the Norwegian authorities have consulted civil society actors in open meetings, and a draft report was circulated for comment in September 2013. The organisations that participated in the process do not necessarily endorse the content of this report. 5. The Norwegian general election of September 2013 led to a change in government. As a result, this report covers policies of both the old and the new government. II. Human rights protection in Norway A. The Norwegian Constitution 6. In 2009, the Storting (the Norwegian parliament) appointed a Human Rights Commission to prepare and put forward recommendations for a limited revision of the Constitution with the aim of strengthening the position of human rights in Norwegian law. In its report, the commission recommended enshrining a number of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights into the Constitution. In 2012, several constitutional amendments on human rights were proposed to the Storting, including all of those put forward by the commission. The Storting will consider these proposals in the three parliamentary sessions following the general election. 7. In 2012, Article 2 of the Constitution was amended. It now sets out that the Constitution shall safeguard democracy, the rule of law and human rights, and specifies that Christian and humanistic values are the foundation of the Norwegian state. A former provision identifying the state religion as Evangelical-Lutheran was abolished and replaced by a provision stating that the Church of Norway is the national church. Several other amendments to the Constitution were adopted at the same time, making the church more independent of the state. B. International human rights conventions 8. Norway is party to the vast majority of UN human rights conventions and considers ratifying new human rights instruments on an ongoing basis. In keeping with the recommendations that Norway accepted after its first UPR, the country has ratified two human rights instruments since 2009: 3 June 2013, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Norway has not decided whether it will accede to the Optional Protocol establishing an individual complaints mechanism. 27 June 2013, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. 9. Ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance could entail amendments to legislation and/or changes in practice, and is being considered by the relevant ministries. 10. In keeping with its voluntary commitments from 2009, Norway has obtained an independent assessment of the possible consequences of acceding to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights establishing an individual complaints mechanism. The assessment was completed in September 2011 and circulated for comment. The Government has not yet taken a position on whether Norway should accede to the Optional Protocol. 11. In the spring of 2013, a similar independent study was conducted on the possible consequences of Norwegian ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on establishing an individual complaints mechanism. Civil society actors and other relevant Norwegian parties were actively consulted in this process. The report was completed in June 2013 and circulated for comment. That same month, the Storting unanimously passed a resolution directing the Government to submit information relating to the question of ratification of this Optional Protocol as soon as possible. 12. A number of human rights conventions have been incorporated into Norwegian law, some by way of the Human Rights Act. Norway has not incorporated additional human rights conventions since 2009, but on a case-by-case basis it considers whether such conventions should be incorporated into Norwegian law, and if so, how. Though Norway has a dualistic system, it is a general principle that Norwegian law is presumed to be in accordance with international obligations. Norwegian law is therefore to be interpreted in such a way that avoids conflict with the rules of international law that Norway is bound by. C. National human rights institution 13. Since 2001, the Norwegian Centre for Human Rights (NCHR) at the University of Oslo has served as Norway's national human rights institution. However, the university's board has determined that the centre is to discontinue its national institution role. 14. In November 2012, the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights recommended that the NCHR be downgraded from A to B status in the international network of national institutions. An inter-ministerial working group was then established to consider changes to Norway's national institution, including the creation of a new institution with a different organisation and structure. The working group consulted broadly, both nationally and internationally, and completed its assessments in the spring of 2013. The assessment was circulated for comment to a wide range of relevant parties in the summer and autumn of 2013. The Government intends the new institution to meet international standards. It is now considering how the new institution should be set up, and will take into account the comments received. III. Human rights implementation in Norway, best practices and challenges A. Introduction 15. Human rights and democracy are key elements of the Norwegian value base. A long-term overarching objective is to ensure that universal human rights and fundamental freedoms become a reality for everyone in Norway, regardless of ethnicity, gender, religion, belief, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, disability or other status. B. Equal opportunities and non-discrimination 1. New legislation 16. On 1 January 2014, four new anti-discrimination acts entered into force: on sexual orientation, gender equality, ethnicity, and accessibility for persons with disabilities. The last three largely extend existing legislation, but they also contain substantive changes designed to strengthen protection against discrimination. Redress for discrimination in the workplace may now be sought regardless of strict liability. Outside the workplace, liability for redress depends on whether or not the discriminating party has been negligent. 17. The Storting has also enacted into law the right to obtain information about other employees' pay if one suspects pay discrimination on the basis of gender, ethnicity, belief, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression. The new provisions aim to increase transparency with regard to pay in the workplace, and thereby make existing prohibitions against pay discrimination more effective. Amendments to the Anti-Discrimination Ombud Act have also been made to improve case-management capacity at the Equality and Anti-Discrimination Tribunal. The Government intends to submit a draft universal equality and non-discrimination act to the Storting. 2. Gender equality 18. Gender equality has been a top priority in Norway for many years, and a wide range of initiatives have been implemented across different sectors of society. 19. Although Norway is regularly named one of the countries where the pursuit of equality has come furthest, there are still gender equality challenges that need to be addressed. The majority of students at colleges and universities are women (60 % in 2010), and many study programmes remain highly gender-divided. Far more women than men work part time. Women have lower wages than men and still assume greater responsibility than men for providing unpaid care. Women with immigrant backgrounds participate at a lower rate in the labour market than other women, or than men with immigrant backgrounds. 20. A number of measures have been implemented to reduce the pay gap between women and men, including the above mentioned measures to promote pay transparency in the workplace. Other measures have been implemented to help equalise the sharing of childcare and household chores. From 1 July 2014, 10 weeks of the leave period after the birth of a child will be reserved for mothers and 10 weeks for fathers. The remainder may be allocated between the parents according to their wishes. This arrangement presents a good combination of requirements and expectations to both mothers and fathers, while leaving a great deal of flexibility to the individual family. From 1 January 2014, all mothers who work at least a seven-hour day are entitled to a one-hour paid break from work to breastfeed during their child's first year. It is hoped that paid breaks for breastfeeding will help reduce the pay gap between women and men by making it easier for parents to share the parental leave period between them. The Government also intends continue the work to improve the gender balance in education and the workplace, and to reduce the use of involuntary part-time employment. The Government is seeking to increase the proportion of minority women participating in the labour market. 3. Sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression 21. Under the recent act relating to a prohibition against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression, the protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation applies to all areas of society with the exception of family life and other purely personal relationships. The act also provides all transgender persons with clear protection against discrimination. 22. The action plan Improving quality of life among lesbians, gays, bisexuals and trans persons (2009 - 2012) was extended to the end of 2013. The action plan's purpose was to prevent discrimination against - and promote better living conditions and quality of life for - lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans persons. One result has been the establishment of a national centre of expertise on sexual orientation and gender identity. This centre identifies, addresses and raises awareness about various challenges related to sexual orientation and gender identity, and keeps up-to-date on developments in the field at national and international level. The evaluation of the plan showed that its objectives in research and knowledge management was or would be reached by the end of the extended period. More expertise will still be needed, though. When it comes to developing services and building expertise among administrators and service providers, more work needs to be done before it can be said that the goals have been achieved. 23. Under Norway's sex-change policy, persons who wish to undergo surgical gender confirmation treatment must agree to be sterilised as part of the treatment. The sterilisation requirement has been criticised by, among others, the Commissioner for Human Rights in the Council of Europe and by user groups. Users have also called for better treatment services for transgender persons in general. In the autumn of 2013, Norway's Ministry of Health and Care Services instructed the Directorate of Health to appoint an expert panel to evaluate the criteria for changing gender, including whether the sterilisation requirement should be abandoned. The Directorate of Health will also submit a plan of action for improving health services in general to the group. Other relevant directorates will be invited to collaborate. 4. Equal opportunities for persons with disabilities 24. The Government is working systematically to improve accessibility for persons with disabilities. Norway Universally Designed by 2025, an action plan for universal design and increased accessibility for the period 2009 - 2013, has produced good results. The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities will be an important resource in this field. The Government is convinced that accessibility for persons with disabilities is an important factor for achieving equality. 25. In 2012, the Jobs Strategy for Persons with Disabilities was implemented. The goal is that more persons with disabilities will enter employment and fewer will require benefits. The main target group is persons with disabilities who are under the age of 30 and need assistance to find work. The Jobs Strategy takes aim at four barriers that can make it difficult for persons with disabilities to enter the labour market: the discrimination barrier, the cost barrier, the productivity barrier, and the information and attitudinal barrier. The Jobs Strategy sets out a series of measures designed to lower these barriers and to help both job seekers with disabilities and the employers who hire them. Examples of measures include a facilitation guarantee, facilitation subsidies for job seekers and a number of follow-up services. Implementation of the strategy is the joint responsibility of the social partners, disability organisations, businesses, the Norwegian Labour and Welfare Administration and other service providers as well as individual job seekers with disabilities who want to work. The Jobs Strategy was extended and strengthened in 2013, and an evaluation will be completed in January 2014. New guardianship provisions 26. Amendments to Norway's guardianship legislation to ensure that Norwegian law is consistent with the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities entered into force in 2013. The changes include a new act regulating individually adapted guardianship to ensure that those who need assistance to safeguard their financial and personal interests receive this assistance in a way that is respectful of individual dignity and integrity. White paper on persons with intellectual disabilities 27. In the spring of 2013 a white paper on freedom and equality for persons with intellectual disabilities was presented to the Storting. The white paper identifies challenges related to equal education and training opportunities, health issues and labour market participation for persons with intellectual disabilities, and it examines questions relating to self-determination and legal safeguards. 5. Integration policy and ethnic discrimination 28. The goal of Norway's integration policy is for immigrants to become a part of, and feel a sense of belonging and attachment to, Norwegian society. Labour market participation and good Norwegian language skills are keys to social inclusion. Everyone should be expected, and required, to contribute to the community. One of the priority topics addressed in the Action Plan to Promote Equality and Prevent Ethnic Discrimination (2009 - 2012) is employment and working life. The plan period was extended to the end of 2013. 29. Although the majority of immigrants in Norway are in work, employment among immigrants is lower than for the rest of the population. Unemployment has historically been about three times higher for immigrants, and the employment-rate disparity between women and men with immigrant backgrounds is greater than between the sexes generally in the population. 30. For most people, good Norwegian language skills and familiarity with Norwegian society are necessary in order to find a job and participate in the community. The Government plans to strengthen language training for immigrants. This and other targeted measures are designed to ensure that more women with immigrant backgrounds, as well as men, are able to take part in working life. The Job Chance programme aims to increase employment among immigrants in general and immigrant women in particular. On 1 September 2013, compulsory tests in civics and Norwegian language were introduced. The Government plans to introduce a requirement that applicants for Norwegian citizenship must pass a civics test and demonstrate a minimum level of spoken Norwegian. 31. The Government intends to pursue a more proactive policy to secure access to the labour market for immigrants. The Government will facilitate faster procedures for the approval of qualifications, efficient assessments of practical skills, and effective utilisation of those skills. The previous Government's third action plan against social dumping was presented in 2013. Efforts to prevent social dumping are being continued through a strengthening of the Norwegian Labour Inspection Authority, evaluation of existing measures to address unacceptable pay and working conditions, and consideration of new initiatives. 32. In recent years, the number of people begging on the street in Norway has increased. Most are Roma with Romanian citizenship. This increase has sparked a debate about whether begging should be banned. In 2013, the Storting voted to allow municipalities to regulate begging, and decided to fund certain projects providing acute accommodation and other basic services to foreign beggars. Statistics and data collection 33. In order to combat discrimination, it is essential to understand its nature, extent and causes. Statistics Norway regularly produces statistics and analyses that form a vital base of information for the authorities. In addition, the Action Plan to Promote Equality and Prevent Ethnic Discrimination (2009 - 2012) sets out several measures aimed at increasing knowledge about the nature, extent and causes of discrimination in various areas of society. Surveys have been conducted to identify the extent to which people with minority backgrounds encounter systematic discrimination in the Norwegian labour market (situational testing). The results of research into discrimination against children and young people have also been compiled. Hate crime 34. Norway faces challenges related to hate crime and hate speech directed against certain minority groups. 35. The Police Directorate and the Oslo police district produce an annual report of all incidents reported to the police in which hate was cited as a motive. Although the police receives few reports of hate crime incidents, there is reason to believe that the number of unreported cases is large. Several steps have been taken to improve the registration rate. The aim is to learn more about the motivation for hate crimes and about the people who are vulnerable to such crimes, so as to better prevent their occurrence and improve law enforcement in this area. 36. In 2013, the Storting amended the Penal Code to expand the prohibition of certain kinds of public statements so as to include those made on the internet. This means, for example, that encouraging someone to commit a specific offence or glorifying a criminal offence online will now be punishable by law. 6. Indigenous peoples 37. Norwegian legislation is presumed to be in accordance with Norway's international obligations towards the Sami. In accordance with the consultation procedures between the central government and Sámediggi (the Sami parliament), Sámediggi and other affected Sami interests are consulted on matters that may affect them directly. These procedures are an important tool for ensuring that new measures and regulations are consistent with Norway's international obligations. 38. Several major processes have been instituted to further secure Sami rights. Efforts are under way to follow-up on the Sami Rights Commission II's report on the rights to, and use of, land and water in traditional Sami areas outside Finnmark. In the autumn of 2012, consultations began with Sámediggi on case-management and consultation rules, as called for in one of the bills presented by the Sami Rights Commission II. In addition, in 2012 and 2013 an overview was compiled of the state's follow-up on recommendations made by the UN special rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples in his January 2011 report on the situation of the Sami in Finland, Sweden and Norway. Negotiations on a draft Nordic Sami Convention are also currently in progress. The aim is for the negotiations to be completed by 2016. 39. The Finnmark Commission has been tasked with identifying ownership and usage rights to land and natural resources in Finnmark. A central issue involves rights obtained through prolonged usage. The commission published its first two reports in 2012 and 2013. 40. A review has been conducted of the provisions in the Sami Act relating to the Sami language. It has assessed these provisions in the light of Norway's international obligations, and examined issues related to the implementation of the provisions. The report was submitted to Sámediggi in August 2013 as a starting point for consultations. Educational rights for Norway's indigenous peoples 41. Pupils at primary and secondary levels in Sami districts are entitled to instruction about, and in, the Sami language. Outside Sami districts, Sami pupils are also entitled to instruction in Sami. However, these rights are not always observed, in part due to a lack of teaching resources. There is a shortage of Sami teaching materials, and it has been a challenge to recruit students into Sami teacher training programmes. Settlement patterns vary greatly, which means that teaching about and in the three Sami languages must be accommodated in different ways. Distance education is offered where it is not possible to provide a teacher in school. In 2013, new web-based information was prepared about the Sami language and Sami-language instruction. Work is also continuing to improve the information about Sami education, culture and traditions that is provided to school administrators, head teachers, teachers and parents. Better ways of facilitating distance learning are being studied as well. 42. Sami subjects are included in the national curriculum under Norway's "Knowledge Promotion" reform. The "Knowledge Promotion - Sami" reform includes Sami teaching plans, revised versions of which are to be in use from the 2013-2014 academic year onward. The revisions include a clarification of learning goals in both the national and Sami curricula, with greater weight assigned to Sami content. To date, Sámediggi has focused mostly on teaching materials in the Sami language. Questions relating to educational materials about the Sami people will be discussed in meetings with Sámediggi. 7. National minorities 43. The Action Plan for improvement of the living conditions of Roma in Oslo was presented in June 2009. The action plan's purpose is to combat discrimination against Norwegian Roma and help improve the accessibility of existing public welfare programmes. The municipality of Oslo, in which most of the Roma live, has established an adult education programme for young adult Roma, an advisory service for Roma, and seminars about the Roma for employees of local and central government agencies. The action plan will be evaluated in 2014. 44. In 2012, the Center for Studies of the Holocaust and Religious Minorities produced a report from a survey on the Norwegian population's attitudes towards Jews and other minorities. The results showed the existence of stereotypical beliefs about Jews in Norway. Overall, 12.5 % of the population hold markedly prejudiced views of Jews. In the European context, the prevalence of anti-Semitic views in Norway is thus relatively small, on par with the UK, the Netherlands, Denmark and Sweden. The survey also showed that scepticism in the general population towards Muslims, Somalis and Roma is much greater than it is towards Jews. Persons with the strongest anti-Semitic attitudes are those who also express the most disdainful attitudes towards other groups. 45. Norway's Jewish community presented a survey in 2012 that showed that about half of its members have experienced anti-Semitic attitudes, and that 20 in 21 Jewish children and young people reported that they had been exposed to anti-Jewish harassment. In the national budget for 2014, the Government has allocated funds for an action plan to combat anti-Semitism, including funds for school initiatives and for the Oslo Jewish Museum. Increased funding has also been allocated for security of the buildings used by the Jewish community. Education for and about national minorities 46. Meeting the educational needs of Roma and Romani/Traveller (Tater) pupils is a major challenge, especially during travel periods. Various measures have been implemented to enable pupils to follow the curriculum, but so far no good permanent solutions have been found. The possibility of developing teaching materials in Romanes and Romani is being considered. One of the challenges is that it is difficult to find people qualified to develop teaching materials in these languages. 47. Pupils with a Finnish-Kven background in the northern counties have the right to instruction in Finnish as a second language in primary and lower secondary schools. As an alternative to Finnish, instruction in Kven may be given in primary and lower secondary school. In some places, training is provided in Finnish or Kven as a second language in upper secondary education. The governors of Troms and Finnmark counties have drawn up an action plan for Finnish as a second language, in part to try to increase interest in the subject. Information material on all of Norway's national minorities is under development. This is primarily intended for teachers, and most of it will be published electronically. 8. Refugees and asylum seekers 48. Norway's new Immigration Act, which entered into force on 1 January 2010, is in accordance with the country's international obligations, such as the UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the European Convention on Human Rights and other conventions that Norway is bound by. If doubt arises as to how a provision is to be interpreted, it is the interpretation that conforms to international law that is to be applied when this strengthens the position of the individual. The act further states that persons with refugee status under the refugee convention and persons who are entitled to protection from inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment under other international conventions have equal rights. 49. In 2012, the Ministry of Justice and Public Security issued instructions to the Norwegian Directorate of Immigration on processing asylum applications pertaining to lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans or intersex (LGBTI) persons. These instructions set out that it should not be expected, required or assumed that, if returned, LGBTI persons will be able to adapt to social, cultural and legal norms in the public sphere, or hide their sexual identity to avoid persecution. 50. Since 2009, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) has examined the merits of three cases brought against Norway on deportation matters. In two of the cases, the ECHR found that deportation would violate the right to privacy and family life. The Norwegian authorities are following up these decisions. Right to health services 51. New regulations on the right to health and care services for persons without permanent residence in Norway entitle everyone staying in the country to urgent care and the right to be evaluated by the specialist health service, as well as the information required to exercise such rights. Further, all persons staying in Norway have the right to protection against contagious diseases. Children and pregnant women are to a large extent entitled to the same treatment as permanent residents. Children staying in Norway are generally entitled to necessary help from both the municipality and the specialist health service. In accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the best interests of the child are to be a primary consideration. Adults without permanent residence have a right to physical and mental health care in urgent cases. In addition, they have the right to other medical treatment that should not be postponed. If the person in question is mentally unstable and poses a serious, imminent risk to his or her own life or health, or to that of another person, then he or she is entitled to mental health care. Persons without permanent residence who are serving a prison or other sentence are entitled to necessary medical care that should not to be postponed until they are released. Housing 52. In 2012, a white paper on the future of housing policy was presented, laying out the main features of an upcoming national strategy on social housing. Housing services for refugees constitute one of several focus areas in the strategy. One of the Government's key aims is faster resettlement of refugees from reception centre to the municipality that is to receive them, and where the integration process can begin with an introduction programme, skills acquisition and language courses. Municipalities settle refugees on a voluntary basis. In recent years the municipalities have not settled as many refugees as needed. There is now a large discrepancy between settlement needs and the number of places offered by municipalities. At the end of October 2013, there were around 5 000 people in reception centres waiting for a municipality to receive them. Several measures have been implemented to improve the situation. In 2013, the Government entered into a new, more binding agreement on settlement issues with the Norwegian Association of Local and Regional Authorities. For 2014, it has been decided to increase both the integration allocation to municipalities and the support to municipal rental housing through the Norwegian State Housing Bank. Minor asylum seekers 53. The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child is central to the immigration authorities' approach to cases concerning children, and several provisions of Norway's Immigration Act set out that the best interests of the child is to be a "fundamental consideration". A foreign national may be granted a residence permit on the basis of strong humanitarian considerations or a particular connection with Norway, even if the person does not qualify for asylum. A child's connection to Norway will be given particular weight in the assessment. 54. Children between 16 and 18 years of age who have no other basis for residency than the fact that they would lack proper care on return may be granted a temporary permit until they turn 18. This permit may not be renewed beyond the age of 18. Nor does it give rights to family reunification or provide the basis for a permanent residence permit. In other respects, the temporary permit confers the same rights and obligations as other permits, such as the right to health care services and education. The system of temporary permits was introduced to prevent children without a need for protection from being sent on a potentially dangerous journey to a foreign country. The Ministry of Education and Research intends to circulate for comment a bill on granting persons who are over compulsory school age but under 18, and who apply for a residence permit, the right to secondary or primary education. It is proposed that this should come into effect from the autumn of 2014. 55. A 2012 white paper on children seeking asylum provides an overview of current Norwegian regulations and practices. It also highlights challenges and possible action points. The white paper addresses the situation of unaccompanied minors seeking asylum as well as the situation of children who leave their home country with their parents or other caregivers, and it provides guidance on balancing immigration control concerns with the best interests of the child. In response to the white paper, a study has been initiated to shed light on the living conditions for children during the asylum-seeking process. The study will survey living conditions for accompanied children and unaccompanied minors in reception and care centres, using indicators related to school, day care, health services, child welfare services, physical conditions and social activities. 56. Unaccompanied minors up to 15 years of age are provided with accommodation at special care centres for minors. The child welfare authorities have responsibility for the care of children during their stay, and must provide care services that are appropriate to their particular needs. The immigration authorities have primary responsibility for housing and care services for unaccompanied asylum-seeking minors over 15 years of age, and for refugee minors who enter the country with their parents or other persons. If concerns for a child's well-being are reported, the municipal child welfare service must ensure that the child in question receives the necessary help and care in a timely manner, regardless of nationality, citizenship and residency status. 57. Since 1 July 2013, unaccompanied minor asylum seekers have had the right to a personal representative whose duty is to secure the minor's interests and assist him or her in the asylum process. The same applies to unaccompanied minor asylum seekers who are identified as victims of trafficking. This system of personal representatives is a replacement for and an improvement on the previous system of guardianship for unaccompanied minors seeking asylum. 9. Children's rights 58. The rights and welfare of children have been a priority for many years. Children's rights are secured through the Children Act and the Child Welfare Act. Moreover, the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and its first two optional protocols have been incorporated into Norwegian law with precedence over other Norwegian legislation. High priority is given to the work of following up the convention and the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. Efforts are also under way with regard to ratification of the Hague convention on parental responsibility and protection of children. Amendments to the Children Act 59. In the spring of 2013, the Storting adopted amendments to the Children Act to place greater emphasis on the child's perspective in civil disputes regarding parental responsibility, place of residence and parental access. The amendments will strengthen the child's position during adjudication of such disputes in cases where the child is at risk of exposure to violence or abuse from his or her parents. The amended act specifies that children under seven years of age must be heard if they are capable of forming their own views on the matter. The child's opinion is to be given weight in accordance with his or her age and maturity. This amendment is firmly in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child. 60. At the same time, the Storting amended provisions related to fatherhood and motherhood in the Children Act in order to reconcile the act with major social and technological developments that have taken place in family structure, opportunities for assisted insemination, and definitive paternity determination through DNA analysis. Child welfare 61. All children in Norway are to be protected from neglect and abuse. Children and young people who live in conditions that can harm their health and development are to be given the help and care they need, when they need it. An increasing number of children require assistance from the child welfare service. Over time, the gap between the number of municipal child welfare employees and the number of cases has been increasing. In recent years, however, the child welfare service has been significantly strengthened. From 2011 to 2014, for example, 890 new child welfare positions at the municipal level have been created with earmarked central government funds, and work is underway to boost skills and expertise within the service. Municipal supervision of children in foster care will be strengthened in 2014. The Government has proposed measures to adapt schooling for children in the care of the child welfare service more closely to their particular needs. This will include closer cooperation between schools and child welfare staff in order to help more of these children complete their schooling. 62. In the spring of 2013, the Storting adopted amendments to the Child Welfare Act to strengthen children's legal safeguards in relation to child welfare services. Among other things, children are now entitled by law to receive adequate child welfare services. A general provision was also adopted emphasising that children are to be given the opportunity to participate in all processes concerning their contact with the child welfare service. Children are also entitled to bring a trusted person with them into child welfare service meetings. Additional amendments were passed to strengthen the supervision of children in foster care. Social inequality and living conditions for children and young people 63. The Government wants all children and young people to grow up in good, safe conditions that include opportunities for personal development. The proportion of children in low-income families has increased and appears to have stabilised at a relatively high level in recent years. Children of parents with low education levels or weak links to the job market, as well as children from immigrant families, children of single parents and children in large families, are especially vulnerable to poverty. Four out of ten children in families with a persistently low income level are of immigrant background. 64. Increased labour market participation by parents and successful skills acquisition by newly arrived immigrants are essential for combating poverty. Day care centres and schools that help neutralise social differences, as well as access to holiday and recreational activities, are vital arenas for enhancing participation and inclusion among children and young people. The Government is working to reduce the dropout rate in upper secondary school and to make sure that everyone receives high-quality educational services. It will continue to support programmes with a positive effect on Norwegian-language learning, such as free core time in day care centres. The child welfare service is working to strengthen knowledge and skills relating to children with ethnic backgrounds other than Norwegian. Children vulnerable to trafficking 65. New provisions of the Child Welfare Act that entered into force on 1 August 2012 set out that a child at risk of becoming a victim of trafficking may temporarily be placed in an institution without the child's consent. The purpose of the new provisions is to safeguard the child's immediate needs for protection and care. C. Efforts to combat violence and sexual abuse Violence and homicide in close relationships 66. Statistics show that domestic violence is a persistent social problem in Norway, with 9 % of women and 2 % of men having been subjected to violence with a high risk of injury at the hands of a current or former partner. Many more have experienced a lower level of violence or use of force. In recent years the number of incidents of domestic violence reported to the police has increased significantly, most likely due to a growing tendency to notify the police in such cases, which may indicate increasing confidence in police handling of such cases. 67. In the last decade, intimate partner homicide accounted for 20 - 30 % of the total number of killings in Norway. 15 of 45 victims of homicide in 2013 were killed by a current or former intimate partner. In more than half of the cases in which women were killed, the perpetrator turned out to be the victim's present or former partner. A research project has been initiated to review all intimate partner homicide cases from 1991 to 2011 in order to identify risk factors and develop more effective prevention strategies. 68. The Government will continue to give high priority to efforts to combat violence in close relationships. Measures to prevent violence are also vital for promoting gender equality, since gender-based violence reinforces and underpins discrimination. 69. In 2013, a white paper on domestic violence was submitted to the Storting; this describes measures that have already been implemented, identifies the challenges ahead, and outlines ways of tackling them. The white paper has been followed up with an action plan for 2014 - 2017. 70. As part of the effort to combat domestic violence, the Norwegian Centre for Violence and Traumatic Stress Studies was commissioned to conduct a nationwide prevalence survey on violence in close relationships. Funds have also been provided for a five-year research programme to investigate such issues as the causes of domestic violence, domestic violence in a life-long and generational perspective, and particular vulnerability. A national prevention strategy is also to be developed. Cooperation with NGOs will be strengthened though the establishment of a new grant scheme and other measures. 71. The school system, too, has a focus on topics related to family, relationships and sexuality. Teaching plans include goals relating to the development of critical attitudes towards violence, abuse, sexuality-related violence and domestic violence. Additional goals relating to gender roles and equality have been introduced for teaching at primary and secondary school level. 72. To ensure more comprehensive protection for persons exposed to violence and threats, all of the police districts in Norway are to implement the Spousal Assault Risk Assessment Guide (SARA) in 2013/2014. The SARA tool contains a checklist to ensure that relevant information is collected to better assess the risk of future partner violence and take appropriate measures. New penal code 73. When the new General Civil Penal Code of 2005 enters into force, the maximum sentence for abuse in close relationships will increase to six years, and to 15 years for cruel and abusive treatment. Stricter punishment is also envisaged within the sentencing frameworks. The new Penal Code has not yet entered into force because it will require significant changes to police computer systems. In 2010, meanwhile, amendments were passed to the Penal Code of 1902 that entailed increasing the maximum sentence for abuse in close relationships from three years to four years and significantly increasing the normal penalty level as well. Forced marriage and female genital mutilation 74. The Government will fight against forced marriage and female genital mutilation. Although many assistance programmes have been established, evaluations of previous action plans show that challenges remain with regard to preventing and obstructing these practices. In 2013, therefore, the Action plan against forced marriage, female genital mutilation and severe restrictions on young people's freedom (2013 - 2016) was introduced. Crisis centre services 75. The Crisis Centre Act highlights that it is a public-sector responsibility to ensure that persons exposed to domestic violence receive protection, help and follow-up services. The act requires municipalities to make crisis centre services available to women, men and children as well as to offer a comprehensive set of measures tailored to meet individual needs, including those of disabled persons. Crisis centres are to provide users with support, guidance and assistance to contact other service agencies as well as safe temporary housing, a daytime programme, a 24-hour telephone service and follow-up during the reestablishment phase. All services are free, with no referral requirement. The research institute Norwegian Social Research (NOVA) is conducting an evaluation of municipal-level implementation of the crisis centre act. Treatment services for offenders 76. Measures to help perpetrators of domestic violence are important for the efforts to prevent this form of violence. The Government is therefore strengthening treatment services both for young people who commit acts of violence and for children exposed to violence and sexual abuse. It will fund a collaborative project involving the research and treatment centre Alternative to Violence (ATV), which will strengthen therapist skills in in the field of violence and sexual abuse, as well as increasing the capacity of the family counselling services to provide assistance in this area. In 2013, ATV had 11 offices spread across much of the country. Violence and abuse against children 77. Preventing violence and abuse against children is a particularly strong priority for the Norwegian Government. Measures to combat violence against children are therefore being continued, as detailed in a new action plan against domestic violence for the period 2014 - 2017. In addition, a national strategy was announced in 2013 to combat violence and sexual abuse against children and young people in the period 2014 - 2017. 78. The Government will further develop the family counselling service's work to help abused children through discussion groups, conversation-based therapy and treatment services. Cooperation with other agencies, such as those offering health and child welfare services, will be key. The response to the report on hospitals' ability to identify child abuse entitled Oppdager sykehusene barnemishandling? (Norwegian only) includes the development of health service guidelines to help identify cases of child abuse. 79. Children's Houses are a service for children and young people under 16 years of age, and for adults with intellectual disabilities, who are thought to have been exposed to violence or sexual abuse, or to have witnessed such violence, in cases that have been reported to the police. Children's Houses are child advocacy centres where judicial examination, medical examinations, treatment and follow-up can all be carried out in the same place. They are also focal points for enhancing the skills of professionals who work with children or with adults with intellectual disabilities, and for improving cooperation between agencies in violence and abuse cases. The white paper on domestic violence sets out that more of the children exposed to violence and abuse are to benefit from the Children's House scheme. The service is being strengthened with the addition of two new Children's Houses and increased staffing. Several measures have been implemented to reduce the waiting time before judicial examinations are carried out, a matter that has proved challenging. 80. On Norway's initiative, Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden have carried out a joint Nordic police action against persons who share pictures and video clips of child sexual abuse via the internet. Police in Norway "patrol" the internet, to monitor and investigate such criminal activity. A simple-to-use notification system has been introduced on websites frequented by minors, permitting youngsters to report to the police any material or behaviour (such as "grooming") they encounter that may be unlawful. The National Criminal Investigation Service operates a tip line where information about child sexual abuse or pictures showing such abuse can be reported. Violence against persons with disabilities 81. Research suggests that persons with disabilities are more vulnerable to sexual abuse and violence than the population in general. Among those with disabilities, women are more at risk of sexual abuse than men. To strengthen protection against violence and abuse, measures directed at the health and welfare services and the police have been implemented, as well as measures directed at persons with disabilities. Rape 82. In 2013, a total of 1 233 rapes and attempted rapes were reported to the police, but the actual numbers are probably much higher. The Government is working to encourage more victims to report incidents to the police. 83. The health services available for the victims of violence and rape have been strengthened with the establishment of reception centres for such victims. These centres are now to be found all over the country. They provide acute health assistance to persons who have been subjected to violence in close relationships and/or sexual abuse. The Government also helps fund the operation of support centres for those exposed to incest and sexual abuse. 84. In 2012, an action plan was presented to combat rape for the period 2012 - 2014. The action plan contains measures to increase prevention, prosecution and assistance to victims, including awareness campaigns with and for young people, enhanced education about sex and sexuality, guidance materials for parents and preventive efforts involving collaboration between public health clinics and the school health service. Measures to strengthen and improve the investigation and follow-up of cases in the legal system have been designed to produce robust procedures. In its case inspections, the public prosecutor will give particular attention to the handling of rape cases. 85. Partly as a result of criticism from the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the Norwegian authorities are considering to propose amendments to the penal provision regarding rape. The matter is under review by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security. D. Education and training in human rights 86. One of the objectives of the Norwegian school system is to help pupils and apprentices become active citizens. The Government will strengthen school-based instruction in democratic participation through the development of teaching plans and programmes as well as training programmes for teachers and school administrators. Knowledge about democratic values and human rights is vital in order to preserve and strengthen the Nordic social model. The Ministry of Education and Research provides financial support to seven Norwegian peace and human rights centres, to help them to offer children and young people high-quality learning experiences in peace and human rights issues. 87. 2014 marks the bicentenary of the Norwegian Constitution. The celebration of the anniversary seeks to boost democratic participation, particularly in the education sector. In this connection, the website www.minstemme.no has been established to promote learning about democracy and participation in society. The site provides teaching resources as well as school- and kindergarten-level exercises. Democratic safeguards against racism and anti-Semitism 88. In 2010, a working group was established to propose measures to combat anti-Semitism and racism in schools. One of the group's proposals led to the teaching programme DEMBRA (Democratic Readiness Against Racism and Anti-Semitism), for use in lower secondary schools. The course is intended primarily for school administrators, teachers and pupils, and is arranged by the Center for Studies of the Holocaust and Religious Minorities in Oslo. The centre has also been granted funds for anti-Semitism research and teaching. E. Judicial system and legal safeguards 1. Police custody and imprisonment Police custody 89. Norway endeavours to ensure that persons who have been arrested spend as little time as possible in police custody. Those detained are always placed in a single-person cell, but police custody provides little opportunity to spend time outside or to associate with other detainees. Arrest cells are therefore suitable only for short-term custody, and Norwegian legislation sets out that detainees are to be transferred from police custody to prison within two days of apprehension, unless practical reasons make this impossible. The increase in the number of foreign nationals committing criminal offences in recent years has led to prison capacity problems. The UN Committee Against Torture, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and Norwegian civil society organisations have criticised what they regard as a significant number of detainees being held in police custody for more than 48 hours before transfer to prison. The authorities, too, view the situation as highly unfortunate. A number of measures have been taken, including increasing prison capacity, to keep people from having to sit more than 48 hours in police arrest. 90. When there is no available space in prison, the prosecuting authority and courts often release people who under normal circumstances would have been held in prison. Considerable effort is expended on transporting prisoners to correctional facilities where there is space. The authorities will work to acquire better statistics on the number of detainees held beyond the time limit. Use of isolation in prison 91. Under amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act that entered into force in 2012, it is no longer permissible to hold people under the age of 18 in total isolation during remand custody. Moreover, following amendments to the Execution of Sentences Act, there will be far fewer opportunities to exclude minors from spending time with other prisoners. In principle, prisoners under 18 are only to be kept apart from others for protectional purposes. Stricter requirements for reporting further up in the system were also introduced, and an absolute seven-day time limit will be introduced for the complete exclusion of this age group from the company of other prisoners. The amendments will take effect as soon as the regulations and guidelines are finalised. 92. Norway has been criticised by the UN Committee Against Torture (CAT) and the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention for the use of exclusion under the Execution of Sentences Act as well as for the lack of statistics related to the practice. The committee has also expressed concern over the legal basis for the use of exclusion. In the committee's view, the provisions are not formulated with sufficient precision, leaving the potential for highly discretionary decisions that complicate administrative or judicial review. 93. The Directorate of Norwegian Correctional Services has initiated a process to improve oversight of the use of total or partial exclusion of prisoners from the company of other prisoners. A new IT tool for statistics and analysis, ASK, will be employed to compile the relevant statistics. The first version of ASK, which will generate statistics such as the ratio of prison places to prisoners and the proportion of prisoners who are foreign nationals, was rolled out to a group of pilot users in October 2013. The next priority for ASK will be the use of exclusion. Compiling these statistics will take some time, as it will require changes to other IT systems as well. The directorate estimates that this will be resolved during the first half of 2014. 94. In the meantime, manual calculations on the use of exclusion are being made in every prison three times a year on the same day. The figures are then reported to the regional administrations of the correctional services as well as to the directorate and the Ministry of Justice and Public Security. Four calculations have been made so far. These calculations will serve as a basis for preliminary statistics until the new IT tool becomes operational. This matter is being closely monitored. 95. When the statistics are in place, the current practice regarding exclusion of prisoners from the company of other prisoners will be evaluated and assessed. Minors in prison 96. The goal is for no minors to be imprisoned except as a last resort. In 2012, several amendments to the Criminal Procedure Act entered into force. Minors may now be held in custody only when compellingly necessary, and a court must consider the question of custody no later than the day after arrest. The court must then reconsider on a two-weekly basis whether custody needs to be prolonged. Measures have also been taken to increase the use of alternatives to imprisonment, including a new sanction called the juvenile sentence. The Government has proposed allocating funds for this purpose in the 2014 national budget. 97. A special prison unit for young offenders was opened in Bergen in 2010 as a pilot project with a view to preventing minors from serving sentences together with adults and ensuring better detention conditions for this group. The establishment of a similar unit in eastern Norway is under consideration. The Bergen unit will now be evaluated. The number of minors in prison has declined since 2010. In 2010, 64 minors were imprisoned compared with 58 in 2011 and 51 in 2012. In 2013, 26 minors had been placed in prison as of November. 98. Norway's reintegration policy, which is designed to ensure the best possible return of former prisoners to society, also applies to persons under 18. This means that young offenders are entitled to all the welfare benefits to which all citizens are entitled, such as housing, work, schooling, health services including treatment for substance abuse, as well as financial counselling. Multidisciplinary teams in the special units for young offenders are to ensure that these young people receive the help to which they are entitled. Follow-up of prisoners with mental health problems 99. Before a person is placed in police custody, the police must evaluate potential health-care needs and make sure that a medical examination is conducted if necessary. No later than two hours after arrival at the police station, detainees are to receive a brochure containing information about their right to consult with a health-care professional. 100. Prisoners have a right to necessary health and care services, and must be offered services that are equivalent to those available to the rest of the population. The municipality in which a prison is located is responsible for providing health and care services to the inmates of that prison, while dental services are provided by the county authorities. If needed, prisoners are referred for further examination and/or treatment to the specialist health service. A revised edition of the guide to prisoner health and care services was issued in early 2013. It conveys information on how to provide services for prisoners in accordance with applicable legislation. 101. In 2010, the Ministry of Justice and Public Security prepared a report on the special units established for prisoners with mental health problems and behavioural disorders. The purpose of these units is to provide closer and more individual follow-up. The report has been circulated for comment and is still under consideration. 2. Use of coercion in mental health care and in the treatment of certain persons with intellectual disabilities 102. Norwegian law permits the use of coercion in the treatment of certain persons with intellectual disabilities and persons with serious mental disorders under specified conditions. The rules are deemed to be consistent with human rights. The Government nevertheless wishes to reduce the use of coercion, and will ensure that all use of coercion is in accordance with legislation. 103. The Directorate of Health's report on the use of coercion in adult mental health services, Bruk av tvang i psykisk helsevern for voksne 2012, shows that the number of involuntary admissions accounted for 16% of all adult mental health service admissions in 2012. The total (corrected for population growth) was reduced by approximately 6 % from 2011 to 2012. In the spring of 2012, a new strategy was established to increase the prevalence of voluntary treatment in the mental health services. This strategy includes obligatory local, regional and national measures to reduce and standardise the use of coercion. With this in view, the Government set the goal of a 5 % reduction in the number of involuntary admissions and treatments in its 2013 instructions to the regional health enterprises. 3. Anti-terrorism legislation 104. Norwegian legislation is to be consistent with human rights, including the right to freedom of expression, the right to religious freedom and the right to privacy. This is ensured through the preparation of the legislation, including the consultation process prior to the enactment of legislation. The Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Act contain provisions setting out that international obligations may limit the applicability of Norwegian legislation, and that human rights conventions incorporated into the Human Rights Act have precedence over Norwegian law. This also applies to anti-terrorism legislation. 4. Human trafficking 105. The Government continues to support the ROSA project, which offers accommodation and support at crisis centres for victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation. 106. In December 2010, an action plan to combat human trafficking was introduced. Norway has ratified the Council of Europe Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings, which establishes a monitoring mechanism to verify that countries are living up to their obligations under the convention. The Council of Europe's Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (GRETA) released its report on Norway in the spring of 2013, and in June of that year the Committee of the Parties to the convention adopted a number of recommendations to Norway to strengthen efforts in this area. The Government will examine the recommendations. 107. Norway is working systematically to improve data collection on human trafficking. From 2003 to June 2013, 42 people were convicted of human trafficking. The national coordination unit for victims of human trafficking has produced statistics showing that 136 persons were identified as new victims of trafficking in 2012. That same year, 349 victims received assistance from the public authorities and other organisations on the basis of their status as victims. Of those, 213 had been identified in previous years. F. Human rights and international cooperation 1. Human rights in foreign and development policy 108. International human rights set the direction for Norwegian foreign and development policy. The Government seeks to promote democracy, human rights, the rule of law and freedom of expression through its foreign policy. The goal of development policy is to contribute to democratisation and the realisation of human rights and to help people to work their way out of poverty. Efforts to promote girls' right to education in poor countries will be given priority. 109. The Government will work to disseminate knowledge about human rights and to combat various forms of violence and oppression, such as female genital mutilation, forced marriage, trafficking and sexual abuse of children. The Government will direct particular attention to vulnerable groups such as women, children, religious minorities, persons with disabilities and sexual minorities. 110. To ensure that Norway's priorities are followed up in the best possible way in the foreign service, guides have been prepared on promoting sexual and reproductive rights, religious minority rights, indigenous peoples, human rights defenders, sexual minorities and persons with disabilities, as well as the fight against the death penalty. 2. Human rights and the business sector 111. In 2011, the UN Human Rights Council approved by consensus the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. Norway was a key player in the process of developing the guidelines. 112. The starting point for Norwegian efforts in this field is the Government's consultative body on corporate social responsibility (CSR), KOMpakt, which includes representatives from government agencies, the private sector, civil society and academia. KOMpakt advises the Government on policy- and decision-making related to CSR matters, including human rights. Another objective is to strengthen the dialogue between government, businesses, special-interest organisations and academia on key CSR topics. In 2013, basic principles were developed under the auspices of KOMpakt for Norwegian companies' dialogue and engagement with stakeholders and interest groups, particularly those active in developing countries and emerging economies. Examples of such groups include indigenous peoples' associations, civil society actors and local authorities. 113. CSR is a high priority for the Norwegian authorities. In 2012, a major international conference, hosted by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was held in Oslo for the purpose of disseminating information about international CRS guidelines and frameworks. Another objective was to foster exchange of knowledge between stakeholders in industry, academia, civil society and government on how best to achieve responsible business practices. 114. Government agencies, such as Innovation Norway with its local offices in Norway and abroad, guide Norwegian businesses on proper business conduct. Companies applying for financial support or guarantees must provide information on their actions within the field of CSR. The information is part of the basis for the agency's decision to grant support. 115. Norway is an active partner in the Global Compact and other international organisations promoting sound business principles and social responsibility. In 2011, Norway launched a reorganised National Contact Point for the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. The National Contact Point carries out its work independently of the Norwegian authorities. It has handled a number of complaints since it became operational. IV. National priorities 116. Norway will: (a) International human rights instruments Continue its work to ensure correspondence between Norwegian law and Norway's international human rights obligations. Ratify and implement the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Consider ratification of the optional protocols on establishing an individual complaints mechanism for the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and for the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. (b) Human rights implementation in Norway National institution: Consider the establishment of a new national human rights institution in Norway. Discrimination: Work to combat all forms of discrimination, including discrimination based on gender, ethnicity, creed, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and disability. Domestic violence: Strengthen efforts to combat and prevent domestic violence, including various forms of violence and sexual abuse against children. Mental health care: Ensure fast, easily accessible, high-quality mental health care, and continue efforts to reduce the use of coercion. Social dumping: Continue to work against the exploitative hiring practices known as social dumping by strengthening the Norwegian Labour Inspection Authority, evaluating the measures that are already in place to prevent unacceptable pay and working conditions, and considering new initiatives. Prison conditions: Ensure that remand in custody and isolation are used in accordance with Norway's international human rights obligations; continue efforts to keep the use of isolation at a low level; continue efforts to ensure adequate treatment and follow-up of prisoners with mental health problems; reduce the number of minors in prison by introducing alternative forms of sanction; and continue to establish a special unit for minors in prison. Education and training in human rights: Examine lower and upper secondary teaching materials on religion, ethics, outlooks on life and social sciences with an eye to how they handle issues related to anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, racism, extremism and radicalisation; consider opportunities for improving children and young people's discernment regarding use of internet and social media. Asylum and immigration policy: Continue efforts to ensure that Norway's regulatory frameworks and practices are consistent with international human rights obligations on asylum and immigration. (c) Norway's international priorities Direct more attention to civil and political rights, also in our neighbouring countries. Continue efforts to promote and protect human rights internationally, including empowerment of women, protection of human rights defenders, freedom of speech, efforts to end the death penalty, anti-discrimination measures, decent work, corporate social responsibility, support for children in general and girls in particular, and support for minorities including lesbians, gays, bisexuals and trans persons (LGBT) as well as indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities. 