%%%ELECTION OF MEMBERS|BIOGRAPHY|

United Nations CRC/SP/46 Convention on the Rights of the Child Distr.: General 22 May 2014 English Original: English/French/Spanish Meeting of States Parties Fifteenth meeting New York, 25 June 2014 Item 5 of the provisional agenda Election of nine members of the Committee on the Rights of the Child in accordance with article 43 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child as amended (see General Assembly resolution 50/155) Election of nine members of the Committee to replace those whose terms are due to expire on 28 February 2015 Note by the Secretary-General* 1. In conformity with article 43 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Fifteenth Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention will be convened by the Secretary-General at United Nations Headquarters on Wednesday, 25 June 2014, for the purpose of electing nine members of the Committee on the Rights of the Child from a list of persons nominated by States parties, to replace those whose terms are due to expire on 28 February 2015 (see annex I). The names of the other nine members who will continue to serve on the Committee until 28 February 2017 appear in annex II. 2. In accordance with the procedure set out in article 43, paragraph 4, of the Convention, the Secretary-General, in a note verbale dated 25 February 2014, invited the States parties to submit their nominations for the election of nine members of the Committee within two months. All the curricula vitae received by 25 April 2014 are included in the present document. Addenda to the present note will be issued for nominations received after the deadline of 25 April 2014. 3. In compliance with the provisions of article 43, paragraph 4, of the Convention, the Secretary-General has the honour to list below, in alphabetical order, the names of the persons nominated for election to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, indicating the States parties which have nominated them. Biographical data of the persons nominated, as furnished by the States parties concerned, are contained in annexes III - XIII to the present document. Nominated by Ms. Suzanne Aho Assouma Togo Ms. Hynd Ayoubi Idrissi Morocco Mr. Jorge Cardona Llorens Spain Mr. Bernard Gastaud Monaco Ms. Norah Amilcar Jean-François Haiti Ms. Mirna Antonieta Perla Jiménez El Salvador Mr. Hatem Kotrane Tunisia Mr. Gehad Madi Egypt Ms. Louisa Oussedik-Chalal Algeria Mr. José Angel Rodríguez Reyes Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Ms. Kirsten Sandberg Norway 4. In addition, in compliance with paragraph 12 of General Assembly resolution 68/268, information regarding the current composition of the Committee on the Rights of the Child, reflecting the balance in terms of geographical distribution and gender representation, professional background and different legal systems, as well as the tenure of current members, is contained in annexes I and II to the present document, as well as in the biographical data of current members, which can be found on the webpage of the Committee (www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CRC/Pages/Membership.aspx). 5. In its resolution 68/268 (para. 13), the General Assembly encouraged States parties, in the election of treaty body experts, to give due consideration, as stipulated in the relevant human rights instruments, to equitable geographical distribution, the representation of the different forms of civilization and the principal legal systems, balanced gender representation and the participation of experts with disabilities in the membership of the human rights treaty bodies. Annex I Members of the Committee on the Rights of the Child whose terms expire on 28 February 2015 Member Country of nationality Member since Ms. Agnes Akosua Aidoo (resigned on 31 October 2013) Ghana Ms. Aseil Al-Shehail Saudi Arabia Ms. Maria Herczog Hungary Ms. Hiranthi Wijemanne Sri Lanka Members of the Committee on the Rights of the Child whose terms expire on 28 February 2017 Ms. Amal Aldoseri Bahrain Mr. Peter Gurán Slovakia Ms. Olga A. Khazova Russian Federation Mr. Benyam Dawit Mezmur Ethiopia Ms. Yasmeen Muhamad Shariff Malaysia Mr. Wanderlino Nogueira Neto Brazil Ms. Sara Oviedo Fierro Ecuador Ms. Maria Rita Parsi Italy Ms. Renate Winter Austria Suzanne Aho Assouma (Togo) Date and place of birth: 12 August 1952, Saigon, Viet Nam Working languages: French/English Current position/function Deputy Mayor of the city of Lomé Main professional activities Responsible for women's and children's issues; issuing birth and other civil status certificates; cooperation/twinning; litigation; marriages, awareness-raising campaigns on children's rights (lost and abandoned children, children in conflict with the law, HIV/AIDS orphans, abused children). All cases involving children are referred to me. I am also in charge of the sociocultural activities of the Juvenile Division. Informal debates about children's rights in schools. I also help women whose children have been abandoned by their fathers to take action in the juvenile court. Educational background Diploma in social work in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, after primary school in Benin and Paris and secondary school in Benin, Togo and Corrèze, France, leading to A4 baccalaureate. Other main activities in the field relevant to the mandate of the treaty body concerned I have participated in the struggle to promote and protect the rights of abandoned children for over 30 years. 1979: Staff member in the Division for the Protection and Promotion of Young People of the General Directorate for Social Affairs of Togo. I set up the Social Services Unit of the Court of Lomé and served as its head for 15 years. 1993: Director of the Department for the Protection and Promotion of the Family and Children of the Ministry of Social Affairs. In view of the absence of a Children's Code, the dispersed nature of the existing laws on the subject and the general lack of familiarity with them, I embarked on a research project that led to the compilation of those provisions in a volume entitled De la protection des enfants mineurs dans la législation togolaise (On the protection afforded to children under Togolese law). I have an inclusive approach to the protection of children that takes into account the situation of families in distress, including in particular refugee families and those caring for older persons. Member of the African Committee of Experts on the Rights and Welfare of the Child of the African Union (mandate interrupted on appointment to a ministerial post). 1997: I presented the initial report of Togo to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child in Geneva. Founder of the Girls' Schooling Committee, which focuses in particular on girls in voodoo convents. Hynd Ayoubi Idrissi (Morocco) Docteur en Droit (Doctorate in law). Specialization: human rights, on the subject "Protection of children's rights in Morocco: constants and challenges". Université Pierre-Mendès-France, Grenoble, France. 1998. Professional experience December 2009: Habilitated professor September 2005 - September 2009: Vice-Dean of scientific research and cooperation 2002 - 2004: Director of International Relations at the Ministry of Human Rights Since November 1999: Professor of law at the Faculty of Legal, Economic and Social Sciences, Souissi, Rabat. Research Published articles and papers "Vers une plus grande effectivité de la Convention de lutte contre toutes les formes de discrimination à l'égard des femmes" (Towards greater effectiveness of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women). In REMALD, No. 68, 2006; "L'exploitation des femmes et des enfants à des fins lucratives" (The exploitation of women and children for profit). In REMALD, No. 70, 2006; Droits des femmes et évolution des Droits humains au Maroc. <<Le féminin en miroir: entre orient et occident>> (Women's rights and the development of human rights in Morocco. Women in a mirror: East and West). Édition Le Fennec, 2005; "Nouvelle législation de la famille et Droits de l'enfant au Maroc" (New legislation on the family and children's rights in Morocco). In Revue Marocaine de Droit des Affaires et des Entreprises, No. 13, October 2007; Elargissement de l'établissement de la filiation en droit marocain (Expanding the establishment of paternity in Moroccan law). Supreme Court, on the occasion of its fiftieth anniversary, March 2007; Economic and social rights of women in Morocco. Study day, Moroccan Human Rights Association. June 2005 (in Arabic); "The role of parliament in the promotion of women to decision-making posts". In Revue Marocaine de Droit des Affaires et des Entreprises, No. 16, May 2009 (in Arabic); Construction de la paix en Afrique et droits des femmes (Peacebuilding in Africa and women's rights). April 2010 (Institute of African Studies, Mohammed V University, Souissi, in press); Enfants migrants non accompagnés en droit international des Droits de l'Homme (Unaccompanied migrant children in international human rights law). Mohammed V University, Souissi, May 2012; "Mécanismes de suivi de la Convention Internationale des Droits de l'Enfant au Maroc: vers un mécanisme independent" (Mechanisms for monitoring the Convention on the Rights of the Child: towards an independent mechanism). International conference. Ministry for Women and Family Affairs, UNICEF, Tunis, 28 - 29 September 2012; "Droit, Culture: quelle gouvernance des droits des femmes au Maroc" (Law and culture: governance of women's rights in Morocco). Congress of the Association internationale pour la recherche interculturelle, Mohammed V University, Souissi, December 2013. Material for publicizing rights Input to a simplified version of the Family Code, entitled La Moudawana autrement, prepared by the State Secretariat for Family, Children and Persons with Disabilities and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ), 2005; Input to the translation of the Family Code with Prof. Abderrazak Moulay Rchid (Faculty of Law, Souissi) and Prof. Mohammed Louakili (Faculty of Law, Agdal), January 2005. Academic responsibilities Founder member of the UNESCO chair in Women and Women's Rights, Faculty of Law, Souissi, Rabat, Morocco; Member of the Moroccan Centre for Study and Research into the Judicial and Legal Professions, Faculty of Law, Souissi, Rabat, Morocco; Member of the research team on democracy and fundamental freedoms, Faculty of Law, Souissi, Rabat, Morocco; Member of the International Association of Youth and Family Judges and Magistrates, Switzerland; Expert with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA); UN-Women; Terre des Hommes international NGO; and the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network. Human rights projects Study under way on sexual violence against children in Morocco, commissioned by the Amane association and UNICEF (2013 - 2014); Preparation of the second report of Morocco under the universal periodic review. Commissioned by the Interministerial Unit on Human Rights. January 2012; Preparation of a study on the establishment of a national appeal mechanism for children whose rights have been violated, commissioned by the Consultative Council on Human Rights, UNICEF and the International Organisation of La Francophonie. May 2010; Preparation of the national Beijing + 15 report, commissioned by the Ministry for Solidarity, Women, the Family and Social Development. June 2009; Preparation of the report on sectoral human rights policies, commissioned by the Consultative Council on Human Rights in preparation for the National Action Plan for Democracy and Human Rights. December 2008; Participation in the finalization of the Moroccan report under the universal periodic review. February 2007. [For further human rights projects, please see the appendix below.] [French only] Notice biographique de Hynd Ayoubi Idrissi (Maroc) [suite] Réalisations en matière de droits de l'homme: Préparation du deuxième rapport périodique du Maroc sur la mise en œuvre de la Convention sur l'élimination de toutes les formes de discrimination à l'égard des femmes (CEDAW). Juin 1999; Préparation des 3ème et 4ème rapports périodiques du Maroc sur la mise en œuvre de la Convention sur l'élimination de toutes les formes de discriminations à l'égard des femmes (CEDAW). Mars 2006; Préparation du deuxième rapport périodique du Maroc sur la mise en œuvre de la Convention relative aux droits de l'enfant (CRC). Juin 2000; Préparation du troisième rapport périodique du Maroc relatif à la mise en œuvre de la Convention contre la torture et autres peines ou traitements cruels, inhumains ou dégradants. 2002; Préparation du cinquième rapport périodique du Maroc sur la mise en œuvre du Pacte international relatif aux droits civils et politiques. 2004; Préparation du troisième rapport périodique du Maroc relatif à la mise en œuvre du Pacte international relatif aux droits économiques, sociaux et culturels. 2004; Préparation du rapport initial du Maroc relatif au Protocole facultatif à la Convention relative aux droits de l'enfant, concernant la vente d'enfants, la prostitution des enfants et la pornographie mettant en scène les enfants. 2004; Partie de la délégation officielle pour présenter les rapports du Maroc devant les organes de traités: Comité pour l'élimination de la discrimination à l'égard des femmes, Comité des droits de l'enfant, Comité contre la torture, Comité des droits économiques, sociaux et culturels et la Comité pour l'élimination de la discrimination raciale; Coordination de l'opération de l'harmonisation de la législation nationale avec la Convention relative aux droits de l'enfant. 2000 - 2002; Conception et coordination des activités du Ministère des Droits de l'Homme pour la célébration du 10éme anniversaire de la Convention relative aux droits de l'enfant. Novembre 1999; Coordination et supervision du Comité technique créé par le Premier Ministre au sein de la commission interministérielle chargée des libertés publiques et des droits de l'homme, pour présenter des propositions en vue de lever les réserves du Maroc sur les six principaux instruments ratifiés en matière de Droits de l'Homme (Pacte international relatif aux droits civils et politiques, Convention internationale sur l'élimination de toutes les formes de discrimination raciale, la Convention contre la torture, la Convention sur l'élimination de toutes les formes de discrimination à l'égard des femmes), octobre 2003 - juin 2004; Coordination et préparation du rapport national sur le suivi du Sommet mondial pour les enfants. 2000; Participation aux sessions préparatoires de la session extraordinaire de l'assemblée générale des Nations Unies, tenue en 2002 à New York; Partie de la délégation marocaine à la Commission des droits de l'homme à Genève; 2003; Partie de la délégation marocaine au congrès de Yokohama sur la lutte contre l'exploitation sexuelle des enfants, en décembre 2001; Coordination de la Commission nationale du droit international humanitaire. Octobre 2003 - juin 2004; Organisation du Séminaire national pour l'élaboration d'un plan d'action national relatif à la mise en œuvre de la Déclaration et du Plan d'Action de la session extraordinaire de l'Assemblée générale des Nations Unies, intitulé <<Un monde digne des enfants>>, les 6 - 7 mai 2004; Rapporteur dans plusieurs manifestations nationales et internationales. Jorge Cardona Llorens (Spain) Date and place of birth: 30 April 1957, Valencia, Spain Working languages: Spanish (mother tongue), French (written and spoken), English (basic) Professor of international law, University of Valencia; Member of the Committee on the Rights of the Child Member of the committee appointed by the Ibero-American Youth Organization to monitor States' compliance with the Ibero-American Convention on the Rights of Youth (2010 to date); Legal expert on human rights, Conference of Ministers of Justice of Ibero-American Countries (COMJIB) (2009 - 2011); Former member of the committee appointed by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights to study the reform of the inter-American human rights system; Director of the United Nations depository library in Valencia (since 2009); Director of the Observatory on Asylum of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Valencia (since 2010); Member of the Panel of Experts of the Trade and Sustainable Development Committee established under the Free trade agreement between the European Union and its member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Korea, of the other part (since 2012); Counsel for the Kingdom of Spain at the International Court of Justice in the case concerning the declaration of independence of Kosovo and adviser to various States, particularly on matters related to foreign investment, legislative reforms to bring domestic law in line with international law, and international disputes; Member of the board of UNICEF, Valencia Region; President of the Mediterranean Institute of European Studies (2002 - 2010); Member of the scientific committee of the Revista Española de Derecho Internacional (1990 - 1998 and 2011 to date); Henri Rolin Chair at the University of Louvain La Neuve and Vrije Universiteit Brussel (2009); Director (and founder) of the Bancaja Euro-Mediterranean courses in international law (since 1997) and director of the international law section of the Bancaja International Centre for Peace and Development (UNESCO Mahatma Gandhi gold medal for peace) (1997 - 2009); President of the Centre for Studies in Law and International Relations (since 2007); Jean Monnet Chair in European Union law (since 1997). Licenciatura (Bachelor's degree), Special award (1980); Doctorado (Doctorate), Special award, University of Valencia (1984). (a) Committee on the Rights of the Child: country rapporteur on a number of States; coordinator or member of various country task forces in the interactive dialogue with States. Other functions: Rapporteur on amendments to the Committee's rules of procedure and methods of work (in the context of the treaty body strengthening process and ongoing improvement of the Committee's work); Member of the working group on general comment No. 14 (2013) on the right of the child to have his or her best interests taken as a primary consideration (art. 3, para. 1); Member of the working group on general comment No. 16 (2013) on State obligations regarding the impact of the business sector on children's rights; Member of the working group established to prepare for the entry into force and application of the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child; Committee focal point for the project on implementation and follow-up to general comment No. 16. (b) Academia: Member of the Board, Masters in human rights, peace and sustainable development, University of Valencia, and International human rights doctoral programme (Spanish Ministry of Education quality award); Member of the Board, Masters in International and European Union studies, University of Valencia; Lecturer, University Diploma in Children's Rights, University of Valencia in cooperation with UNICEF; Guest lecturer at various universities and university and scientific institutes in Europe, Latin America and Africa (Angers, Barcelona, Bello Horizonte, Bogota, Buenos Aires, Caracas, Casablanca, Cergy-Pontoise, Clermont-Ferrand, Coruña, Costa Rica, Granada, Madrid, Marrakech, Naples, Palermo, Panama, Paris I, Paris II, Paris Sud, Paris X, Rome La Sapienza, Rome Tor Vergata, Seville, Tunis II, Tunis III, courses of The Hague Academy of International Law, courses of the Inter-American Juridical Committee in Rio de Janeiro, Bancaja Euro-Mediterranean courses on international law, etc.); Participant at more than two hundred congresses and national and international colloquiums; director of some fifty research projects; supervisor of a dozen doctoral theses in the area of human rights in general and children's rights in particular. [For more main activities in the field relevant to the treaty body concerned and most recent publications, please see the appendix below.] [Spanish only] Datos biográficos adicionales de Jorge Cardona Llorens (España) Otras actividades principales en el campo relacionado con el órgano correspondiente, en el ámbito de la cooperación al desarrollo Miembro de diversos órganos consultivos de la Administración y Patronatos de Fundaciones en materia de cooperación al desarrollo y derechos humanos (Consejo Valenciano de Cooperación al Desarrollo; Fundación por la Justicia; Comité Valenciano de Ayuda Humanitaria; Patronato Sud-Nord de cooperación al desarrollo de la Universidad de Valencia, etc.); Director de proyectos de la Fundación por la Justicia, que participa en acciones de cooperación al desarrollo, orientadas siempre desde la perspectiva de los derechos humanos, en India, Etiopía, Sierra Leona, Senegal, El Salvador, Haití, Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia o Paraguay. De las actividades de la Fundación, tiene una especial relación con la promoción y protección de los derechos de los niños su participación en los siguientes proyectos: "Programa para reducir las prácticas tradicionales dañinas en la mujer", realizado en colaboración con Kembatta Women's Self Help Center (KMG) en Etiopía (cuyos objetivos generales son capacitar a la comunidad para la lucha contra la mutilación genital femenina y otras formas de prácticas tradicionales dañinas, capacitar a las mujeres, adolescentes y niñas para que conozcan y reclamen por sus derechos, y reducir la violencia de género en las zonas rurales del país, concretamente en los distritos de Tedele y Kebena); "Cooperación con la Diamond Child" en Sierra Leona (escuela-taller que acoge a niños, niñas y jóvenes más desfavorecidos, en especial, antiguos niños soldados, orientada a la reinserción mediante la educación con el objetivo de brindarles una profesión y un mejor futuro en su país); cooperación con el Centro de acogida de huérfanos Ramdha Udhist en Daramsala (India); o acciones para reducir la discriminación de los niños albinos en Senegal; todos ellos desarrollados a través de la Fundación por la Justicia; Participa en el diseño y aplicación de proyectos de empoderamiento de niños especialmente vulnerables en España. Entre otros: Programa de inserción socio-laboral con menores infractores; Programa de integración escolar y laboral de niños con síndrome de Down; Programa de apoyo a niños autistas y sus familias, etc. Publicaciones más recientes en ese campo Autor de más de centenar y medio de publicaciones de derecho internacional (en especial, de derechos humanos, derecho de los tratados, derecho de la responsabilidad internacional, derecho de las organizaciones internacionales, derecho internacional económico, mantenimiento de la paz y la seguridad internacionales, etc.) En los últimos tres años sus publicaciones en el ámbito específico de los derechos humanos: "Diritti umani e diversità nelle abilità individuali: dalla discriminazione alla inclusione." Ragion Pratica. Revista de filosofía práctica. 2011, pp. 185 - 212; "Human Rights and the Inclusive Society". En Globalization and Human Rights: Challenges and Answers from a European Perspective, pp. 51 - 72. Editorial: Springer Netherlands, 2012; "El tercer Protocolo de la Convención de los Derechos del Niño: la consagración del niño como sujeto de derechos humanos y los nuevos desafíos del Comité de los Derechos del Niño", Revista do Instituto Brasileiro de Direitos Humanos, vol. 12 Nº 12, pp. 211 - 228, 2012; "La Convención sobre los Derechos del Niño: significado, alcance y nuevos retos", Educatio siglo XXI. Nº 30, pp. 47 - 68. 2012; "La Convención de los derechos del niño: significado, alcance y nuevos retos", en Temas de actualidad jurídica sobre la niñez. pp. 1 - 18, Ed.: Porrúa (México), 2012; "Droits de l'enfant et secteur privé: existe-t-il un besoin de Convention contraignante?", en Droits de l'enfant et secteur prive: amener les États et les entreprises a remplir leurs obligations, Institut International des Droits de l'Enfant, pp. 72 - 85, 2012; "La Convención Iberoamericana de Derechos de la Juventud y los sistemas internacionales de protección de derechos humanos en los ámbitos universal y regional", en Estudio sobre la Convención Iberoamericana de Derechos de los Jóvenes, Editorial: OIJ. Sitio internet: http://www.oij.org/file_upload/ publicationsItems/document/20130114165345_51.pdf; "Worrying Tendencies: children's criminalization" (edito), en News de l'Institut International des droits de l'Enfant. pp. 1 - 3. 2012. Disponible en Internet en: <http://www.childsrights.org/ html/site_en/>; "La Convención sobre los Derechos del Niño: significado, alcance y nuevos retos". En Revista Educatio Siglo XXI.30, pp. 47 - 68. 2012; "El derecho de las personas con discapacidad intelectual al acceso al empleo público en España: una propuesta a la luz de la Convención sobre los derechos de las personas con discapacidad." En La perspectiva de derechos humanos de la discapacidad, pp. 119 - 161. Tirant lo Blanch, 2012; "Hacia el fortalecimiento del sistema de órganos de Tratados de Derechos Humanos de las Naciones Unidas", en Nuevas fronteras del derecho de la Unión Europea. Liber amicorum: José Luis Iglesias Buhigues, pp. 969 - 983 (España): Tirant lo Blanch, 2012; "Vers la révision du système conventionnel de contrôle des droits de l'homme?" (Editorial). European Society of International Law. Newsletter. pp. 1 - 3. European Society of International Law, 2012. Disponible en Internet en: <http://www.esil-sedi.eu/english/February%202012.xps>; "La evaluación y determinación del interés superior del niño." Revista Española de Derecho Internacional, vol. LXV2, pp. 253 - 258, 2013; "Droit à l'éducation des enfants en situation de handicap: exclusion, intégration et inclusión", en Droit des enfants en situation de handicap, pp. 49 - 58. IDE, 2013; "Retos, amenazas y esperanzas en el sistema de control y garantía de los derechos humanos en Naciones Unidas", en Unity and Diversity of International Law. Essays in Honour of Professor Pierre-Marie Dupuy (Leiden), 2014. "La transposition des droits de l'enfant dans les systèmes juridiques nationaux", en Regards croisés sur deux décennies d'application de la Convention des Nations-Unies relative aux droits de l'enfant au Nord et au Sud de la Méditerranée, Monaco, 2014. Bernard Gastaud (Monaco) Date and place of birth: 10 January 1946, Principality of Monaco Working languages: French (mother tongue), English (written and spoken), Arabic (basic) Member of the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child (elected 2010); Observer with the World Association of Children's Friends (AMADE) (President, HRH the Princess of Hanover). Consultant, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Principality of Monaco; Member, Committee of Legal Advisers on Public International Law (CAHDI), Council of Europe; Conciliator, Court of Conciliation and Arbitration, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Certificat d'études supérieures de maîtrise en lettres (Master's degree) (Nice, France); Diplôme d'études supérieures de droit public (Postgraduate degree in public law) (Nice, France); Doctorat d'État en droit (Doctorate in law) (Nice, France). Lecturer, Interdisciplinary Centre for Children's Rights at the Catholic University of Leuven (Belgium). Recent publications and presentations related to children's rights 1. "Le renforcement de la coopération entre les organes chargés de mettre en œuvre les mécanismes de suivi du Conseil de l'Europe et de l'Organisation des Nations Unies" (Strengthening cooperation between Council of Europe and United Nations monitoring mechanisms), presentation to the Council of Europe conference "Building a child-friendly Europe: Turning a vision into reality", at a round table on the topic "Finding the missing pieces: evaluating implementation of children's rights". Monaco, 21 November 2011. Paper (in French) can be consulted on the Council of Europe website: http://www.coe.int/t/dg3/children/strategyconferencemonaco/Speeches_fr.asp. 2. "La collecte des données et la justice juvénile" (Data collection and juvenile justice), presentation to the Sixth European Forum on the Rights of the Child (Brussels, Belgium, 23 November 2011). Text reproduced in the Revue de Droit Monégasque No. 12, 2013, pp. 109 - 118, and available online on the website of the International Juvenile Justice Observatory: http://www.oijj.org/fr/docs/rapport/6eme-forum-relatif-aux-droits-de-l-enfant-la-collecte-des-donnees-et-la-justice-juvenil. 3. "La Convention relative aux droits de l'enfant et l'ombudsman des enfants" (The Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Children's Ombudsman), contribution to a publication to mark the 20th anniversary of the French Community Delegate-General for Children's Rights, Brussels, Belgium, 2012. 4. "The United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of the Child", presentation, Montessori Model United Nations, Geneva, Switzerland, 6 June 2013. 5. "The impact of migrations on child rights", 17th Annual Conference of the European Network of Ombudspersons for Children, Brussels, 25 September 2013. Presentation available on the ENOC website. 6. "Le droit au jeu est-il un droit mineur?" (Is the right to play a minor right?). In Journal du droit des Jeunes, Belgian edition, No. 328, October 2013, p. 31. 7. "Introduction générale: Responsabilités et solidarités" (General introduction: responsibility and solidarity), presentation at high-level colloquium "Regards croisés sur deux décennies d'application de la Convention relative aux droits de l'enfant au Nord et au Sud de la Méditerranée" (Perspectives on Two Decades of Application of the Convention on the Rights of the Child to the North and the South of the Mediterranean. Monaco, 21 November 2013. In Revue de Droit Monégasque, special issue, 2014. 8. "What are children's rights in the context of children working and/or living on the street?", round table organized by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Singapore, 10 - 11 December 2013, unpublished paper. 9. "Le Comité des Nations Unies des droits de l'enfant: dualité et singularité des missions" (The United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child: duality and singularity of missions). In Revue de Droit Monégasque, No. 13, 2014 (forthcoming). 10. "L'éducation aux droits de l'enfant" (Education on the rights of the child). In Journal du droit des jeunes, Belgian edition, 2014 (forthcoming). Norah Amilcar Jean François (Haiti) Date and place of birth: 6 October 1954, Dessaline, Haiti Working language: French Judge-counsellor for social defence, Court of Appeal of Port-au-Prince Judge, Court of Appeal of Port-au-Prince; Senior lecturer, School of the Judiciary (children); Lecturer in civil law and at private universities; Lecturer on human rights, particularly women's and children's rights; Executive director of the Haitian chapter of the International Association of Women Judges (IAWJ). Maîtrise (Master's degree) in public governance, Université Laval, Canada; Maîtrise (Master's degree) in judicial administration, Haiti State University; Diploma, Legal Service Training College, France; Licence en droit (Law degree), Haiti State University; Diploma in management of small and medium-sized enterprises; Certificat de fin de cycle (End-of-cycle certificate), Faculty of Applied Linguistics; Other main activities in the field relevant to the mandate of the Committee on the Rights of the Child Judge-counsellor for social defence, Ministry of Justice and Public Security; Focal point with the International Labour Organization (ILO) on child labour and the list of hazardous occupations for children; Developing a project on trafficking in persons in Haiti, particularly trafficking in women and children, in partnership with the International Association of Women Judges (IAWJ). Most recent publications in this field Study on the legal framework of forced child labour, with a particular focus on child domestic labour; Le droit à l'éducation: de la prévention à la protection (The right to education: from prevention to protection); Un nouveau regard sur l'enfance Haïtienne (A new perspective on children in Haiti); Législation Haïtienne en vigueur sur les mineurs (Haitian legislation on minors); Report on children in difficulty in Haiti. Mirna Antonieta Perla Jiménez (El Salvador) Date and place of birth: 8 January 1955, Nueva Esparta, La Unión, El Salvador Working language: Spanish Lawyer and notary; defender and promoter of human rights Secretary General of the National University; member of the judiciary for 23 years; general coordinator of a human rights body at the University of Central America for 4 years; in the judiciary served as a juvenile judge and magistrate in the Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court; member of the committees on minors, gender, the environment and labour justice; lecturer at the National University for 10 years, from 1977 to 1987; participated in four sessions of the United Nations General Assembly as human rights representative for the Central American region; co-founder (1994) and member of the Pro-Búsqueda association to search for disappeared children in El Salvador; co-founder of the Tecleña committee on children and young people (1995). Licenciatura (Bachelor's degree) in legal science, graduate of the National University; Maestría (Master's degree) in public law, Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona; Doctorado (Doctorate), Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona Specialization: minors and juvenile law; Lecturer in human rights; Training in justice and gender; Lecturer on the gender perspective and equality case law. Has lodged complaints concerning the disappearance of children with the courts in El Salvador and taken cases to international bodies; works in the area of preserving historical memory; helped organize and plan the complaint concerning the El Mozote massacre in Morazán in 1981; defended political prisoners in the 1980s; has helped revive the human rights movement since 1993; "Herbert Anaya" Human Rights Congress, in tribute to human rights defenders, who continue to work for justice; has organized four human rights festivals to motivate young people and investigate human rights violations committed at any time, or during the conflict, as well as current cases at the national or the international level; and has worked with civil society in anti-corruption efforts to have the cases of CEL-Enel and Francisco Flores investigated. List of most recent publications in the field Radiografía de las violaciones a los Derechos Económicos, Sociales y Culturales en El Salvador (Analysis of violations of economic, social and cultural rights in El Salvador); Articles on the situation of children's and adolescents' rights in El Salvador; El internamiento como última medida (Detention as a measure of last resort); Comunidad como alternativa a la privación de libertad de los menores infractores (Community as an alternative to deprivation of liberty for young offenders). Hatem Kotrane (Tunisia) Date and place of birth: 25 July 1954, Tunis Working languages: Arabic, French, English Professor, Faculty of Legal, Political and Social Sciences, University of Carthage, Tunis Member of the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child since 2003 Teaching: civil law, social law, human rights Research supervision (Master's degrees and doctorates) Chairperson of the recruitment panel for university teachers in private law and social law: assistants, lecturers and senior lecturers Training trainers in human rights 1977: Licence en droit (Bachelor of law), Faculty of Law and Political Science, Tunis; 1978: Diplôme d'études approfondies (DEA) (Master's degree) in social law, Université de Paris 1, Panthéon-Sorbonne; 2001: Diplôme d'études approfondies (DEA) (Master's degree) in private international law, Université de Paris 1, Panthéon-Sorbonne; 2002: Doctorat d'Etat (Doctorate) in social law, 1982, Université de Paris 1, Panthéon-Sorbonne; thesis title: L'ordre public en droit social international (Public order in international social law); 2004: Agrégation (Competitive examination) in private law, University of Tunis. Independent Expert to examine the question of a draft optional protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. United Nations Commission on Human Rights, 2000 - 2001; Member of the Tunisian Higher Committee on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 1991 - 2011; General Rapporteur of the preparatory conference of French-speaking countries for the World Conference on Human Rights, Libreville, Gabon, 1993; Member of the Arab Group of Experts on the revision of the Arab Charter on Human Rights (OHCHR - League of Arab States), Cairo, 2004; General Rapporteur for the regional conference of Middle Eastern and North African countries on the United Nations Secretary-General's Study on Violence against Children, Cairo, 27 - 30 June 2005; General Rapporteur of the 18th Congress of the International Association of Youth and Family Judges and Magistrates, held in Tunis from 21 to 24 April 2010 in partnership with the Tunisian Association for Children's Rights (ATUDE), on the overall theme "United in diversity. Protection of children in juvenile justice in the principal legal systems"; Mediator (international abduction cases). 2000: Mondialisation de l'économie et défi de la cohésion sociale - Le cas de la Tunisie (Globalization and the challenge of social cohesion - the case of Tunisia). Tunis, Centre de publication universitaire (CPU); 2005: Guide des droits économiques, sociaux et culturels (Guide to economic, social and cultural rights), Tunis, Arab Institute of Human Rights; 2012: The right to education in the Arab States -- Review of national legal and policy frameworks -- Regional synthesis report. UNESCO, 2012; 2012: Importance de l'insertion des droits économiques, sociaux et culturels dans les constitutions des pays arabes (Importance of the inclusion of economic, social and cultural rights in the constitutions of Arab countries). Arab NGO Network for Development. Beirut, Lebanon, November 2012; 2014: Les droits de l'enfant dans les États arabes, 25 ans après! (The rights of the child in Arab States 25 years on) (in press). Gehad Madi (Egypt) Date and place of birth: 13 November 1951, Cairo, Egypt Working languages: English and Arabic Current position Member of the Committee on the Rights of the Child since March 2011 2008 - 2011, assumed the post of Assistant Foreign Minister and Director of the Diplomatic and Consular Corp Department. Responsible for recruitments, postings of diplomatic staff abroad and evaluating the performance of the different departments of the ministry as well as the diplomatic missions and diplomatic staff; 2004 - 2008, ambassador of Egypt to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; 1998 - 2002, ambassador of Egypt to India; 2002 - 2004, Deputy Assistant Foreign Minister for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs; Held several diplomatic posts abroad, including the legal advisor to the mission of Egypt to the United Nations in New York. B.A. in German Language and Literature, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt; LLB in Law, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. While assuming the post of Deputy Assistant Foreign Minister for Human rights and International Humanitarian Affairs: Played an instrumental role in initiating and establishing Egypt's National Council for Human Rights; Oversaw matters pertaining to the implementation of Egypt's international human rights obligations, including in the field of the rights of the child; National coordinator for human rights activities of the relevant governmental departments; Programme coordinator for issues related to the rights of the child; Chair of the committee assessing obligations regarding withdrawal process of Egypt's reservation on articles 20 and 21 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child; Contributed to the launching of a national campaign to amend the 1996 Child Law, which culminated in the approval by Parliament in 2008 of a large number of important legislative amendments, including criminalization of female genital mutilation and raising the minimum age of marriage for girls; Chaired the Egyptian delegation in drafting and adopting the Arab Charter for Human Rights. Writings in the field of child rights My writings, analyses and reports in the field of human rights and child rights were presented to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to relevant government departments and to the Egyptian parliament for the purposes of formulating policies and strategies, as well as enacting legislation on human rights related issues. As an example, I participated in the drafting of the following national documents (related to human and child rights): National Strategy on the Protection, Rehabilitation and Integration of Street Children (2003); National Action Plan for the Education of Girls, and seven Local Action Plans for the seven governorates mostly affected by the gender gap (2002); National Survey on the child labour force in Egypt. Medals and decorations Order of Merit, Egypt; Order of the Arab Republic of Egypt; Order of Merit, Germany. Louisa Oussedik-Chalal (Algeria) Date and place of birth: 12 January 1951, Algeria Working languages: French, English, Arabic Chargée de Mission at the Office of the President of the Republic, where I have been working since 1976. 1976 - 1984: Administrator, Office of the President of the Republic 1984 - 1990: Deputy Director 1990 - 1995: Director 1995 - 2003: Director of studies 2003 to date: Chargée de Mission Member of the National Advisory Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights Member of the Board of the Palais de la Culture Consultant to NGOs and national associations dealing with economic, social, political and cultural rights Member of the Association of Mediterranean Ombudsmen since its establishment in 1998 Member of the Algerian Network for the Defence of Children's Rights (NADA) 1956: Primary school, Frais-Vallon, Bab-El Oued, Algiers 1960: El-Mouradia lower secondary school, Algiers 1970: Baccalaureate (El Mokrani secondary school) 1974: Licence d'Enseignement Supérieur (Bachelor's degree), University of Algiers 1976: Maîtrise (Master's degree) in educational science 2000: Training as administrator in geopolitics and humanitarian affairs Since 2005, member of an ad hoc committee of the Human Rights Commission to prepare reports submitted by Algeria to the United Nations human rights bodies; Participation in the drafting of the third and fourth reports of Algeria on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child; 2008: Participation in meetings on the National Plan for Children 2008 - 2015, launched in December 2008 by the former Deputy Minister for Family and the Status of Women; Member of a committee to monitor implementation of the National Plan under the National Human Rights Commission; 2009: Participation in the drafting of the partnership project between the National Human Rights Commission and UNICEF; 2009: Initiated a survey on the situation of children born outside marriage in Algeria and recommendations on how to better address the problems identified; 2009: Chairperson of a workshop on the Convention on the Rights of the Child in public policy and prospects for the future; Drafted a guide on the rights of the child, inspired by the Convention on the Rights of the Child and distributed in primary schools in Algiers; impact evaluation; 2010: Appointed to supervise education and training activities on children's rights in schools; 2010: Campaign for the right to education for children with disabilities; 2010: Participation in a thematic workshop organized by the NADA network on sexual violence against children, in partnership with the AMANE/Acting for Life association; 2011: Campaign for the right to education for children with disabilities; 2012: Participation in projects related to the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child following its consideration of the report of Algeria in June 2012; 2012: Launch of an awareness-raising campaign to set up a home for the families of children with carcinoma from neighbouring provinces in a bid to ease the isolation of these children, already weakened by the illness. The project is now being implemented; Regular unannounced visits to children's homes; volunteer work; 2013: Training on mixed migration flows and children in vulnerable situations. Personal projects Paper on the protection of children given up at birth and proposal for legislation to require the parent to recognize the child, either through DNA testing or voluntarily, implying a need to define the concept of the best interest of the child; Drafting of a mediation guide; Establishment of a unit to raise awareness of international obligations in the area of women's and children's rights; Involvement in the establishment of an observatory for children's and women's rights; Lobbying national bodies for ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Labour Organization (ILO) Domestic Workers Convention; Proposal for a Children's Code. José Angel Rodríguez Reyes (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) Date and place of birth: 7 February 1967, Caracas, Venezuela Adviser on children's issues for public bodies such as the Ombudsman's Office, the Autonomous Institute and National Council for Children's and Adolescents' Rights (Idenna) and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Consultant at the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), contracted to compile the necessary information for drafting the third, fourth and fifth periodic reports of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela under article 44 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the fourth report to the Human Rights Committee under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Tenured judge, appointed through a public competition, Second Court of First Instance for the Protection of Children and Adolescents, judicial district of the Metropolitan Area of Caracas; Deputy senior judge, Second High Court of Appeal, judicial district of the Metropolitan Area of Caracas; Executive Secretary, Republican Ethics Council; Director of mediation and conciliation, Ombudsman's Office; Ombudsman's delegate, Metropolitan Area of Caracas. Lawyer Maestría (Master's degree) in constitutional law, University of Valencia, Spain Maestría (Master's degree) in procedural law, Universidad Católica Andrés Bello Diplomas and advanced training in human rights, in the areas of protection of children and adolescents, women's right to a life free of violence and the rights of indigenous peoples. Currently a lecturer at the Fundación Juan Vives Suriá, attached to the Ombudsman's Office, on the course on "The new oral proceedings in the Child Protection Act", in the Diploma in Children's Rights. Previously instructor on training courses on the procedural reform of the Child Protection Act organized through cooperation between the Universidad Católica Andrés Bello and CECODAP, a non-governmental organization (NGO). Lecturer on the judges' initial training course at the National School of the Judiciary, 2008 - 2009. Frequently invited to speak at conferences on issues related to human rights, alternative forms of conflict resolution and comprehensive protection of children and adolescents. Member of the assembly of the human rights NGO Red de Apoyo por la Justicia y la Paz (Support network for justice and peace). Most recent publications in the field Teaching manual on mediation for the Experimental University for Public Security Articles for the daily newspaper El Universal Kirsten Sandberg (Norway) Date and place of birth: 1 April 1954, Oslo Working languages: English / Norwegian Chairperson of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (2013 - 2015) Professor of Law at the Faculty of Law, University of Oslo. Specializing in Child Law Chairing the Committee meetings, cooperating with the secretariat in Geneva, representing the Committee at various events, giving lectures and taking part in workshops on the Convention and the Committee's activities Teaching and research in her position as professor (children's rights, child law, public administration law, legal method, etc.) Various lectures and presentations on children's rights outside the university 2003 Dr.juris, University of Oslo 1980 Law degree (Cand.Jur.), Faculty of Law, University of Oslo Vice-dean of studies, Faculty of Law, University of Oslo, 2012 - 2013; Acting Justice in the Supreme Court of Norway, 2010 Nov - Feb 2011; Head of the Department of Public and Administrative Law, University of Oslo, 2005 - 2009; Visiting fellow at the Law Department, European University Institute, Florence, 2009; Lecture honorarium at Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea, 2012; Invited speaker at a human rights conference at Pomor State University, Arkhangelsk, Russia, 2008; Visiting lecturer at the University of Edinburgh, Northern Scholars Scheme, 2006; Project leader of the research project "Children's rights: The significance of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in administrative and court practice", financed by the Norwegian Research Council, 2006 - 2011; Lecturing extensively on children's rights in Norway and abroad. Books Høstmælingen, N., Kjørholt E.S., Sandberg, K. (ed.): The Convention on the Rights of the Child - Children's Rights in Norway (Barnekonvensjonen - barns rettigheter i Norge), Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, 2nd edition 2012 Sandberg, K.: The question of returning children after foster placement (Tilbakeføring av barn etter omsorgsovertakelse). Oslo: Gyldendal Akademisk 2003. 452 p. (doctoral thesis) Articles "The Role of National Courts in Promoting Children's Rights", in International Journal of Children's Rights, volume 22, Issue 1, 2014, pp. 1 - 20. "Om barns egen rolle i overvåkingen av FNs barnekonvensjon" (On children's own role in the monitoring of the Convention on the Rights of the Child). I: Velferd og rettferd: Festskrift til Asbjørn Kjønstad 70 år. Oslo: Gyldendal Juridisk 2013, pp. 493 - 501. "Rettsforholdet mellom barn og foreldre i utdanningssammenheng - hvem har rett til informasjon, og hvem bestemmer hva" (The legal relationship between children and parents in an educational context) I: Utdanningsrettslige emner. Oslo: Cappelen Damm 2012 pp. 539 - 557. "Norway: The Long and Winding Road towards Prohibiting Physical Punishment", in Durrant, J. and Smith, A., Global Pathways to Abolishing Physical Punishment. Realizing Children's Rights, London: Routledge, 2011. "Children's right to participate in health care decisions", in Sinding Aasen, H. and Halvorsen, R., Human rights, dignity and autonomy in health care and social services: Nordic perspectives, Intersentia, Belgium 2009. 