%%%ELECTION OF MEMBERS|

2014 session Item 4 of the provisional agenda* Elections, nominations, confirmations and appointments * E/2014/1/Rev.1, annex II. Election of nine members of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Note by the Secretary-General 1. By its resolution 1985/17, the Economic and Social Council decided to establish a Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to undertake functions relating to the implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and to assist the Council in fulfilling its responsibilities under the Covenant. The members are elected from a list of persons nominated by States parties to the Covenant. 2. In 2014, the Council is to elect nine members of the Committee for a four-year term beginning on 1 January 2015 to fill vacancies that will occur upon the expiration, on 31 December 2014, of the terms of the following members: Aslan Abashidze (Russian Federation), Clément Atangana (Cameroon), Maria Virginia Bras Gomes (Portugal), Chandrashekhar Dasgupta (India), Azzouz Kerdoun (Algeria), Jaime Marchán Romero (Ecuador), Renato Zerbini Ribeiro Leão (Brazil), Heisoo Shin (Republic of Korea) and Álvaro Tirado Mejía (Colombia). 3. In a note verbale dated 21 October 2013, the Secretary-General invited States parties to the Covenant to submit their nominations for membership in the Committee within three months. The names of the persons nominated are set out below, together with the States parties that nominated them. Biographical information on the candidates will be provided in document E/2014/9/Add.13. Name Proposed by 1. Aslan Abashidze* Russian Federation 2. Maria Virginia Bras Gomes* Portugal 3. Laura-Maria Craciunean Romania 4. Chandrashekhar Dasgupta* India 5. Olivier De Schutter Belgium 6. Azzouz Kerdoun* Algeria 7. Jaime Marchán Romero* Ecuador 8. Renato Zerbini Ribeiro Leão* Brazil 9. Askar Shakirov Kazakhstan 10. Heisoo Shin* Republic of Korea 11. Rodrigo Uprimny Yepes Colombia 12. Carlos Rafael Urquilla Bonilla El Salvador * Nominated for re-election. 4. Currently, there are 161 States parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The number of States parties by regional group is listed below, together with the number of seats to be allocated to each region in accordance with Council resolution 1985/17, subparagraph (b) and in accordance with Council decision 2010/201 B of 28 April 2010: Regional group States parties as at 1 January 2014 Seats allocated African States Asia-Pacific States Eastern European States Latin American and Caribbean States Western European and other States Total 5. Accordingly, the number of vacancies in each geographical region to be filled by the Council in 2014 is as follows: Number of vacancies 6. The current membership of the Committee is listed in the annex to the present note. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (18 members; four-year term) Membership in 2014 Term expires on 31 December Aslan Abashidze (Russian Federation)* Mohamed Ezzeldin Abdel-Moneim (Egypt) Clément Atangana (Cameroon)* Maria Virginia Bras Gomes (Portugal)* Jun Cong (China) Chandrashekhar Dasgupta (India)* Zdzislaw Kedzia (Poland) Azzouz Kerdoun (Algeria)* Mikel Mancisidor (Spain) Jaime Marchán Romero (Ecuador)* Sergei Martynov (Belarus) Ariranga Govindasamy Pillay (Mauritius) Lydia Carmelita Ravenberg (Suriname) Renato Zerbini Ribeiro Leão (Brazil)* Waleed Sa'di (Jordan) Nicolaas Jan Schrijver (Netherlands) Heisoo Shin (Republic of Korea)* Álvaro Tirado Mejía (Colombia)* * Retiring member. 