%%%DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|

2014 session Item 5 (c) of the provisional agenda* High-level segment: annual ministerial review * E/2014/1/Rev.1, annex II. Statement submitted by American Foundation of Savoy Orders, a non-governmental organization in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council The Secretary-General has received the following statement, which is being circulated in accordance with paragraphs 30 and 31 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31. The American Foundation of Savoy Orders supports the 2014 theme of addressing on-going and emerging challenges for meeting the Millennium Development Goals in 2015 and for sustaining development gains in the future. The Foundation is a charitable and philanthropic organization that provides support for hospitals, relief agencies and assistance for the poor, sick and elderly. The Foundation's experience has been developed through numerous initiatives across North America and abroad in the fields of education, emergency disaster, medical and poverty relief, social services and children's causes. The Millennium Development Goals represent an unprecedented partnership among nations to better the disadvantaged across the globe. As the 2015 target date approaches, many countries have already made extraordinary progress, improving the lives of millions of people. But not all countries or regions of the world are on track to meet the goals. The Millennium Development Goal indicators reveal vast disparities between developed and developing countries, and even among developing countries there are wide differences. Moreover, developing nations face numerous barriers to achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Some of these barriers are unique and country-specific, while others are broadly shared. Common problems faced by developing nations include conflict, instability, poor starting conditions, weak governance and institutions and environmental degradation. To meet the Millennium Development Goals and create a sustainable path to development, countries must adopt policies and programmes to overcome these problems. Developed countries and civil society each have a role to play in assisting developing countries to overcome these barriers and to meet the goals. Developed countries must take the lead and continue with their pledge to renew and strengthen partnerships for development, including providing aid and promoting policies and programmes. Aid donors from civil society, on the other hand, must ensure that development assistance is flexible enough to help countries address these challenges and meet the Millennium Development Goals. The Foundation believes that the challenges faced by developing countries must be addressed lest the risk of putting the Millennium Development Goals remain beyond the reach of many countries. For its part, The American Foundation of Savoy Orders is deeply committed to humanitarian and charitable projects for the poor, particularly charities that serve children. 