%%%NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS|CONSULTATIVE STATUS|

Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations 2014 resumed session 19-28 May and 6 June 2014 Quadrennial reports for the period 2009-2012 submitted by non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council through the Secretary-General pursuant to Council resolution 1996/31 Note by the Secretary-General Addendum Contents Page 1. Maharashtra Foundation 2. Migrants Rights International 3. National Tropical Botanical Garden 4. National Youth Council of Russia 5. Partnership Africa Canada 6. Pax Romana 7. Public Services International 8. Save the Children International 9. Social Accountability International 10. Society for International Development 11. Society for Threatened Peoples 12. Trauma Foundation 13. Verein Südwind Entwicklungspolitik 14. Vrienden van Congo 15. Wellesley Centers for Women Special, 2005 Introduction The Maharashtra Foundation is a unique, volunteer-supported, non-profit organization based in the United States of America working with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in India, mainly in the State of Maharashtra. Aims and purposes of the organization The mission of the Foundation is social and economic justice for all. The Foundation focuses on education, health, empowerment of women and children's welfare in selecting the NGOs with which it works. The NGOs must have a proven record of working at the grass-roots level. The Foundation members visit the NGOs during their visits to India and report on their activities to the Foundation. Significant changes in the organization There have been no significant changes. Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations In support of the Millennium Development Goals, the Foundation supported a number of projects during the period 2009-2012. In the area of women's empowerment, shelter services for victims of domestic violence were offered. Increasing awareness of and building confidence against violence was the focus of projects in India and the United States. In the area of efforts to combat human trafficking, the Foundation supported a project offering after-school care for the children of sex workers in the red-light district of Mumbai, in addition to supporting projects and programmes in Marathwada and Amravati districts, Maharashtra State. In the health sector, the Foundation supported projects to supply safe drinking water to rural schools in Solapur and Phaltan. Currently, a 20-bed hospital is under construction in the rural coastal area of Maharashtra State. For the past three years, the Foundation has been conducting youth wellness and health camps with Jnana Prabodhini, an NGO, in Harali, Maharashtra State, where some 400 children from schools and surrounding village areas are examined by doctors (paediatricians, dentists and psychologists) and volunteers from the United States. The haemoglobin data indicated improvements consistent with treatment. In 2011, work against female infanticide was an additional feature of the camp. Women from surrounding villages received sex, health and social education. Participation in meetings of the United Nations The Foundation attended the third working session of the Open-ended Working Group on Ageing, held in New York in August 2012, representing the Janaseva Foundation of Pune, India. Members of the Maharashtra Foundation attended no other meetings or international conferences of the Council and its subsidiary bodies, given that the Foundation focused its activities on the development and implementation of programmes and campaigns. Cooperation with United Nations bodies No cooperation was specified. Initiatives taken by the organization in support of the Millennium Development Goals Activities are included above under the section "Contribution of the organization to the work of the United Nations". Special, 2001 Migrants Rights International was founded in Cairo in September 1994 as the International Migrants Rights Watch Committee, at the time of the International Conference on Population and Development. Since then, the organization has grown to become a global non-governmental civil society alliance of migrant associations, human rights, labour, religious, academic and other organizations that operate at the local, national, regional and international levels. The organization's mission is to advocate respect for and protection and fulfilment of the full range of human rights of migrants around the world and to foster unity and the inclusion of migrant voices at all levels of policymaking. In 2012, the organization co-founded and currently coordinates a new global civil society coalition, the Global Coalition on Migration, which brings together the world's largest international and regional civil society networks working on migration. This body brings together and streamlines civil society input on migration framework-setting and policymaking, especially through the United Nations and related processes. The organization contributed to the work of the United Nations by participating in the following meetings and events: (a) Selected sessions of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva from 2009 to 2012, at which the organization presented oral and written statements and organized side events and civil society delegations; (b) Ninth session of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, held in Geneva in November 2010, at which the national report of the United States was considered: the organization co-submitted a shadow report and co-organized a civil society panel with the National Network for Immigrant and Refugee Rights; (c) Fifty-fourth to fifty-sixth sessions of the Commission on the Status of Women (New York, 2010-2012), at which the organization organized side events and presented oral and written statements; (d) Sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Cancun, Mexico, from 29 November to 10 December 2010, at which it organized side events and presented materials on climate change and migration; (e) Global Forum on Migration and Development: the organization was a member of the international advisory committee for the civil society days and organized delegations and side events in Athens in November 2009, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, in November 2010, Geneva in December 2011 and Port Louis in November 2012. The participation of the organization is as stated above. The organization cooperated with the Human Rights Council, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the Global Migration Group, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Special Rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on International Migration and Development and the Office of the President of the General Assembly, among others. The organization co-wrote and promoted the post-2015 development agenda as part of the outcomes of the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and Development. The organization participated in global civil society consultations on population dynamics for the post-2015 development agenda. Additional information While the Global Forum on Migration and Development is not a direct part of the United Nations, the organization took a leadership role in civil society participation and contribution to the Forum process, including advocating a formal relationship with the United Nations framework. Special, 1997 The mission of the National Tropical Botanical Garden is to enrich life through discovery, scientific research, conservation and education by perpetuating the survival of the plants, ecosystems and cultural knowledge of tropical regions. Through its network of botanical gardens, state-of-the-art research and horticulture complexes and living and resource collections, the organization's purposes are to establish, develop, operate and maintain an educational and scientific centre with libraries, herbaria, laboratories and museums to encourage and conduct research in basic and applied tropical botany; to foster and encourage fundamental research in tropical plant life and study the uses of tropical flora in agriculture, forestry, horticulture, medicine and other sciences; to share knowledge acquired relative to basic and applied tropical botany through publications and other media; to collect and cultivate tropical flora; to preserve species of tropical plant life threatened with extinction; and to provide a facility that contributes to the education, instruction and recreation of the public. The organization also has a new, multi-million-dollar botanic research centre, designed to be environmentally sustainable, which was awarded LEED gold certification, making it the first building on the island of Kaua'i recognized under the rating system. Contributions included undertaking activities that supported and advanced global conservation efforts, sharing scientific data and resources, publishing new botanical manuscripts, conducting biodiversity surveys, supporting graduate research fellowships in botany, undertaking restoration projects in botanical preserves and carrying out activities that promoted cultural and ethnobotanic knowledge. The organization did not participate in the work of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies, in major conferences or in other United Nations meetings during the reporting period because it focused its activities on the development and implementation of programmes on native plant conservation, ecosystem restoration and educational programmes for underserved youth, working directly with governmental and other non-governmental organizations. The organization would have been more active in the implementation of United Nations programmes if not for its scarce funds and few representative staff, which hampered attendance at international meetings. One of the most noteworthy initiatives that the organization undertook in the past four years was the Global Hunger Initiative, under which the organization's Breadfruit Institute researched, propagated and distributed breadfruit plants to areas where hunger is an issue. It distributed nutritious and prolific breadfruit plants to Costa Rica, Ghana, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Panama, the Philippines, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania, as well as to American Samoa, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, French Polynesia, Guam, Hawaii and Puerto Rico. The organization also continued the primary work that it has been doing for nearly 50 years (from which the breadfruit project evolved), namely conservation of the natural environment, preservation of biodiversity and ensuring environmental sustainability, as indicated by the activities mentioned in the previous sections. It also implemented various education programmes that engaged children of all ages in conservation efforts, environmental stewardship and preservation of ethnobotanic practices and helped them to prepare for green careers. In addition, the organization offered an environmental journalism fellowship programme to better prepare journalists to understand and cover environmental issues, in addition to a programme for science teachers to help them to understand and teach their pupils about the environment. Special, 2009 The main aim of the National Youth Council of Russia is to support and coordinate the activities of Russian youth and children's organizations in order to encourage the protection and realization of their interests and the rights of children and young people. The Council carries out these aims by cooperating with legislative bodies, interacting with executive bodies on young people, preparing educational seminars, encouraging and helping young people to participate in training courses and other events, publishing information and other material on and for youth and children's organizations, engaging in public relations efforts and promoting the work of children's and youth organizations, and representing the interests of Russian children's and youth organizations at the international level. The Council is a full member of the European Youth Forum and has observer status in the World Assembly of Youth. The position of Executive Director was established in the statutes under article 4.18. The Executive Director can be elected and dismissed by the Board on the proposal of the Chair of the Council. The Executive Director is expected to act without power of attorney on behalf of the Council and represent its interests in relation to public authorities, businesses and non-profit, international and other organizations; to sign contracts and agreements involving the Council (with property and financial obligations); and to appoint and dismiss staff members of the Council, to allocate responsibilities among them and to impose penalties on them and make rewards. The Executive Director has the right to sign financial documents, to issue orders and instructions within the area of his or her competence and to ensure the implementation of the statutes and governing documents of the Council. The Council is implementing a youth delegate programme in the Russian Federation, giving an opportunity for young representatives of Russian civil society to participate in meetings of the United Nations and ensuring that the voices of Russian young people are heard at the global level. Representatives attended the following meetings: (a) Sixty-fourth and sixty-sixth sessions of the General Assembly, held in New York in 2009 and 2011; (b) Forty-ninth session of the Commission for Social Development, held in New York from 9 to 18 February 2011; (c) Fourth Alliance of Civilizations Forum, held in Doha from 11 to 13 December 2011. The Council is actively working on Goal 3 (promote gender equality and empower women). It calls for young women to participate in society and in the work of civil society, encouraging them, among other things, to participate in the work and events of the Council and its member organizations, ensuring fair treatment and gender balance in all cases. One of the key areas of work of the Council is education, both formal and non-formal. Most of the Goals are tackled during its events. Partnership Africa Canada has its headquarters in Ottawa and is governed by a board of directors drawn in equal numbers from Canada and Africa. The organization works globally, but has a special focus on Africa. The organization works in partnership with organizations in Africa, Canada and internationally to build sustainable human development in Africa. It undertakes research and policy dialogue on issues affecting African development. During the period in question, its programmes focused on peace and human security, human rights and good governance. The organization has a particular focus on the mineral sector in Central and West Africa and on transparency in the extractive sector generally. The organization's liaison office in Addis Ababa closed in 2009. As a member of the Kimberley Process, the organization helped to implement General Assembly resolution 55/56 with regard to the work of the Process in developing an international system to prevent conflict diamonds. This included specific action in such countries as Côte d'Ivoire and Liberia, where the organization collaborated closely with the Panel of Experts on Liberia. With the support of the United Nations, the organization created, for the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, a regional certification mechanism for tin, tungsten, tantalum and gold. The organization is the lead partner of the International Conference in the implementation of the mechanism and was a key contributor to the development and implementation of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas. As such, the organization is directly contributing to the implementation of Security Council resolution 1952 (2010), which supports taking forward the due diligence recommendations of the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition to providing technical support for natural resource governance and mineral certification in the Great Lakes region, the organization conducted and published research relating to sexual and other forms of gender-based violence and was active in promoting the United Nations women and peace and security agenda in the Great Lakes region throughout all its programming areas and in Canada. It coordinated the development of the Canadian action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolutions on women and peace and security. Current programming examines women's participation in artisanal mining in the Great Lakes region and seeks to develop and pilot meaningful implementation of relevant national action plans on women and peace and security in the context of resource governance and peacebuilding. The organization participated in the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012. The organization was also an active contributor to the biannual meetings of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and United Nations Forum on Responsible Mineral Supply Chains. The organization was approached by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), UN-Women, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to act as a peer reviewer for their joint policy report on women, natural resources and peacebuilding, Women and Natural Resources: Unlocking the Peacebuilding Potential. The organization considers its work to be supportive of many of the Goals. Special, 1949 Pax Romana is an international NGO with two branches, the International Catholic Movement for Intellectual and Cultural Affairs (for professionals and intellectuals, with 27 organizations present in 26 countries) and the International Movement of Catholic Students (for university students, with 79 organizations present in 74 countries on five continents). The organization is working to promote an ethical perspective on education, social development, peace and security, human rights, financing for development, sustainable development, children, young people, women's issues, the rights of indigenous peoples, fundamental codes of conduct for transnational corporations, fair wages and workers' rights, international tax cooperation and transparency, global financial international institutions promoting transparency and justice, international governance and corruption and interreligious and intercultural dialogue. No contribution was specified. The organization participated in the following meetings during the reporting period: (a) In Geneva: the tenth to twenty-third regular sessions and the eleventh, thirteenth and fifteenth special sessions of the Human Rights Council; (b) In New York: the official launch of the International Year of Youth: Dialogue and Mutual Understanding at the General Assembly, held on 12 August 2010; the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held from 20 to 22 September 2010; the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on youth: dialogue and mutual understanding, held on 25 and 26 July 2011; the forty-ninth and fiftieth sessions of the Commission for Social Development, held in February 2011 and February 2012; the fifty-fourth session of the Commission on the Status of Women, held from 1 to 12 March 2010; and the forty-fifth session of the Commission on Population and Development, held from 23 to 27 April 2012; (c) In Vienna: the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, fifth session (held from 18 to 22 October 2010); the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, reconvened eighteenth session (held on 3 and 4 December 2009), twentieth session (held from 11 to 15 April 2011) and twenty-first session (held from 23 to 27 April 2012); and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, reconvened fifty-second session (held on 1 and 2 December 2009), fifty-fourth session (held from 21 to 25 March 2011) and fifty-fifth session (held from 12 to 16 March 2012). The organization participated in the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the UNESCO Youth Forum and in the work of joint programmatic commissions on dialogue between cultures for peace, poverty eradication and human rights. The organization also participated in the work of UNEP and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) in Nairobi. The organization took initiatives in the following areas: (a) On 14 and 15 June 2010, the organization participated in the informal interactive hearings organized by the General Assembly as part of the preparatory process for the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals; (b) In January 2011, the organization organized a training programme, entitled "Assessing the past for a better future: HIV/AIDS is still a reality", for East African young people; (c) In June 2011, the organization organized a training programme, entitled "Good governance and leadership, our key to development: African youth up against corruption", for Southern African participants; (d) The organization organized an annual human rights internship programme in Geneva during the period 2009-2012; (e) The organization organized an annual global leadership programme for law students at the United Nations in New York during the period 2009-2012; (f) On 17 and 18 March 2011, the organization organized a study session on empowering young women for the new millennium in New York; (g) In July 2011, the organization organized a study session in Cologne, Germany, ongoing beyond borders, with 200 participants from 80 countries brought together to discuss challenges facing the future development work of the United Nations; (h) The organization organized a United Nations study session on the role of student activism in poverty eradication from 14 to 16 March 2012, with great emphasis on the Millennium Development Goals and other critical aspects of the United Nations development agenda. Public Services International is the global union federation for public sector trade unions. Founded in 1907, it currently represents 671 affiliated trade unions in 152 countries. The organization coordinates public sector struggles for workers' rights, social and economic justice and efficient and accessible public services. Together, the affiliated unions organize more than 20 million public sector workers, providing services in central government, health and social care, municipal and community services and public utilities. The organization campaigns to improve the quality of public services, working closely with international organizations, national Governments, consumer lobbies, community organizations, non-governmental organizations and unions. At the organization's world congress in 2012, its constitution was amended to include, in its principles and objectives, reference to advocating social justice through the United Nations system, including the International Labour Organization (ILO), and to promote and implement the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169) of ILO by increasing the active participation of indigenous peoples in its programme of action for 2013-2017. At the congress, Rosa Pavanelli was appointed as the first ever female General Secretary of the organization. During the reporting period, the organization: (a) Sponsored and disseminated research on access to public services; contributed to the work of the Economic Commission for Europe on public services; made submissions to the Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation; successfully advocated to have ILO join UN-Water; developed campaigns to end violence against women, in parallel with the Commission on the Status of Women; disseminated and integrated the agreed conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women into its work on gender issues; promoted ILO conventions and recommendations and other United Nations instruments; and supported affiliate members in their use of ILO and other United Nations mechanisms; (b) Contributed to the World Youth Report and promoted its participatory mechanisms; organized trade union rights campaigns referring to ILO and United Nations mechanisms, country-based as well as globally; collaborated with ILO on trade union rights, labour migration, public services and many other fields; and strongly supported the Social Protection Floor Initiative and its implementation in all countries. At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the organization's strongest focus was on preserving the language on the right to water in the official text and strengthening campaigning and links with civil society through work at the parallel People's Summit. The organization was an invited speaker at the dialogue days organized by Brazil, with the support of the United Nations, from 16 to 19 June 2012. The organization's representatives in official forums advocated against privatization and in favour of a social protection floor, high-quality public services and the need for fair taxation to fund public services. The Commission on the Status of Women is an important platform for public service unions and other global federations. The organization's objective is to ensure that labour issues are appropriately included in the resolutions of the Commission and that trade unions are recognized as important partners in the struggle for equality. A progressive organization, the organization works together with civil society for a more inclusive and rights-based approach. The organization also actively participates in the International Labour Conference, both at the preparatory stage and during the Conference, to ensure that public sector issues are addressed adequately. The organization is a member of the Advisory Board on Water and Sanitation, a member of the steering committee of the UN-Habitat Global Water Operators' Partnerships Alliance programme and the main partner for ILO public service sector activities. It cooperates with the World Health Organization (WHO) on health policies and the rights of health workers. The organization developed the public-public partnership concept for development assistance between water utilities. It engaged in successful advocacy with the European Union on creating a specific aid fund for public utilities in the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States. It provided education programmes to its members in 152 countries on the Millennium Development Goals and the post-2015 development agenda and contributed to the work of the ILO Bureau for Workers' Activities on the Goals and on the post-2015 development agenda. General, 1993 Save the Children is the world's leading independent organization for children. It works in humanitarian and development contexts. In 2012, it touched the lives of more than 125 million children worldwide. The organization's vision is a world in which every child attains the right to survival, protection, development and participation. Its mission is to inspire breakthroughs in the way in which the world treats children and to achieve immediate and lasting change in their lives. It works principally in the areas of health and nutrition, education, child protection and child rights governance. The organization has an integrated structure that enables it to manage its programmes around the world and speak with one voice. It is in the process of joining forces with Merlin, an international health charity. The organization supports the work of the Secretary-General's Global Strategy for Women's and Children's Health by partnering with the Every Woman, Every Child initiative and co-sponsoring events for the United Nations community. The organization actively supports the Economic and Social Council and contributes regularly to the Commission on the Status of Women and the Commission on Population and Development by organizing events on the chosen theme with a focus on children's rights and bringing in experts from around the world to serve as panellists. The organization provides briefings to the Working Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict and also through bilateral meetings with Council members. It actively participates in the Non-Governmental Organizations Committee on the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the Non-Governmental Organizations Working Group on the Security Council. The organization also participates in the monthly meetings conducted by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with civil society organizations and provides briefings upon request. The organization participates in the civil society network that proposes suggestions for the universal periodic review process for countries in which it works. The organization participates in meetings of the UNICEF Executive Board and makes recommendations in areas in which it works. The organization works with the foreign policy and global health group on its annual resolution in the General Assembly, providing technical expertise and suggesting textual edits. The organization participates in United Nations international conferences, such as the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and the sessions of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. Representatives attended the day of general discussion of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on the rights of all children in the context of international migration, held in Geneva in September 2012, and the organization helped two children to speak to the Committee about their personal experiences. The organization is operational in more than 120 countries and works closely with the United Nations and its various agencies in each country. The organization signed a letter of cooperation with UNICEF identifying critical priority areas for collaboration in 2012. It contributed to the annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict at the field level in various countries between 2009 and 2012. The organization co-leads the Global Education Cluster. The breakthroughs of the organization in education and in health and nutrition are directed towards achieving targets under Goals 1 to 5. Its "Rewrite the future" campaign (2006-2010) directly supported the achievement of Goal 2 and benefited more than 10 million children, securing access to education for 1.64 million. The organization's current global "Every one" campaign aims to help to achieve Goal 4. Annually, the organization releases a report on the state of the world's mothers in which the challenges to achieving Goals 4 and 5 are highlighted. Social Accountability International is a non-profit organization dedicated to improving workplaces and communities by developing and implementing social responsibility standards. The organization brings together stakeholders, companies, NGOs, trade unions and Governments to carry out research, training and technical assistance programmes. It works with international brands and retailers, various trade unions that represent more than 15 million workers and NGOs. The organization partners with a global network of auditing groups known as "certification bodies", which certify companies and production facilities to the SA8000 standard. The organization's SA8000 standard is a leading standard that incorporates third-party monitoring and innovative management systems. As a voluntary standard, it provides a sustainable framework for improved social performance that is robust while being flexible and pragmatic. The organization operates globally, with offices in Brazil, China, India, the Netherlands, Nicaragua and the United States. The standard is based on ILO and United Nations conventions and is therefore viewed as incorporating the most robust principles with regard to workplace human rights. The organization participated in a variety of meetings organized by the United Nations, including those of the Economic and Social Council. Examples include ILO briefing sessions on various issues, such as labour rights and forced labour. The organization worked with the Global Compact and UN-Women to research and develop tools to promote labour rights. The organization participated in meetings of the Global Compact, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises and the Business Leaders Initiative on Human Rights. The organization is a founding member of and participant in the steering committee for the Business Principles for Countering Bribery. The organization contributed to the attainment of the Goals in Central America, South America, Africa and Asia. Major actions taken were the following: (a) Goal 1: the organization implemented labour rights/wage standards as defined in the SA8000 standard, which covers more than 1 million workers in more than 2,000 certified facilities and in 68 countries; (b) Goal 3: the organization worked on a programme with the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland covering thousands of women in India working in the garment sector. The organization also has a large presence in the garment sector in Bangladesh, providing labour rights and fire safety training. Garment workers represent the largest percentage of workers in SA8000-certified facilities, in which nearly 300,000 workers are employed. Women constitute more than 80 per cent of workers in the garment industry and the promotion of the standard ensures that they are protected from discriminatory practices within the workplace and promotes stability for their families; (c) Goal 7: the organization continues to work in the agricultural sector in China and Central America (the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Nicaragua) on crops such as cotton, sugar cane and coffee. The main objective of the programmes is to protect the labour rights of farmers and to ensure that employers, workers, trade unions and government ministries adhere to national and international labour legislation. The organization also worked with World Wide Fund for Nature International on the development of integrated standards (environmental and social) in aquaculture. Additional joint programmes are under consideration. General, 1981 The Society for International Development is an international network of individuals and organizations founded in 1957 to promote social justice and foster democratic participation in the development process. Through locally driven programmes and activities, the Society strengthens collective empowerment, facilitates dialogue and knowledge-sharing on people-centred development strategies and promotes policy change towards inclusiveness, equity and sustainability. The Society has more than 30 chapters and 3,000 members in more than 50 countries. The Society's vision and fundamental values include respect for human dignity and rights and utmost commitment to social justice and gender equality, commitment to people-centred sustainable development, appreciation for ethnic, cultural, religious and political diversity and recognition that global public goods require shared commitment and international cooperation. The Society's worldwide membership approved slight modifications to its constitution in 2011, the most significant change being a reduction in the size of its governing body. Over the past four years, the organization also advanced its process of decentralization. While maintaining its official headquarters in Rome, many functions were devolved to the local offices in Nairobi, Dar es Salaam, Buenos Aires, La Paz, The Hague and Washington, D.C. The Society's work closely relates to the work of the United Nations at the national, regional and global levels. This is best exemplified by the line-up of issues of the Society's quarterly journal Development: (a) 2009 issues on sexuality and development (March); power, movements and change (June); beyond economics (September); and xenophobia, culture and identity (December); (b) 2010 issues on new institutions for development (March); gender and empowerment (June); sustaining local economies (September); and education for transformation (December); (c) 2011 issues on global land grabs (March); challenges to sustainability (June); sustainable cities (September); and cosmovisions (December); (d) 2012 issues on greening the economy (March); citizenship for change (June); gender and economic justice (September); and African strategies for transformation (December). Beyond their wide distribution, all these issues are presented and debated by the worldwide network of the Society's chapters. The Society regularly attended key meetings of the following United Nations bodies: the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, UNEP, UN-Habitat, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UN-Women. Key United Nations events in New York attended included the fifty-fourth session of the Commission on the Status of Women (New York, 1-12 March 2010) and the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly. Beyond its regular work that closely engages many United Nations agencies (such as UN-Women, UNDP, UNFPA, UNIDO and the Rome-based organizations) at both the global and national levels (the Society's chapters), the Society worked closely with several United Nations bodies in the 2009-2012 period. Four key examples include: (a) Cooperation with UNDP for the Platform Human Development 2010 initiative (the Society's Managing Director co-chaired the working group on the Human Development Report); (b) The joint technical cooperation project between the Society and UNFPA on responses to the care crises, 2010-2011; (c) The Society's 2011 world congress on the theme "Our common challenge: a world moving towards a sustainable future", attended by the Assistant Administrator of UNDP, the Director General of UNIDO and the Executive Director of UNFPA, among other United Nations representatives, in addition to the President and the Managing Director of the World Bank and the President of the African Development Bank; (d) The March 2012 issue of the Society's journal, Development, on greening the economy, produced in partnership with the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development. While most of its activities are directly related to Goals 1, 3 and 8, the Society was extremely engaged in the review of the Goals framework and the post-2015 development agenda. In particular, the Society served as an adviser to the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda from September 2012. The Society's journal, Development, regularly featured key issues and dialogues with regard to the Goals and the post-2015 development agenda. Special, 1993 The Society for Threatened Peoples is a human rights organization that advocates the rights of ethnic and religious minorities around the world. It has played a major role in the United Nations by promoting the rights of indigenous peoples and by supporting the drafting of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. The Society campaigns with and on behalf of threatened and persecuted ethnic and religious minorities, nationalities and indigenous peoples. It stands side by side with the victims of crimes against humanity, identifying the individual perpetrators of such crimes and their accomplices by name. The main activities of the Society focused on its participation in the work of the Human Rights Council, the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues and several subcommissions. The Society consistently campaigned for food security and against land grabs. It regularly calls for linkages to be drawn between economic development and environmental sustainability. The organization's participation included attendance at the tenth to twenty-first sessions of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva, as well as the submission of written and oral statements. It sponsored side events at the eleventh, fifteenth, sixteenth, nineteenth and twenty-first sessions of the Council (from 2009 to 2012). It also sponsored a side event immediately before the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. During the reporting period, the Society provided written submissions to the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review at its sixth, eighth, ninth, eleventh, twelfth, fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth sessions, held in Geneva. It also presented an oral statement at the eleventh session of the Working Group and an oral statement at the Durban Review Conference, held in Geneva from 20 to 24 April 2009. The Society submitted a shadow report to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in June 2009. Society representatives attended the ninth session of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Further Commitments for Annex I Parties under the Kyoto Protocol, held in Bangkok from 28 September to 9 October 2009, and Barcelona, Spain, from 2 to 6 November 2009; the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Copenhagen from 7 to 18 December 2009; the fifty-third, fifty-fourth and fifty-fifth sessions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, held in Vienna in March 2010, 2011 and 2012; the sixteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in Cancun, Mexico, from 29 November to 10 December 2010; the fifty-sixth session of the Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York from 7 February to 9 March 2012; the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development; and the fifth session of the Forum on Minority Issues, held in Geneva in November 2012. The Society jointly lobbied with the World Food Programme for greater food security. The Society continued to support solar cooker programmes for refugees from Darfur. It lobbies for food security, support for pastoralists and the establishment of linkages between economic development and ethical economic practices. Together with local authorities, the Society supported the medical situation of albinos in the United Republic of Tanzania. The Society continued to lobby on behalf of slaves and former slaves in Mauritania. The Trauma Foundation is a founding member of the International Action Network on Small Arms and since 2001 has been a regular participant in activities under the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The mission of the Foundation, founded in 1981, is to reduce injuries and injury-related deaths through prevention, improved trauma care and improved rehabilitation. A major focus of the Foundation's prevention activities has been firearm-related injuries and deaths. The Foundation works in California with local communities and state policymakers on the proliferation of dangerous firearms in the United States, which resulted in bans on junk guns (1999) and .50 calibre sniper rifles (2004), as well as other small arms control measures. In 1998, it founded the Bell Campaign, the first national survivor-led gun control movement in the United States. In 2000, the movement became known as the Million Mom March. Since 1998, the Foundation has received funding for research on international gun control issues and provided information to the international gun control community through the Foundation website. The Foundation is a sponsor of the website GunPolicy.org, the world's largest website in support of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, its goals, monitoring and implementation. The website received 1.5 million unique visitors during the reporting period and points thousands of hyperlinks to the website of the Office for Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat (www.poa-iss.org) in support of the Programme of Action. One or more representatives of the Foundation have attended and most often presented research findings at every biennial meeting of States to consider the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and at each United Nations conference to review progress made in the implementation of the Programme of Action. In recent years, the Foundation has often been invited to attend the conferences as an NGO delegate on the government delegation of a Member State and/or as the regional representative of the International Action Network on Small Arms, the NGO appointed by the Office for Disarmament Affairs to manage civil society attendance at the meetings. The Foundation collaborates with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Office for Disarmament Affairs, WHO, the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms and other United Nations agencies to disseminate relevant data and research findings concerning the Programme of Action to a global Internet audience. At each major meeting of the Programme of Action process in New York, a Foundation representative also arranged for the attendance of regional representatives and survivors of gun violence, in particular from the Pacific region and almost always a member of a women's group, to speak on the adverse impact on the Goals of the proliferation and misuse of illicit small arms in Oceania. The organization is an Austria-wide NGO with regional roots. The organization focuses on ecological, economic and socially sustainable development and is committed to reducing the gap between the North and the South. The organization stands for a just world economic order in both social and economic terms. The organization subscribes to the strengthening of the participatory components of representative democracy and the advancement of human rights. In the light of the importance that the organization attaches to human rights, it has been a regular attendee at the sessions of the Human Rights Council, where it not only presented written and oral statements, but also organized side events. Given that the organization is located in Vienna, a United Nations headquarters duty station, it follows that the organization observes with keen interest the work of the Vienna-based United Nations organizations, especially as they relate to development. Over the past four years, the organization has been a major player in establishing an NGO committee on sustainable development that meets regularly in the Vienna International Centre. Within the context of the committee, the organization has taken up the baton of ensuring social and environmental sustainability and justice. The Committee is currently elaborating a position on sustainable development goals and following the debate within the Commission on Sustainable Development. In 2009, the organization attended two meetings related to climate change in New York: the summit on climate change held on 22 September and the related segment in the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly. From 2010 to 2012, the organization attended the fourteenth to twenty-first sessions of the Human Rights Council, held in Geneva. It also attended the fifty-sixth session of the Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York from 27 February to 9 March 2012. Thanks to its extensive network of human rights defenders in the Islamic Republic of Iran (a project funded by the European Union in the amount of 600,000 euros), the organization supported the work of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran. The organization also provided case histories and other data that were drawn upon in the elaboration and refinement of the special procedures for the Human Rights Council. The organization also maintained working contacts with other United Nations special rapporteurs in areas related to rights of ethnic and religious minorities, freedom of expression and assembly as well as torture. In the years leading up to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, the organization, together with other NGOs in Austria, launched several proposals related to the Goals under the heading "Justice in a finite world". The main emphasis of the initiative (which entailed the organization of 50 events) was on development policy and the environment. The policy proposals developed were ultimately presented to the Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management of Austria and were subsequently incorporated into the Government's submission to the Conference. The establishment of a representative cross-section of NGOs concerned with developmental issues, of which the organization was a founding member, contributed greatly to enhancing public awareness of the Goals. A parallel initiative was also launched to follow climate-related developments addressed by the United Nations. The organization was a major sponsor of activities relating to the Goals, primarily within the context of its global learning programme aimed at schools and adult education institutes. Vrienden van Congo has been working in various sectors of society in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since 2009. Its activities are organized and monitored through partnerships with various local organizations. In 2010, following a decision adopted at the general assembly, the headquarters was moved from Belgium to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since activities organized from a distance had proved ineffective, the decision to relocate enabled the organization to coordinate its activities more easily and to achieve results beyond its expectations (or that exceeded its goals). In the 2009-2012 period, the organization was active in three main areas, namely, agriculture, training (education) and capacity-building. The organization works in the agricultural sector to increase cassava production in the region of Pay Kongila so that farmers can sell their harvest at a competitive price in Kinshasa and can increase their income by minimizing production costs using supplies provided by the organization (fertilizers, implements, drugs and vehicles). In the field of education and training, the organization has worked to broaden the scope of scientific research by offering new publications in selected fields, and to boost access to new information technology. The organization also works to strengthen self-help capacities; build the capacities of microfinance institutions; ensure that the community radio station of MIJAS Congo reaches a wider audience; and enhance access to microloans. The general assembly of the organization unanimously decided to relocate the association's headquarters and apply for legal status in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Following the move and the closure of its offices in Belgium, the association decided to launch operations on a 13-hectare piece of land in Kimwenza that it has owned since 2009. Half the land is used by local organizations for commercial purposes to raise funds for the association. Chemical fertilizer-free vegetables and fruit are packaged and marketed to the same end. The organization contributes to the work of the United Nations within the framework of the Millennium Development Goals by working to reduce rural poverty through farmers' associations and South-South fair trade. :: 14 and 15 June 2010: informal interactive meetings involving the general assembly and non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector. :: 3-14 May 2010: eighteenth session of the Commission on Sustainable Development. :: 1-12 March 2010: fifty-fourth session of the Commission on the Status of Women. :: 3-12 February 2010: forty-eighth session of the Commission for Social Development. :: 18-27 May 2009: Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations (resumed 2009 session). No information provided. Agriculture: higher productivity of farmers' associations, lower prices and better terms of trade; improvement in the quality of life of area farmers as a result of rising incomes. Education and training: quantitative and qualitative increase in the library book selection; better access to information technology (Internet). Capacity-building: enhanced approach to the redefinition of strategies for entering the market in partnership with microfinance institutions. The Wellesley Centers for Women aims to bring about social change through its social science research projects and training programmes. Women's perspectives and experiences are at the centre of this work, which addresses three major areas: the status of women and girls and the advancement of their human rights, both in the United States and around the globe; the education, care and development of children and young people; and the emotional well-being of families and individuals. The organization conducts scholarly research and sound action programmes with women's perspectives and experiences at the centre and ensures that this work reaches a wide audience and thus influences public policies and programmes. Issues of diversity and equity are central to all the work, as are the experiences and perspectives of women from various backgrounds and cultures. With its more than 70 full-time and part-time staff members and some 45 research and action projects, the organization has produced more than 400 papers, reports and curricula and more than 200 scholarly journal articles and 100 books since 1974. The outcome of this work has led to the training of thousands of practitioners and brought about critical changes in public policies, perceptions and practices. The organization contributed in the following areas: (a) It participated in monitoring the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; (b) It served as a panellist during the fourth session of the Conference of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, held in New York in September 2011, at a side event entitled "Gender perspectives: using international law to advance the rights of women and girls with disabilities"; (c) It served as a panellist for a side event at the fifty-fifth session of the Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York in 2011, on expanding access to education and employment opportunities for girls and women with disabilities in science, technology, engineering and mathematics; (d) It served as a panellist for a side event at the fifty-sixth session of the Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York in 2010, entitled "Cross-sectionalities of gender, disability and development: towards equality for women and girls with disabilities"; (e) As a member of the advisory board of the United Nations Evaluation Group, it attended a workshop on gender equality and human rights evaluation guidance held in New York in February 2009; (f) It organized conferences on implementing the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in Bangladesh and Nepal with grass-roots organizations and NGOs (January 2009). The organization attended the forty-seventh session of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, held in Geneva in November 2012, sessions of the Statistical Commission, held in New York from 2009 to 2012, and the fifty-third to fifty-sixth sessions of the Commission on the Status of Women, held in New York from 2009 to 2012. As adviser to the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the organization developed a guidance document on gender and disability to be used as a supplement to the guidance note for United Nations country teams on integrating the rights of persons with disabilities in United Nations programming at the country level. The organization contributed to Eastern Europe and Central Asia regional legislative analysis and mapping for regional partners. This work by UNFPA was the result of the legislative analysis undertaken by the Subregional Office for Eastern Europe and Central Asia of UN-Women on new developments in gender equality legislation in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. Together with UNFPA and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the organization developed a resource tool entitled "Disability rights, gender, and development: a resource tool for action". The organization also worked on an indicators project by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva in April 2009. The organization participated as a member of the research expert group at the expert group meeting on mainstreaming disability in the policies, processes and mechanisms of the Millennium Development Goals, held from 14 to 16 April 2009. 