%%%CLIMATE CHANGE|CAPACITY BUILDING|DEVELOPING COUNTRIES|

United Nations FCCC/SBI/2014/2 Distr.: General 8 April 2014 Original: English Subsidiary Body for Implementation Fortieth session Bonn, 4 - 15 June 2014 Item 12(a) and (b) of the provisional agenda Capacity-building Capacity-building under the Convention Capacity-building under the Kyoto Protocol Synthesis report on the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries Note by the secretariat* Summary This report has been prepared to support the Subsidiary Body for Implementation in its annual monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries in accordance with decisions 2/CP.7 and 29/CMP.1. The report draws on information synthesized from 59 national communications, 35 biennial reports, one national adaptation programme of action, the 2013 annual report of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism to the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, the 2013 annual report of the Nairobi Framework Partnership and annual submissions from Parties and intergovernmental organizations. Information is presented according to the scope of needs and priority areas for capacity-building in developing countries outlined in decision 2/CP.7. This report may assist Parties in reviewing the progress made in the implementation of the framework for capacity-building in developing countries and identifying ways to further enhance the delivery of capacity-building support to developing countries. Contents Paragraphs Page I. Introduction 1 - 72 3 A. Mandate 1 - 3 3 B. Scope of the report 4 - 7 3 C. Possible action by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation 8 4 D. Overview of information reported and submitted by Parties 9 - 11 4 E. Information on activities addressing needs and priority areas identified in the capacity-building framework 12 - 72 5 II. Summary of issues raised in submissions from Parties 73 - 78 14 III. Capacity-building activities under the Kyoto Protocol 79 - 83 15 I. Introduction A. Mandate 1. The Conference of the Parties, by decisions 2/CP.7 and 4/CP.12, requested the secretariat to produce annually a synthesis report on activities undertaken to implement the framework for capacity-building in developing countries (hereinafter referred to as the capacity-building framework). 2. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP), by decisions 29/CMP.1 and 6/CMP.2, requested the secretariat to take into account, in its annual synthesis report, capacity-building activities relating to the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol in developing countries. 3. In accordance with decision 1/CP.18, the synthesis report is made available to the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) at its sessions coinciding with the meetings of the Durban Forum on capacity-building. B. Scope of the report 4. This report summarizes available information on the extent of the implementation of the capacity-building framework. The information refers to activities reported between January and December 2013, and is drawn, inter alia, from the following sources: 22 national communications submitted by Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (non-Annex I Parties); 37 national communications and 35 biennial reports submitted by Parties included in Annex II to the Convention; one national adaptation programme of action (NAPA); the third synthesis report on technology needs identified by non-Annex I Parties; the 2013 annual report of the Executive Board of the clean development mechanism (CDM) to the CMP (part I); and the 2013 annual report of the Nairobi Framework Partnership. 5. Two Parties made submissions on capacity-building: Greece and the European Commission on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member States, and Nauru on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States. These submissions have been taken into account in the preparation of this report. Information submitted by United Nations organizations and other institutions is available in the addendum to this report. 6. This report presents information according to the scope of needs and the priority areas for capacity-building in developing countries outlined in the capacity-building framework. It highlights barriers and constraints to the implementation of the capacity-building framework and the support provided by developed country Parties to developing country Parties. Examples of good practices reported in national communications submitted by developing country Parties are also highlighted. Given the importance of gender aspects in capacity-building activities, a section of the report is dedicated to matters relating to gender as an issue cutting across needs and priority areas for capacity-building. 7. As further work may have been undertaken after the submission of the source documents, the synthesis of information contained in this report may not convey the complete picture. There may also be gaps in areas where information on activities was unavailable. C. Possible action by the Subsidiary Body for Implementation 8. The SBI may wish to use the information contained in this report to: (a) Undertake the annual monitoring of the implementation of the capacity-building framework; (b) Facilitate discussions at the 3rd meeting of the Durban Forum on capacity-building, which will coincide with SBI 40; (c) Determine any further steps to support enhanced action on capacity-building. D. Overview of information reported and submitted by Parties 9. Information on capacity-building reported and submitted by Parties during the period from January to December 2013 covers all the needs and priority areas identified in the capacity-building framework. The national communications referred to in paragraph 4 above highlight efforts by Parties to improve reporting on capacity-building. Five of them feature separate chapters and 13 feature separate sections on this thematic area. Good progress is noted in supporting, planning and implementing capacity-building activities in developing countries. As regards the implementation of the capacity-building framework, a pivotal role is played by Parties' involvement in regional and subregional initiatives coordinated and supported by bilateral, multilateral and South - South cooperation. Capacity-building support received at the national level through bilateral cooperation is also widely covered. The role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in building capacity for the implementation of adaptation and mitigation activities within local and grass-root communities is recognized as significant. 10. Despite the progress made, major barriers to the implementation of the capacity-building framework are identified. The majority of national communications submitted by non-Annex I Parties contain information on constraints to building capacity at the institutional, systemic and individual levels. Inadequate or obsolete institutional arrangements and lack of technical expertise are identified as key obstacles to climate change action requiring urgent attention by the international donor community. Many Parties also highlight the limited interest and knowledge of policymakers regarding climate change related issues, with negative repercussions on the adoption of regulatory frameworks. A number of Parties identify the specific capacity-building support needed to implement the project ideas described in the submitted reports. 11. Support provided by developed country Parties is targeted to enhance institutional, systemic and individual capacity at the global, regional, subregional, national and local levels. National priorities and needs are considered in formulating support for mitigation and adaptation activities. Furthermore, capacity-building support cuts across different climate change related areas such as poverty reduction, food security, meteorology and health. Developed country Parties underline the importance of existing reporting channels, such as national communications, biennial update reports and submissions, for collecting, exchanging and sharing information, and for guiding capacity-building efforts. E. Information on activities addressing needs and priority areas identified in the capacity-building framework 1. Institutional capacity-building, including the strengthening or establishment, as appropriate, of national climate change secretariats or national focal points 12. A few developing countries report having established institutional arrangements enabling the formulation, coordination and implementation of mitigation and adaptation related activities. Some Parties highlight successful experiences of strengthening institutional arrangements by means of improved coordination with key ministries involved in sectoral climate change plans. 13. The majority of developing countries report the need to establish and/or strengthen permanent institutions tasked with formulating long-term policy responses to climate change related issues. Some countries stress the need to mainstream environmental and climate change related issues in other sustainable development initiatives, including forest and rural policies. Strengthening the collaboration between existing institutional arrangements and the private sector is regarded as an essential element to ensure the successful implementation of climate change activities. 14. Developed country Parties underline the importance of a country-driven, bottom-up approach to organizing capacity-building support. Some Parties stress the need to create an environment for interaction and cooperation with national and local institutions. Such an environment fosters a better coordination of climate change political goals and strategies, and facilitates a targeted provision of capacity-building support. 15. Following the adoption of the National Climate Change Policy, and in recognition of the need for building synergy across the various stakeholders involved in climate change policies and strategies, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago has approved the appointment of focal points for multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) with particular focus on climate change in all government ministries, agencies, statutory bodies, academia, the private sector, including the banking and insurance sector, industry, NGOs and community-based organizations. More than 120 nominations of focal points have been secured and a network of focal points has been established. The network will enable the sharing of knowledge and information, and full stakeholder participation in decision-making at the policy and implementation levels. 2. Enhancement and/or creation of an enabling environment 16. A few developing countries report that the gradual strengthening of governmental institutions is contributing to creating and/or enhancing an enabling environment for climate change planning. The development of environmental protection policies and regulatory frameworks in line with sustainable development principles has improved the capacity of Parties to fulfil obligations under multiple MEAs and to address other areas with links to climate change. For example, one Party reports having approved a climate change public expenditure and having finalized an institutional review to strengthen governance and delivery of climate finance in line with monitoring, reporting and verification requirements. 17. For the majority of developing countries, however, promoting an enabling environment fit for meeting national climate change goals is still a challenge. Many developing countries report the lack of adequate policy frameworks, which are necessary to support effective mitigation and adaptation actions. Examples of capacity constraints include the lack of national climate change policies and plans, greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory strategies, national adaptation plans or technology action plans (TAPs), nationally appropriate mitigation action (NAMA) plans and systems of meteorological observation, analytical tools and models. 18. Developed country Parties report on their efforts to enhance an enabling environment by facilitating access to existing bilateral, multilateral and private capital financing options for diverse projects in the areas of climate change adaptation and mitigation. While recognizing the essential role of public climate finance, developed country Parties consider that the involvement of the private sector and the mobilization of private finance are a driving force for building lasting resilience to unavoidable adverse climate impacts, supporting low-emission development strategies (LEDS) and enabling the transition to a sustainable, clean energy economy. 19. The Strengthening Adaptation and Resilience to Climate Change in Kenya Plus programme plans to scale up innovation and investments by the private sector in low-carbon and adaptation/resilience products, services and assets through the introduction of climate change governance reforms. 3. National communications 20. Parties note that the benefits emerging from the national communication process are manifold. They range from laying the foundation for a set of concrete actions that facilitate the implementation of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to producing broader information on, and deeper understanding of, climate change issues for national institutions and civil society. Several developing country Parties report on activities undertaken to increase the capacity of expert teams to prepare national communications, including the organization of training to develop national GHG inventories and conduct mitigation and vulnerability assessments. 21. On the other hand, the preparation of national communications brings to the surface a high number of capacity gaps at the institutional, systemic and individual levels. The limited technical expertise on various domains, the insufficient or obsolete technical equipment, the absence of sectoral planning and inadequate financial resources are among the major concerns reported, in particular by the least developed countries. Some Parties also underline the absence of a specific process in place to inform policymakers about the main facts gathered and conclusions drawn in national communications. 22. Developed country Parties highlight the relevance of national communications as a primary source of information on actions taken and on emerging barriers. National communications are therefore an extremely useful instrument to plan and target their support on a country-driven basis taking into account national priorities. 23. In preparing its first national communication, the Lao People's Democratic Republic was heavily dependent on external experts. Owing to the development and strengthening of regional and subregional coordination and exchange of information and expertise, the country has gradually enhanced its capacity to address issues such as climate change modelling and the GHG inventory. This has contributed to enhancing its national capacity to prepare the second national communication. 4. National climate change programmes 24. Many developing country Parties report having adopted national climate change programmes. In many instances these programmes, based on national priorities, go beyond the climate change domain to cover other sustainable development issues such as poverty reduction and food security. 25. A few countries report the difficulty in mainstreaming climate change in national strategies for sustainable development. It is observed that this is due mainly to the limited interest in, and understanding of, the climate change process by policymakers. The lack of financial resources makes it impossible to build the necessary human and institutional capacity for an effective and efficient implementation of national climate change programmes. 26. An example of support provided in this priority area is the Global Climate Change Alliance (GCCA). GCCA aims to strengthen dialogue and cooperation on climate change between the EU and developing countries and acts as a platform for dialogue and exchange of experience on climate policy. It is also a technical and financial support provider contributing to the implementation of adaptation and mitigation actions. The intervention of GCCA goes beyond national boundaries and extends to the regional and subregional levels. 27. The implementation of the National Climate Change Strategy of El Salvador is a major institutional challenge, as it requires a readjustment in the current institutional arrangements, the establishment of new priorities and new institutional performance standards. The institutional requirements include inter-institutional coordination, institutional strengthening, governance and management models, monitoring, reporting and verification, and legislation, rules and regulations. 5. Greenhouse gas inventories, emission database management and systems for collecting, managing and utilizing activity data and emission factors 28. Some developing country Parties report on a range of capacity-building initiatives undertaken at the individual level aiming at improving the necessary competencies, and at the institutional level aiming at putting in place structures and responsible bodies. Such activities include training sessions for experts, cross-sectoral exchanges among institutions involved and improved quality assurance/quality control procedures enabling a higher quality of the inventories. 29. One country highlights as a critical issue the absence of a national institution responsible for the GHG inventory, which has a considerable effect on the quality of reporting. Many developing country Parties stress the need to develop a standardized system for collecting and processing information. In some cases, the lack of disaggregated activity data and emission factors leads to incomplete estimates of GHG emissions for some sectors. The lack of coordination among the institutions involved and organizational problems impinges on the timely collection and synthesis of GHG data and information. In some cases the pool of experts trained to conduct the inventory is not large enough, resulting in the recruitment of international consultants. 30. Several initiatives are reported by developed country Parties to build the capacity of developing country Parties to compile periodic, time-series consistent and accurate national GHG inventories. Assistance is also provided in establishing the national GHG inventory and a monitoring, reporting and verification system, which is required to underpin mitigation actions. 31. In the Republic of Moldova, the national inventory system covers all institutional and legal arrangements associated with the national GHG inventory preparation process, including reporting under the Convention. Preliminary activities within the inventory preparation process include defining specific responsibilities within the team in charge of the inventory preparation process. The national inventory team is continuously working to improve the accuracy, completeness and transparency of the inventory. 6. Vulnerability and adaptation assessment 32. The developing country Parties which report progress on this priority area are generally those where a NAPA process has been established. Thanks to the vulnerability and adaptation assessments conducted in a NAPA environment, Parties are in a position first to identify capacities and resources needed to implement national adaptation strategies, then to organize ad hoc training activities for the various stakeholders involved, from policymakers to representatives of local communities. 33. Nevertheless, several capacity constraints have been identified. The most critical barrier is the lack of skilled professionals with technical knowledge in designing assessments. Such a barrier will not be removed until adequate financial resources are provided for the high training costs to acquire the requisite knowledge. Weak institutional and technical structures, limited capacity of research institutions and insufficient collaboration between stakeholders are among the key factors hindering the organization of comprehensive vulnerability assessments. Another obstacle is the lack of, or limited access to, data to conduct assessments. In particular, one Party welcomes the interest of international academic and research institutions in vulnerability to climate change, which has led to a proliferation of information on this topic. However, with a limited understanding of such assessments, and consequently the insufficient capacity to contribute to them, national and local institutions are not in a position to take advantage of the resulting information and outcomes. 34. The Sudan undertook and completed several major climate change assessments to improve the understanding of the available range of adaptation opportunities. These assessments focused on topics such as adaptation policy relevance. In this case the research aimed at identifying the role of project measures in building community coping mechanisms and adaptive capacity, policy and institutional enabling factors, and potential for climate change adaptation. On the basis of the results obtained, recommendations will be formulated on how all these elements can be integrated into the national adaptation policy and planning. Another topic included in the assessment was the role of social capital, considered as a key determinant of resilience to climatic shocks and stress. Family and informal social networks, community groups, self-help groups, effective local decision-making bodies and institutions were each identified as important resources for building and preserving the capacity to cope with climate impacts. 7. Capacity-building for implementation of adaptation measures 35. The majority of developing country Parties report on measures taken at the institutional and systemic levels to enhance their adaptive capacity. Many highlight the benefits gained in participating in regional and subregional projects, funded through bilateral and multilateral cooperation. Some Parties emphasize that the design and formulation of adaptation strategies closely relate to other development priorities such as poverty reduction and food security, thus linking the implementation of adaptation measures to technical, political and socio-economic factors. Synergies with other MEAs would also facilitate a more structured approach to sustainable development policies that would cover adaptation actions. 36. Constraints identified in this priority area have been stressed in particular by least developed country Parties, which report the following issues: lack of national adaptation action plans and comprehensive adaptation strategies; insufficient capacity to employ the most advanced adaptation assessment models; insufficient basic data; and lack of disaster management capacity. 37. Several developed country Parties report having increased their efforts to provide support for adaptation, including financial support, especially in the most vulnerable countries. They also report a wide number of capacity-building initiatives implemented at the national, regional and subregional levels in support of adaptation. 38. In its national communication, Chad reported that one of the approaches followed to implement adaptation measures is based on traditional practices, which were identified during the NAPA preparation process. These techniques, all listed in the report, are considered an efficient response to climate change risks. 8. Assessment for implementation of mitigation options 39. The vast majority of developing country Parties underline their engagement in promoting the implementation of climate change mitigation projects and policies. This has been made possible through the elaboration of national programmes or strategies, supported by the enactment and enforcement of laws and regulations. Training sessions and workshops have been organized to build and/or enhance the capacity of individuals to ensure wider stakeholder participation and involvement in the design and implementation of mitigation plans and projects, including for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries and CDM projects, and NAMAs. 40. Some developing country Parties underscore the lack of adequate institutional frameworks to assess mitigation options, design NAMAs, formulate strategies for enhanced energy efficiency and renewable energy, and promote CDM project activities. Some Parties highlight the urgent need to organize training workshops and courses on mitigation assessment models. More training is also needed to increase understanding of complex CDM procedures. 41. Several Parties report their engagement in multilateral initiatives to build the institutional and technical capacity to plan and undertake mitigation actions. One of the most often reported initiatives is the Low Emission Capacity Building Programme, whose objective is to support developing country Parties to formulate LEDS and NAMAs. The programme is also assisting countries to establish the national GHG inventory and monitoring, reporting and verification systems required to underpin mitigation actions and adopt integrated approaches for low-emission development. This includes building the national capacity to address deforestation and forest degradation, and to coordinate climate change actions at the national and regional levels. 42. Botswana is engaged in formulating a sound energy policy which aims to provide a least-cost mix of energy supply reflecting total life cycle costs and externalities, such as environmental damage. The publication A Long Term Vision for Botswana recognizes the potential role that solar energy can play in meeting the energy requirements of rural communities not served by the national grid and recommends that Botswana be developed into a centre of excellence for solar energy technology. 9. Research and systematic observation, including meteorological, hydrological and climatological services 43. Several Parties have created, or are in the process of creating, institutions responsible for monitoring meteorological and climatic circumstances, taking into account the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) guidelines. The participation in global and regional networks enables Parties not only to share information on local conditions and circumstances, but also to enhance their knowledge of climatology. Thanks to multilateral cooperation investment programmes, some Parties register significant improvements in their meteorological station networks, and consequently also in the quality of data collection. 44. The most urgent need identified by developing country Parties in this priority area is to invest in human capital. A higher number of experts are needed and individual skills of existing staff in the area of meteorological observation and climatology need to be expanded. A few Parties highlight the urgent need to establish or enhance, both quantitatively and qualitatively, institutional arrangements in the area of systematic research and oceanography. Specific concerns related to systematic observation, data analysis and modelling include the need to upgrade information technologies installed in key institutions. There is also a need to upgrade conventional equipment or substitute it with the digital equivalent, so as to minimize the impact of insufficient records on the overall data quality. Discontinuing the existing fragmented monitoring networks for more appropriate monitoring of atmospheric, terrestrial and oceanographic values is another critical issue. 45. Developed country Parties stress their efforts to enhance support for research and systematic observation through the coordination of activities where multiple actors are engaged and a wide range of instruments and tools are made available. Parties also refer to their contribution to major international institutions, research initiatives and programmes such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the Global Climate Observing System. 46. Before 1979, Afghanistan operated the most advanced meteorological monitoring system in the region, subsequently rendered non-functional or destroyed due to years of conflict and war. Since 2001, some non-functional weather stations have been rehabilitated and new ones installed. With support from the International Civil Aviation Organization, an automated aviation weather observing system is being installed. WMO, the Government of India and the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland have agreed to support the Afghanistan Meteorological Authority in a more systematic observation of meteorological parameters, analysis, forecasting and institutional capacities to support and carry out research work. 10. Development and transfer of technology 47. The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice, at its thirty-ninth session, considered a report synthesizing the information contained in the technology needs assessment (TNA) reports of 31 developing country Parties. One of the key findings arising from this report is the development of national TAPs following the TNAs conducted by Parties. TAPs are instrumental in providing recommendations for enabling frameworks identified by Parties to facilitate the diffusion of prioritized technologies. The project ideas prepared by Parties under the TAP umbrella have facilitated the identification of technology transfer projects to mitigate GHG emissions and adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change. Capacity-building at the national and local levels in relation to the transfer, effective operation and maintenance of delivered technologies is also part of the financial needs for capacity-building reported by Parties in their TNAs. 48. Parties have drawn attention to specific barriers to, and enabling factors for, technology transfer. Training is among the measures suggested to address endogenous institutional, systemic, scientific and technical barriers. Policymakers, representatives of financing institutions and technology users and operators, including at the community level, request specific training to acquire or enhance technical knowledge and skills to promote and implement mitigation and adaptation projects. The establishment of information and awareness programmes to promote the use of specific technologies was also mentioned as an enabling factor for technology transfer. 49. Most developed country Parties state that capacity-building for technology development and transfer is a component of virtually all their international cooperation projects. Support in this area is provided through bilateral and multilateral channels. 50. The Community-Based Extension Agents (CBEA) is a pilot model on rural agricultural extension introduced in Ghana. It is based on the idea of providing specialized and intensive technical training to identified people living in rural communities in order to promote a variety of technologies and offer technical services with support and review from an extension organization. CBEA is a demand-driven model; farmers' groups or communities have the possibility to request specific information and related services from the service provider. 11. Improved decision-making, including assistance for participation in international negotiations 51. Several initiatives have been undertaken to improve the decision-making process and the participation in international negotiations. A number of programmes have been focused on supporting delegates from developing country Parties in taking part in meetings of governing and subsidiary bodies. Such programmes feature training sessions and workshops centred on creating and/or strengthening adequate knowledge of the climate change negotiation process. In some cases technical and logistical support has been provided, so as to give more voice to the poorest countries in the arena of international discussions on climate change. 52. Many developing country Parties underscore the need to enhance the analytical capacity of experts, policymakers and decision-makers to acquire a deeper understanding of the links between technical and political issues related to climate change, and of the UNFCCC processes in general. Several Parties note the urgent need to increase the involvement in the decision-making process of stakeholders operating at the community level. This would imply the need for additional training and education programmes focused on climate change. 53. The contribution from developed country Parties to enhancing the knowledge of decision-makers of climate change related issues and supporting their participation in the climate change negotiation process takes a variety of forms. For many Parties the starting point is the creation of an environment for exchange of information, coordination of efforts and cooperation. Assistance is provided in the preparation of national communications, in the establishment of regular contact with national focal points and in the formulation of country-driven climate-related political goals and strategies. 54. The Government of Seychelles is geared towards building a society that is more informed about and resilient to climate change by supporting a public education and outreach programme. One focus of this programme is the improvement of decision-making and fostering of policy changes when necessary. Through the establishment of new institutions and the formulation of the new National Climate Change Strategy, the government is putting in place a management system that is efficient, flexible and transparent. This system facilitates the implementation of strategic objectives and outputs, with the financial resources allocated according to the technical specifications and quality standards articulated within the Seychelles' third Environment Management Plan. 12. Clean development mechanism 55. Designated national authorities to promote projects eligible under the CDM have been established and regulatory frameworks have been created in many developing countries. While some developing countries have put in place strategies to identify suitable areas for CDM investment, the number of projects launched is still relatively small. 56. Although some progress has been reported, developing countries highlight several constraints to their participation in the CDM. The establishment of formal institutions is seen as a main priority for several Parties. Some Parties report the need for training to enhance the development of local capacity to understand CDM procedures, so as to enable a more effective formulation and design of CDM project activities. Another reported barrier is the decision-makers' limited knowledge of the financial and environmental benefits of the CDM. 57. Developed country Parties see the CDM as an opportunity for developing countries to contribute to emission reductions. Support is provided mostly as training in the use of established and new mechanisms in the carbon market. 58. Since its ratification of the Kyoto Protocol, Georgia, in order to develop its CDM potential, has undertaken capacity-building activities to formulate a strategy of full-scale activation of the CDM, put in place national institutions and procedures and established contacts with international donors, developed country Parties and potential private-sector actors. Various bilateral and multilateral programmes contributed to building Georgia's capacity to assess proposed projects according to sustainable development criteria and to evaluate them before submission for registration. To date Georgia has one CDM project registered and 10 more are under consideration. 13. Needs arising out of the implementation of Article 4, paragraphs 8 and 9, of the Convention 59. Most Parties report their active participation in international cooperation and regional climate change initiatives. The close coordination and cooperation with the international community have contributed to progress in tackling climate change issues and challenges and in implementing sustainable development programmes, including poverty reduction policies. 60. In relevant sections of submitted national communications, a large number of Parties provide a rigorous description of the constraints undermining their efforts to implement the Convention and of the capacity-building support that they need to undertake adaptation and mitigation actions. Many Parties recognize some progress following the capacity-building support provided by the international community. They also report the adoption of national policies and strategies embedding climate change components and sustainable development principles. Besides addressing, among other areas, the MDGs, some of the adopted policies contribute to empowering local communities to effectively manage their natural resources. 61. South - South cooperation initiatives are reported by several developing countries. They generally refer to exchanges of expertise, training courses and workshops on climate change related issues. Countries involved are Afghanistan/India, China/Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Gambia/Niger, the Gambia/South Africa and Moldova/Romania/Ukraine. 14. Education, training and public awareness 62. The increasing tendency among Parties to report more on education, training and public awareness observed in past years is confirmed. This tendency is also valid for other elements of Article 6 of the Convention, namely public participation and public access to information. Parties also report enhanced cooperation within this priority area with other stakeholders, namely NGOs and the public sector, at both the national and the subregional level. 63. Several Parties report that the topic of climate change is almost absent in formal education, from primary schools to university. As a consequence, education and public awareness activities, together with the development and implementation of specific training programmes on climate change, are considered a priority. The lack of dedicated funding is considered by many Parties as the root cause of insufficient and inadequate attention to Article 6 related issues. 64. Parties recognize that addressing the challenge of climate change will require a collective effort of governments, NGOs, businesses and individuals. They reported that a considerable effort has been made and resources made available to increase public awareness of the challenges posed by the impacts of climate change and of the opportunities arising from climate change mitigation. Some Parties stated that NGOs should play a central role in providing information to the public, developing public education and awareness campaigns, and encouraging public action on climate change. 65. In order to raise awareness and bring the general public up-to-date information on the international climate change process, the Gambian Ministry of Forestry and the Environment, in collaboration with the Gambia Radio and Television Services, arranged for three television programmes with phone-in segments on climate change and related issues. A panel of experts, including the UNFCCC national focal point, the NAPA Coordinator, the focal point for Article 6 of the Convention and other representatives of the National Climate Committee made presentations and answered questions from the audience in local languages. 15. Information and networking, including the establishment of databases 66. Many Parties have invested great efforts in improving climate change information and networking. This process has taken place at various levels. Many Parties participated in information sharing activities and initiatives that emerged during national and subregional meetings, or were organized in the context of the preparation of NAPAs, TNAs or national communications. The creation of centralized data and information sharing centres, especially in the area of meteorology, has also contributed to enhancing knowledge of specific aspects of climate change. Climate change topics have also been discussed during cross-sectoral thematic meetings and workshops. 67. Many Parties advocate addressing the need to develop data and information management systems that allow information sharing and integrated analysis and synthesis at the local, regional and international levels. Furthermore, an expanded network of research institutions enabling the exchange of information between scientists and experts would enhance the knowledge of emerging climate change issues. 68. Many developed country Parties engage in facilitating the exchange of information on climate change at the international level. In particular, the cooperation across a range of various international networks offering training opportunities and exchange of expertise on climate change has been strengthened. 69. The Lesotho Bureau of Statistics is mandated to collect, compile, analyse, abstract and publish major statistical information on a wide range of topics, including climate change. This institution maintains a centralized data bank that is easily accessible on request. Academic institutions and private-sector organizations, including NGOs, are also repositories of environmental data and information; however, access is generally difficult and limited since such data and information are compiled for internal use, and in some cases the users do not acknowledge the original source of the data and information. 16. Gender and climate change 70. Only a limited number of developing countries report on capacity-building activities addressing links between gender and climate change. The few national communications considering this topic describe activities planned and/or undertaken to strengthen the role of women in vulnerable rural contexts, or highlight their contribution to mitigation by changing cooking practices. One Party highlights the need to organize training courses targeting women on the introduction of innovative technologies and on environmental education for the sustainable management of natural resources. Another describes the result of a study according to which men are most likely to be affected by the impacts of climate change on forests, as they are involved in harvesting activities and use forest products more than women do. One Party highlights deep gender disparities in terms of human development. 71. Developed country Parties report a wide range of cooperation initiatives in support of projects targeting exclusively gender issues, or where gender is a specific component of projects. Such projects are geared towards empowering women through training and awareness-raising activities to adapt to climate change effects, develop disaster management plans, increase household food security and improve livelihoods. 72. The Gambia is promoting "Women for climate justice", a global web-based network of women and gender activists and experts working for gender and climate justice from all regions of the world. The network has been created in response to the growing public attention to climate change and the increasing need for information about women's perspectives and gender aspects in climate change policies and measures. II. Summary of issues raised in submissions from Parties 73. The issues raised by Parties in the submissions referred to in paragraph 5 above are summarized in paragraphs 74 - 78 below. 74. A group of Parties stated that the Durban Forum on capacity-building needs to go beyond its current role as a space for dialogue. It must be complemented by an action-oriented process that builds and acts on the outcomes of the Forum. Such a process, aiming at capturing the cross-cutting nature of capacity-building, is required to further enhance the implementation of capacity-building activities. The process, enshrined in a two-year work programme, should include, but would not be limited to, the following objectives: (a) Identifying the required capacities/skills for addressing challenges faced in adequately carrying out actions related to mitigation and adaptation; (b) Developing a template that will allow developing countries to determine what capacities they require, building on the national capacity self-assessment process under the Global Environment Facility; (c) Providing a facility for understanding the outputs of the Durban Forum which highlights best practices and key areas still to be addressed; (d) Developing a process to assist developing countries to meet their identified needs of education, training, services and awareness through facilitating the matching of resources with needs. 75. A group of Parties regarded capacity-building as fundamental to enable the full, effective and sustained implementation of the Convention. Capacity-building is by nature a cross-cutting issue, therefore it has to be a substantial and integral part of all development activities, including those that aim to enhance mitigation and adaptation and facilitate access to support in developing countries. 76. The same group of Parties, building on its extensive experience in the area of development cooperation, confirmed its commitment to support country-driven and comprehensive activities that strengthen national capacities, combined with relevant qualitative and quantitative methods for monitoring their impact, when appropriate. 77. The group added that its support for capacity-building is not based on a global top-down approach, but builds on a bottom-up approach taking into account each country's situation and links capacity-building to context-specific needs and challenges. In addition, the provision of financial and technical support aims at building capacity through various channels, including bilateral, multilateral and private-sector cooperation. 78. The group of Parties stated that its capacity development approach is in line with the provisions of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation. III. Capacity-building activities under the Kyoto Protocol 79. The CDM Executive Board, in its role as the regulatory body of the CDM, continues to undertake measures to enhance the geographical distribution of CDM project activities and to widen stakeholder participation. 80. The Nairobi Framework, initiated by the United Nations Secretary-General at CMP 2, supports the development of CDM project activities worldwide, with a special focus on Africa, the least developed countries, small island developing States and countries with fewer than 10 registered project activities. 81. During 2013, the Nairobi Framework partners focused their efforts mainly on capacity-building activities for a range of stakeholders, and on support for project development. The capacity-building activities targeted designated national authorities, coordinating/managing entities of programmes of activities (PoAs), project developers and other stakeholders through workshops and other events. Distance learning through webinars and e-courses was also organized. 82. Project development support was led by the secretariat's regional collaboration centres (RCCs). RCCs are designed to help underrepresented regions to increase their attractiveness and potential for the CDM by building their capacity and reducing the risk for investors. These centres are intended to support the identification of CDM projects, provide assistance for project design, address issues identified by validators and offer opportunities to reduce transaction costs. RCCs are currently established in Togo, to increase participation in CDM projects in West and Francophone Africa; in Uganda, to serve the rest of Africa; in Grenada, to assist in the development of CDM projects in the Caribbean; and in Colombia, to bring the benefits of the CDM to currently underrepresented countries in Latin America. 83. Project development support was also provided through the contributions from partners in each region, including the Asian Development Bank, the Institute for Global Environmental Strategies, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme's Risoe Centre. The development of PoAs and standardized baselines is the preferred area of support. 