%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|PEACEBUILDING|INTERNAL SECURITY|POLITICAL CONDITIONS|SOMALIA|SOMALIA SITUATION|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia I. Introduction 1. The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 13 of Security Council resolution 2102 (2013), in which the Council requested me to keep it regularly informed of the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and to provide an assessment of the political and security implications of wider United Nations deployments across Somalia every 90 days. The present report covers major developments that occurred during the period from 16 November 2013 to 15 February 2014. II. Political and security developments A. Political situation 2. The political landscape in Somalia was dominated by the formation of a new cabinet, with regional political processes showing promising signs. Indirect elections in Puntland State of Somalia led to the selection of a new President. In addition, the inauguration of the Interim Juba Administration, witnessed by the international community, and the holding of talks between the Federal Government of Somalia and "Somaliland" were positive steps forward. 3. On 2 December 2013, Prime Minister Abdi Farah Shirdon lost a no confidence motion in the Somali Federal Parliament. On 12 December, following extensive consultations, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud nominated Abdiweli Sheikh Ahmed as the new Prime Minister. He was endorsed by the Parliament on 21 December, and on 17 January, Mr. Ahmed announced the formation of his expanded cabinet composed of 25 members, including 2 women. 4. Elsewhere, on 8 January, the Parliament of Puntland elected Abdiweli Mohamed Ali Gaas President for a five-year term. Incumbent President Abdirahman Mohamed Farole, who lost by one vote, gracefully conceded defeat, characterizing the election as "clean and democratic" and expressing his support to Mr. Gaas, who later became the fifth President of Puntland. The electoral process had begun in December with the selection of the members of parliament by the region's traditional leaders, who were then vetted by a Conflict Resolution and Reconciliation Committee. The Committee announced a list of the 66 members of parliament out of 160 nominees on 30 December. Only 2 out of the 66 members of parliament are women. They were sworn in on 1 January. 5. On 17 December, in Baidoa, Somali traditional leaders, intellectuals and politicians launched the second phase of "the Baidoa Conference" aimed at the formation of a new federal State comprising six regions, namely, Bay, Bakool, Juba Hoose, Juba Dhexe, Shabelle Dhexe and Gedo. During the last week of January, the Baidoa Conference moved closer to the declaration of a federal State by adopting a Constitution and a flag, as well as the swearing in of a House of Elders, the upper house of a two-chamber Parliament. At the request of various individuals, including the Speaker of the Federal Parliament, the Baidoa Conference agreed to temporarily suspend the election of a "President". A competing three-region federal State initiative, championed by the previous Speaker of Parliament, Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden, intensified its activities in the first week of February, adopting its own flag and establishing a constitutional committee and making plans for a formal conference. 6. Progress was made towards the implementation of the Addis Ababa Agreement on the Interim Juba Administration. On 7 December, the Interim Juba Administration announced the appointment of eight Ministers and a second Deputy Leader. On 20 January, the administration was formally inaugurated in Kismaayo in a ceremony attended by international partners. Meanwhile, tension rose between the Interim Juba Administration and the Barre Hirale militia based outside Kismaayo. The Interim Juba Administration accused the militia of having attacked the residence of a Minister in Kismaayo on 26 December. 7. On 28 and 29 January, the Galmudug, and Himan and Heeb administrations held a conference in Gaalkacyo, where they agreed to continue their initiative to form a federal State through a reconciliation process. 8. In "Somaliland", relations between the Government and the opposition deteriorated. The Justice and Welfare Party claimed it had been denied freedom of movement and permission to hold peaceful demonstrations against the Government. Meanwhile, Mr. Abdirahman Mohamed Abdillahi "Irro", Speaker of the "Somaliland" House of Representatives and Chair of Wadani (opposition party), announced his support for the holding of a national dialogue conference as called for by the opposition parties. On 18 December, talks held between "Somaliland" President Ahmed Mohamed Silanyo and Speaker Irro resulted in an agreement on the holding of a conference, provided that a neutral party would chair it. 9. From 16 to 19 January, a third round of talks between the Federal Government of Somalia and "Somaliland" was hosted by Turkey in Istanbul. The two delegations adopted a communiqué, establishing a joint secretariat in Turkey to institutionalize the process and agreeing that talks should take place every 90 days. Furthermore, the communiqué provided for the establishment of a joint air traffic control board. It also condemned the "atrocities committed" by the former Siad Barre regime, "particularly" in "Somaliland". B. Security situation 10. The security situation in Mogadishu remained volatile. Al-Shabaab continued to use both guerrilla and terrorist tactics, which often resulted in civilian casualties, to undermine the Federal Government of Somalia and intimidate international partners. Armed attacks against the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army took place almost weekly. In the outer districts of Mogadishu, small-scale attacks, particularly targeted assassinations, occurred almost daily. Some violence is likely to be criminal or clan related. 11. Three justice officials were murdered on 23 and 30 November, while a member of parliament was killed by a car bomb outside Villa Somalia on 6 December. On 1 January, Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for a coordinated suicide car bombing that killed at least 12 people and injured several others at the Jazeera Hotel. 12. Separately, on 1 January, six shells fired from positions north of the Mogadishu International Airport landed inside various sites of the AMISOM protected area causing minimal damage. In February, a series of mortar attacks took place in Mogadishu. On 10 February, a car bomb targeted a meeting at the Oriental Hotel, killing two and injuring five. On 13 February, a United Nations convoy was attacked by a suicide car bomber while approaching the Mogadishu International Airport. Several Somali bystanders were killed. No United Nations staff were injured. Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility for the attack. 13. In southern and central Somalia, periodic clashes occurred between AlShabaab and the Somali National Army, who was supported by AMISOM, the Ethiopian National Defence Force, and pro-Government militias in the Bay and Gedo regions, particularly in and around Baidoa, Qansaxdheere, Gofgadud, Awdinle, Faxfaxdhuun and Garbahaarey. On 8 January, an airstrike by Kenya Defence Force jets reportedly killed eight Al-Shabaab insurgents near Garbaraahey. Fewer incidents were reported in Bakool, which remains almost entirely under the control of Al-Shabaab. 14. Kismaayo remained unstable owing to continued activities of Al-Shabaab and sporadic outbursts of violence between rogue forces of the Interim Juba Administration and clan militias. On 5 December, the convoy of the Interim Juba Administration President, Mr. Ahmed Madobe, was hit by a roadside bomb, resulting in one casualty. AMISOM forces faced repeated probing attacks in other areas of Juba Hoose, particularly in Afmadow, and along the Taabta-Dhobley road. 15. In Shabelle Hoose, Al-Shabaab launched almost daily attacks against AMISOM and Somali military targets. On 15 January, Al-Shabaab launched an ultimately unsuccessful attack on positions of the Somali National Army in Burane and Mahadday Weym. On 26 January, an unmanned drone hit an Al-Shabaab convoy in the Baraawe district, reportedly killing a senior commander. The situation deteriorated with renewed inter-clan rivalries. A clash between the Biyo Mal and Habargidir clan militias on 16 November triggered a series of retaliatory incidents in the Afgooye and Marka districts, resulting in over 20 fatalities and additional injuries. There were also sporadic clashes between the Abgal and Shidle communities in the Jawhar district, Shabelle Dhexe, in late November. However, a ceasefire mediated by local clan elders and the Federal Government of Somalia with local representatives ended the hostilities in early December. 16. Galguduud remained quiet, whereas the security situation in Hiraan deteriorated. On 19 November, Al-Shabaab insurgents carried out a complex attack against the central police station in Beledweyne, in which 24 Somali police officers and one AMISOM soldier were killed, and several others were injured. Following the attack, AMISOM forces conducted extensive operations, recovering villages in the outskirts of Beledweyne, but continued to face attacks by Al-Shabaab. 17. Puntland experienced renewed Al-Shabaab activities. On 5 December, an AlShabaab suicide car bomber hit a convoy of the Puntland security forces in central Boosaaso, killing three police officers and four civilians, while injuring several others. In early January, Al-Shabaab carried out four raids against police checkpoints outside Boosaaso. On 21 January, two roadside explosions in Gaalkacyo killed three civilians and injured 13 others. However, the elections in Puntland were held without major security incidents. In Sool, clashes were reported in Taleh on 28 November between armed men from the Dhulbahante clan and Puntland forces. Those clashes reportedly resulted in the killing of 12 people, including 11 civilians, and injury to several others. On 26 January, the Puntland Government announced that it had recovered ammunition, explosive devices and other equipment from Al-Shabaab hideouts following an assault on the group's base in Galgala near the Golis Mountain range. 18. "Somaliland" was relatively calm. Isolated armed clashes were reported in the disputed Sool, Sanaag, and Cayn regions on 27 and 28 November. Tension was high in early December following reports of a military build-up along the border between "Somaliland" and Puntland, but no further incidents were reported. III. United Nations support to peace consolidation A. Good offices and political support 19. During the reporting period, my Special Representative for Somalia and Head of UNSOM, Nicholas Kay, continued to avail himself of his good offices role to help address a number of domestic and international challenges. 20. In Puntland, my Special Representative and his team played a critical role in ensuring that the electoral process was inclusive, transparent and peaceful. They worked closely with all stakeholders to ensure that key electoral mechanisms were credible. Also working closely with international partners, Mr. Kay effectively led the efforts to regularly engage with candidates and stakeholders, mediate and encourage them to campaign responsibly. He visited Puntland between 20 to 22 November and from 7 to 9 January to follow the indirect presidential election. Subsequently, the new President and the members of parliament were called on to resume relations with the Federal Government of Somalia and to work on advancing federalism in Somalia. He stressed the importance of resuming the suspended democratization process in Puntland, as the recent elections were based on a traditional system, and called for the enhancement of women's role in government and public life. 21. On 26 November, my Special Representative held discussions with the Federal Government of Somalia and international partners following the resignation of the Governor of the Central Bank. Participants agreed on the appointment of an interim Central Bank Governor and ways to strengthen the public finance management capacity of the Federal Government of Somalia. 22. My Special Representative also visited Beledweyne, Hiraan, on 14 December, where he urged the local authorities, elders, civil society organizations and women's representatives to resolve clan disputes. After the outbreak of violence in the Sool region on 27 November, he stressed the fact that political differences and competing claims should be resolved through dialogue. 23. On 5 December, my Deputy Special Representative, Fatiha Serour, led a delegation of international partners to Kismaayo. The team held consultations with Ahmed Madobe, leader of the Interim Juba Administration, on progress made in the reconciliation process and on the integration of forces and security, among other issues. On 5 February, she again met Mr. Madobe and the Interim Juba Administration leadership in Kismaayo to discuss a range of issues, including the implementation of the Addis Ababa agreement. B. Support to peacebuilding and State-building 24. Implementation of the New Deal Somalia Compact and its peacebuilding and State-building goals has gained momentum. The establishment of the United Nations multi-partner trust fund has been completed. Peacebuilding and State-building goal 1: development of a federal system and constitutional review 25. The United Nations continued to assist the Federal Government of Somalia with the provision of technical advice on the formation of the Federal Member States. On 21 November, UNSOM provided the Federal Government of Somalia with an options paper on State formation, including confidence-building measures. Upon the request of the Presidency, UNSOM helped the Federal Government of Somalia in the drafting of a consultative discussion paper on State formation to help guide regional dialogue. The President also requested technical briefings on federalism for senior government officials and presidential advisers. 26. Also at the political level and during the period of the parliamentary vote of no confidence on former Prime Minister Abdi Farah Shirdon, my Special Representative undertook consultations with the President, the Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Parliament towards an amicable resolution of the deadlock and also consulted with senior political leaders on initiatives to better delineate the roles and responsibilities of the offices of the President and Prime Minister, in accordance with the terms of the Provisional Constitution. That engagement highlighted the importance of rapidly establishing the Judicial Services Commission and of rebuilding a qualified judiciary with the capacity to interpret the Provisional Constitution. 27. UNSOM is facilitating the coordination of international support for constitutional activities as defined in the first peacebuilding and State-building goal of the Somali Compact. On 21 January, UNSOM provided a briefing at a donors' meeting in Nairobi on the plans of the United Nations to coordinate constitutional support. UNSOM and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) also continued to provide support to the Federal Parliament on the nationwide dialogue on constitutional issues. Furthermore, UNSOM and UNDP are providing technical and logistical support for civic education activities and advice on the formation of the Independent Constitutional Review Commission and the Judicial Reform Commission, which are stated priorities for the new Government. 28. On 27 January, a Senior Electoral Adviser was deployed to facilitate discussions and provide advice for the drafting of a law to establish the National Independent Electoral Commission, one of the key recommendations of the United Nations needs assessment mission that was deployed in November. 29. In support of the Compact and the Economic Recovery Plan, UNDP and the World Bank, in consultation with the Federal Government of Somalia and other stakeholders, have been formulating options for a joint programme aimed at developing institutional capacity. This entails a number of assessments and "due diligence" in civil service management, human resources management, "core of government" functionalities and a modality for capacity injection. The main objective is to establish a sound baseline and reach an understanding on cooperation and support modalities. Peacebuilding and State-building goal 2: security sector Defence 30. The Aid Coordination Unit of the Federal Government of Somalia submitted the terms of reference for the Working Group on peacebuilding and State-building goal 2 to the Somali Development and Reconstruction Facility on 3 February for approval, indicating the National Security Adviser as chairperson, with UNSOM providing secretariat support. UNSOM also assisted the National Security Adviser with developing the work processes, personnel structure and office of the secretariat of the Somali National Security Council. On 4 December, the National Security Adviser convened the first meeting of the Human Resources System Steering Committee, which aims at rationalizing the processing and procedures related to salary and stipends across the Somali security institutions. On 21 and 22 January, UNSOM and UNDP facilitated the holding of a workshop on arms and ammunition management, which provided guidance and support to the Federal Government of Somalia prior to the submission of its six-month report to the Sanctions Committee on 6 February. Meanwhile, agreement was reached between UNSOM and the World Bank on 12 December to jointly conduct a review of security sector reform public expenditure in the first half of 2014. 31. The Commanders of the Somali Air Force and the Navy/Coast Guard joined the Defence Working Group, thereby extending security sector reform to those components of the Somali National Army. The Defence Working Group continued to organize a series of sub-working groups, including the newly established Defence Policy Working Group led by the Ministry of Defence. Disengaging fighters 32. On 12 December, the Serendi Rehabilitation Centre for disengaged combatants in Mogadishu opened a wing for children. On 10 January, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) started providing support to the Federal Government of Somalia for existing disengaged combatant caseloads in Baidoa, some of which will be transferred to a new Transition Centre being rehabilitated by the Federal Government of Somalia and local authorities. UNSOM also conducted assessment missions to Kismaayo from 23 to 26 December and on 13 January to support the Federal Government of Somalia in establishing a transition facility for disengaging combatants in coordination with the Interim Juba Administration and AMISOM. Police 33. The capacity of the Somali police force has been enhanced through timely stipend payments, training and harmonized mechanisms with the support of the United Nations, AMISOM and other international partners. A strategic planning team was established in the Somali police force, through the rule of law bridging and inception project funds, to oversee the implementation of the strategic action plan for policing of the Ministry of Interior and National Security and the Somali police force. 34. The Somali police force has increased its workforce by 625 officers to meet the demands of operations in the newly recovered areas, bringing their total number in the south central Somalia to 5,711. The construction and rehabilitation of 23 police facilities continued in south-central Somalia and Puntland. With contributions from the Government of Japan to the Trust Fund in Support of Somali Transitional Security Institutions, UNSOM distributed furniture and office equipment for 10 police stations and the headquarters of the Somali police force on 9 February. 35. UNSOM supported the Somali police force in the development of its 2014 workplan, which addresses the urgent capacity-building and reform needs of the force. With United Nations technical and financial support, current police reform measures in "Somaliland" include the review and development of policies in the areas of special police unit payments, provision of advice on model police stations, establishment of a joint committee to develop a Police Act for "Somaliland" police, recruitment of 40 female police personnel, and construction of two model police stations. 36. UNSOM organized site visits to Kismaayo, Baidoa and Beledweyne together with the Somali police force, AMISOM police, the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA) and the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) to identify urgent operational and logistical requirements, infrastructure rehabilitation needs and possible alternative training facilities to start the basic training programmes for 2,000 new recruits envisaged in the Somali police force workplan for 2014. Maritime security 37. Incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia have decreased, owing largely to effective self-protection by vessels, coordinated naval action at sea, and prosecution and imprisonment of individuals suspected of piracy. However, this positive trend remains reversible in the absence of sustainable infrastructure and development of the maritime security apparatus in Somalia. 38. The Federal Government of Somalia has agreed to establish a maritime security architecture within the Somali National Security Council to create linkages between various maritime focused forums across all activities related to the Peacebuilding and State-building Goals. A Maritime Steering Committee, including relevant ministries of the Federal Government of Somalia and representatives from the international community, will provide for enhanced coordination across all thematic areas articulated in the Somali maritime resource and security strategy. Mine action 39. UNMAS continued its engagement with the Somali Explosive Management Authority to address explosives contamination throughout Somalia. During the reporting period, the explosive ordnance disposal teams of the Somali police force, trained by UNMAS, responded to 19 confirmed incidents involving improvised explosive devices and cleared 247 items of unexploded ordnance. The teams have the capacity to deploy to Marka, Wanlaweyn, Jawhar and Afgooye. Training for additional Somali ordnance disposal units, which will deploy to Beledweyne in the next quarter, was also completed. UNSOM cleared 2,627 items of unexploded ordnance and provided training for 69,657 people about the risks posed by such ordnance. AMISOM teams safely destroyed 2,418 items of unexploded ordnance and 21 improvised explosive devices across southern and central Somalia. 40. UNMAS continued to work with the Somali police force on developing safe and secure ammunition storage facilities, and building armouries in Beledweyne, the police headquarters and at Mogadishu Central Prison, while also leading the Technical Working Group on Weapons and Ammunition Management. Peacebuilding and State-building goal 3: justice 41. A judicial security assessment and a plan for responses, supported by the United Nations, were finalized on 23 January. As security of judges was identified as a top priority, the United Nations continued to encourage the establishment of a Police Protection Unit. 42. The Justice and Corrections Steering Committee, supported by the United Nations, held its inaugural meeting on 24 November, including representatives from donors and other international partners. Co-chaired by the Chief Justice and the Minister of Justice, the discussion focused on the continued concern over the security of the judiciary. 43. One of the most urgent issues in the justice sector is to find a short-term solution to hold trials involving high-risk cases, including those involving AlShabaab, pending the completion of the Mogadishu Major Crimes Complex, which is funded by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Challenging security concerns for the safety of the judiciary, prosecutors, lawyers and legal system staff and a lack of capacity hamper possible solutions. 44. On 19 December, the Ministry of Justice, the Judiciary, the United Nations and the International Development Law Organization launched a new six-month rule of law project, funded by the European Union, Luxembourg and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, for the establishment of the Judicial Services Commission and a Legal Policy and Drafting Unit in the Ministry of Justice. 45. UNSOM and UNDP facilitated two courses on 30 November and 4 January to train Somali custodial corps officers on the human resources registration system. They also completed the registration of and started producing biometric identification cards for those officers. From 9 to 12 January, UNSOM and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime facilitated training for senior officers on the treatment of prisoners, as well as on safety and security in prisons. The refurbishment of the Mogadishu Central Prison, by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), commenced on 1 February. C. Human rights and protection Human rights 46. The United Nations worked closely with AMISOM and the Federal Government of Somalia on the implementation of the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy in Somalia. This included the development of a joint strategy and the establishment of a working group as provided for in the revised Concept of Operations for AMISOM (see para. 74 below). UNSOM continued to provide predeployment induction training to AMISOM contingents, as well as to the Somali National Army. Efforts were also under way to undertake risk assessment for both AMISOM and the Somali National Army in order to identify mitigation measures, develop monitoring and reporting frameworks, and establish procedures for intervention and corrective measures in case of non-compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy by those non-United Nations entities. 47. Targeted attacks continued on journalists and human rights defenders, in particular on those defending victims in cases involving gender-based violence. Ten journalists (three in Kismaayo, three in Mogadishu and four in "Somaliland") were arrested. No specific measures were taken to reinforce the protection of journalists, notwithstanding a statement by the Federal Government of Somalia indicating its intention to investigate attacks on journalists and bring the perpetrators to justice. The continued application of the death penalty remains a concern, despite the commitment by the Federal Government of Somalia to a moratorium in 2011 during the Universal Periodic Review reporting procedure before the United Nations Human Rights Council remains a concern. 48. The United Nations collaborated closely with the Federal Government of Somalia on the finalization of the post-transition human rights road map, including engaging with relevant ministries and institutions on their roles and responsibilities in the process. There has been continued delays in the broad consultations by the Government and the relevant Parliamentary Committee on the draft law creating the National Human Rights Commission. 49. During the reporting period, UNSOM trained 30 judges and key judicial officers, 20 prosecutors and 30 members of civil society organizations in Puntland on the application of human rights standards in the delivery of justice. Child protection 50. In November and December 2013, 386 incidents of grave violations affecting 367 children (359 boys and 19 girls) were reported to the United Nations Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting. Overall, most of the violations were committed by Al-Shabaab (57 per cent), followed by the Army and allied militias (31 per cent), who were the main perpetrators of abductions (99 cases). Al-Shabaab was responsible for most cases of the recruitment and use of children (196 cases). 51. The Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict held a special meeting on 24 November to review, before submission to the Federal Government of Somalia for endorsement, the standard operating procedures for handling children formerly associated with armed forces and groups, which were developed in 2012. This is key to the implementation of the two action plans signed by the United Nations and the Federal Government of Somalia. The Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting is closely monitoring the formal signing of the standard operating procedures, which was delayed as a result of the dissolution of the previous cabinet. Gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment 52. From 2 to 4 December, the United Nations hosted the Women and Peace Security Open Day. Some 40 participants called for a greater role of women in politics, identifying political marginalization, the absence of a justice system that addresses gender-based violence, and the lack of respect for the human rights of women as the major challenges. Recommendations included that at least 30 per cent of positions in the new cabinet be held by women and that commitments on gender equality be translated into action. 53. From 10 December to 5 January, 23 representatives of women's organizations from south-central Somalia and Puntland established the Somali Women Leadership Initiative to advocate for heightened participation of women in the Federal cabinet, and the Puntland elections. They held meetings with the President, the Prime Minister and Speakers. 54. On 8 December, the United Nations Gender Theme Group and the Donor Gender Theme Group agreed with the Federal Government of Somalia Director-General on Women, Family and Children Affairs on a road map to finalize the consultation and drafting of the National Gender Policy. The first draft was developed with the support of AMISOM in July 2013. Sexual violence in conflict and gender-based violence 55. From 3 to 11 December, the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict held consultations with the Federal Government of Somalia, various United Nations entities and other stakeholders in Mogadishu and Nairobi, aimed at helping the Federal Government of Somalia fulfil its commitments under the 7 May 2013 joint statement on ending violence against women and girls. 56. The Working Group on gender-based violence, chaired by UNFPA, developed its 2014-2016 strategy around four key areas: prevention; service provision and response; access to justice and rule of law; and coordination. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) is currently coordinating the development of an operational manual for the implementation of this strategy. In Puntland, in partnership with the Ministry of Women, Family and Social Affairs, and prominent religious leaders, UNFPA developed a prevention programme against gender-based violence, and established, in collaboration with Muslim Aid, a one-stop centre that provides a comprehensive set of services to survivors of gender-based violence. UNFPA and UNDP trained 26 police officers in Puntland on investigation of and reporting on cases of gender-based violence. 57. In order to strengthen prevention capacities and response to conflict-related sexual violence, 40 AMISOM senior military commanders from Uganda, including four women officers, were trained on gender issues in Entebbe, Uganda, from 5 to 7 December 2013. D. Humanitarian situation 58. Nearly 860,000 people remain acutely food insecure, and another 2 million people remain on the margins of food insecurity. Acute malnutrition persists, with 203,000 children malnourished, especially in the south, where at least 50,000 children face increased risk of death. 59. Persistent insecurity in parts of the country continued to limit humanitarian access and delivery of essential assistance. Aid workers have increasingly been the targets of arrest and detention by armed groups. Despite the challenging operating environment, the World Food Programme (WFP) managed to assist about 800,000 people per month, strengthening livelihoods for the most vulnerable. The distribution of food vouchers for disaster-affected people has been expanded in Banadir, Bari, Gedo and Nugaal regions, reducing security concerns around food distribution in volatile areas and stimulating local markets. 60. In spite of difficult conditions, including severed communications and lack of road access after the tropical storm that hit Puntland in November, a majority of about 6,000 directly affected households was reached with critical aid within 10 days following the disaster. WFP provided 27,000 people with food, while the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) helped restore water supplies in Dongaroyo and Eyl. Some 23 schools received emergency supplies for 2,500 children to resume their studies. UNFPA deployed five mobile medical teams with reproductive health supplies sufficient to support 1,000 births. The livestock sector was very affected, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimated that up to 300,000 animals died within hours. Support was provided by FAO for surviving animals, including vaccination against contagious diseases, and the safe disposal of animal carcasses. 61. Seasonal rains also caused localized flooding, with some 11,000 households affected in Jawhar (Shabelle Dhexe). The situation was compounded by an outbreak of clan fighting in the area, which displaced 3,000 households and hampered access to those in need. Emergency response was provided, including food assistance to 30,000 people. In response to the contamination of water sources by flooding, and an increase in health threats, the Common Humanitarian Fund in December allocated nearly $1.2 million to support emergency health activities and access to clean water and sanitation in the area. The World Health Organization (WHO) and partners also provided support with two mobile health teams and medical supplies in the most affected areas. UNICEF and partners provided over 81,000 people with soap, water purification tablets, chlorine and containers for water storage. 62. Some 600 wounded civilians were treated at four major hospitals supported by WHO in Mogadishu, and another 170 were treated at the main hospital in Kismaayo. Wild polio cases in Somalia stand at 192. No new cases have been reported in the Banadir region, the epicentre of the outbreak, since mass vaccinations began following the outbreak in May 2013. A vaccination campaign against measles and polio targeting over 2 million children was held across southern and central Somalia from 22 to 26 December. The response continues. 63. Following the signing on 10 November of the Tripartite Agreement on the voluntary return of Somali refugees from Kenya to Somalia, Kenya, Somalia and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), agreed on a six-month pilot project to assist voluntary returnees. Some 10,000 Somali refugees will be supported to return to their area of origin. The three pilot areas are: Baidoa, Kismaayo and Luuq. UNMAS is working with UNHCR to ensure that awareness of explosive hazards becomes part of the education offered in preparation for voluntary return. In addition, the Return Consortium, led by UNHCR and comprising eight United Nations entities and NGOs, assisted about 40,000 people to return, mainly from Mogadishu, to their places of origin in Bay, Shabelle Dhexe and Shabelle Hoose. 64. Despite continued advocacy, forced evictions remain a serious threat to displaced people and other vulnerable groups. According to UNHCR, in November and December, about 27,000 people were evicted from different settlements in Mogadishu. 65. In December, the second-year review of the 2013-2015 consolidated appeal process was finalized. The humanitarian community requires $928 million in 2014 based on needs, humanitarian access and a realistic implementation capacity. In 2013, the consolidated appeal process received only 50 per cent of the funding required. Continued underfunding seriously limits the number of people who can receive aid and jeopardizes attempts to build long-term resilience. E. Stabilization 66. With support from UNSOM, AMISOM and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the Government initiated a successful dialogue with international partners on the strategic and operational coordination of stabilization. Government plans include the nomination of acting interim administrations, shortly after military operations, responsible for immediate day-to-day administration and for initiating a consultative process to establish locally selected administrations to take over from the acting interim structures. They will also coordinate delivery of basic services and other "peace dividends" to the citizens. F. Socioeconomic recovery and development 67. On 24 November, the Federal Government of Somalia unveiled its 2014 budget proposal. The Government plans to increase annual spending to a total of $219 million in 2014. 68. On 5 November, the remittance company, Dahabshiil, won an injunction at the High Court in the United Kingdom, which will enable it to temporarily maintain an account at Barclays Bank in that country. Irrespective of the outcome, the Dahabshiil case serves to highlight the continuing fragility of the Somali money transfer sector and the urgent need to bring existing money transfer operations into compliance with international regulations on the prevention of money-laundering and the financing of counter-terrorism. 69. Following the resignation of the Governor of the Central Bank on 2 November, and after consultations with international partners, President Mohamud appointed Mr. Bashir Isse Ali as the interim Governor on 27 November. The Federal Government of Somalia also requested support from the international community for the establishment of a Financial Governance Committee. A joint World Bank, International Monetary Fund and United Nations mission met with senior representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia and the Central Bank in early December. Discussions were still ongoing at the time of the writing of the present report. 70. On 20 December, I declared Somalia eligible to receive support from the Peacebuilding Fund UNSOM and the United Nations country team in consultation with the Federal Government of Somalia, started identifying urgent peacebuilding priorities to be considered for funding under the Immediate Response Facility of the Peacebuilding Fund. The United Nations in Somalia is also developing a new integrated strategic framework, which will serve as its strategy to consolidate peace in the country. It will also guide the formulation of a Peacebuilding Priority Plan to facilitate Somalia's access to longer-term support from the Peacebuilding and Recovery Facility of the Peacebuilding Fund. G. Targeted sanctions 71. During the reporting period, the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group obtained evidence of the continued export of Somali charcoal in violation of the ban imposed by the Security Council. The Monitoring Group has provided this information to relevant Member States and the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. 72. Pursuant to paragraph 9 of its resolution 2111 (2013), the Security Council received the second report of the Federal Government on 7 February. H. Coordination of international efforts 73. The Federal Government of Somalia has put in place coordination bodies to support the implementation of the Somali Compact. The Somali Development and Reconstruction Facility Steering Committee provides oversight and guidance for the implementation of the Somali Compact and the Somali Development and Reconstruction Facility. Its first meeting was held on 11 December in Mogadishu. My Special Representative co-chairs with President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud the High-level Partnership Forum. Its first meeting was held on 24 February. Denmark has kindly agreed to host a meeting of the High-level Partnership Forum in the second half of 2014. IV. Implementation of Security Council resolution 2124 (2013) 74. Significant progress was made towards the implementation of resolution 2124 (2013). On 21 January, the African Union Peace and Security Council adopted a revised concept of operations for AMISOM. The revised concept was developed during a planning workshop organized by the African Union from 9 to 18 December in Nairobi, with the participation of the Federal Government of Somalia and key partners. UNSOM, UNSOA, the United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU) and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations provided technical support to the African Union and to the Federal Government of Somalia in the process of developing the concept of operations. 75. The revised concept of operations focuses on operations against Al-Shabaab's strongholds and a degradation of its capability, which are to be followed by stabilization and drawdown phases. It created two additional AMISOM sectors in south-central Somalia and paved the way for the expansion of AMISOM to reach its new authorized strength of 22,126 through the inclusion of Ethiopia as a troop-contributing country. Ethiopian troops were re-hatted into AMISOM on 1 January. A formal ceremony took place on 22 January in Baidoa. The concept of operations also established a framework concept for joint operations by AMISOM and the Somali National Army, which will serve as the basis for front line units of the Somali National Army to receive targeted support through the Trust Fund for AMISOM in Somalia managed by UNSOA. 76. The concept of operations established that units of the Somali National Army benefiting from United Nations support should undergo a basic training package, including human rights training, to be monitored and certified by UNSOM under the human rights due diligence policy. The concept of operations also foresees that AMISOM will work with the United Nations and international partners to establish appropriate and effective procedures for allegations of grave violations of the international humanitarian and human rights law, including conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence. The concept of operations further included the establishment of a Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell. 77. The importance of linking the security, political and stabilization efforts through a multidimensional campaign was highlighted during an event hosted by President Mohamud with key partners on 28 January in Addis Ababa. The President announced the creation of a high-level Strategic Coordination Mechanism to ensure coherence between the military campaign and stabilization efforts focusing on the establishment of local administrative structures, public outreach and the delivery of basic services. 78. On 12 and 13 February, UNSOM, joined by UNSOA, UNDP and UNOAU, held a retreat with the African Union and AMISOM near Addis Ababa. This was a landmark event, which brought the African Union and the United Nations together as partners in peace and State-building in Somalia. A total of 26 areas of common mandated tasks between the United Nations and the African Union in Somalia were identified, and relevant recommendations were made to increase and deepen coordination mechanisms, especially in the implementation of Security Council resolution 2124 (2013), the human rights due diligence policy, support to the Government's "Vision 2016", and stabilization efforts to be led by the Federal Government of Somalia and the Somali Compact. Logistical support to the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali National Army 79. UNSOA continued to provide logistical support to AMISOM in the entire region of south-central Somalia. However, the local administration in Kismaayo has not provided land to UNSOA for the construction of the tactical hub. UNSOA completed the construction of eight accommodation facilities that are compliant with minimum operating security standards, and the Communications, Information and Technology Services hub in Baidoa. UNSOA also deployed engineering materials and commenced defence installations for the hub perimeter in Beledweyne. 80. The expansion of the UNSOM and UNSOA camp within the AMISOM protected area at the Mogadishu International Airport and the construction of living accommodation facilities, are in progress. However, security concerns within the Airport have generated challenges on staff movement, accommodation and office space requirements. On 28 January, UNSOM opened its offices in Villa Somalia. 81. UNSOA facilitated the rotation of 3,401 AMISOM troops, 297 Police and 7 staff officers. UNSOA also continued to provide medical support to AMISOM, carrying out 51 medical evacuations, and transfer, redeployment and repatriation flights, involving 81 AMISOM personnel. In addition, UNSOA provided predeployment, in-mission and other training for 877 AMISOM personnel. 82. The lack of air assets remains a challenge. The African Union and UNSOA are discussing with Uganda and Burundi the possibility of deploying up to four military rotary-wing assets each. 83. UNSOA continued to provide support to AMISOM in the area of communications and information and technology services. Such support included the provision of Internet connectivity at the Mission and force headquarters, installation of a Tetra system at Mogadishu University and in Baidoa, distribution of laptops to AMISOM, deployment of high frequency secure communications in the sectors, and installation of two module infrastructures cabling for AMISOM force headquarters to provide data connectivity. UNSOA also commenced Internet cabling works in Sector 1 Headquarters. 84. The African Union-United Nations Information Support Team, managed by UNSOA, continued to provide strategic communications support to AMISOM and UNSOM, including live audio and video coverage during the elections in Puntland. 85. I am grateful to the Governments of Canada and the Republic of Korea, which pledged $2,600,000 and contributed $200,000, respectively, to the Trust Fund in Support of AMISOM. V. United Nations presence in Somalia 86. Negotiations continued for the signature of a status-of-mission agreement for UNSOM and UNSOA. It is expected that the agreement would be concluded in the near future. 87. As of 12 February, a total of 357 international and 973 national staff members from UNSOM, and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes had been deployed. UNSOM deployment strength stood at 65 international and 19 national staff. 88. Some 67 staff in Hargeysa, approximately 12 in Boosaaso, 45 in Garoowe, and 13 in Gaalkacyo were deployed. UNICEF relocated its office in Puntland from Boosasso to Garowe. In south-central Somalia, the presence of international staff remained limited, with approximately 15 in Baidoa, 13 in Dollow, and one in Kismaayo. In addition to its field presence in Garowe, Baidoa, Kismaayo and Hargeisa, UNSOM inaugurated a dedicated United Nations office at Villa Somalia in Mogadishu in late January to facilitate daily and direct engagement with Government counterparts. Integration 89. Integration of the United Nations presence into Somalia reached a new milestone with the appointment of Philippe Lazzarini as my Deputy Special Representative, Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator on 30 December. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2102 (2013), UNSOM became a structurally integrated Mission on 1 January 2014. Even prior to that date, the Mission and the United Nations country team had established various joint teams and management mechanisms. United Nations entities have worked in close cooperation, especially in the areas of governance, constitutional review, elections, rule of law, police, and justice and corrections, as well as security, and human rights, including advocacy for the protection of internally displaced persons in key areas in southern and central Somalia, and for disengaged combatants. 90. The United Nations is aligning its integrated strategic framework with the Somali Compact. Joint planning is also taking place under the framework of the Somali Compact working groups on the Peacebuilding and State-building Goals, involving Government leads, the United Nations, as well as bilateral and other development partners. A mission of the Global Focal Point for Rule of Law took place from 13 to 26 November to prepare overall strategic directions for the work of the United Nations in this area. As part of the integrated strategic framework process, the United Nations is developing its three-year action plan in support of the Somalia Compact. Safety and security of staff 91. The United Nations continued to work in a very challenging security environment that hampered the operations of UNSOM and UNSOA, as well as the programme delivery of its agencies, funds and programmes. 92. The implementation of security enhancement measures that were identified in the aftermath of the attack in June on the United Nations Common Compound continued. In terms of operations management, the United Nations, the Somali National Arm and AMISOM are working together to strengthen information-sharing and coordination, including possible responses to support United Nations staff in extreme situations. For example, liaison officers of the National Intelligence and Security Agency and AMISOM have been permanently assigned to the Joint Operations Centre within the Security Information and Operations Centre of UNSOM. This coordination extends to movement security, particularly for areas outside the Mogadishu International Airport and along the airport road to improve security at the compound's gates and operations in the areas bordering the perimeter. This coordination is aimed at denying Al-Shabaab freedom of movement and the capability to have an impact on operations within the Mogadishu International Airport by either direct or indirect attacks. 93. Within the Mogadishu International Airport, a number of interim measures were taken after the attack on 1 January. A combination of measures, including both prevention and protection, allowed a return to the same numbers of personnel prior to the attack. There is continued coordination with AMISOM, the Federal Government of Somalia and other partners, considering the more recent incidents of indirect fire (mortar attacks) in Mogadishu City, to ensure the maintenance of efforts to deny and deter future stand-off attacks on the Mogadishu International Airport and considering the more recent incidents of indirect fire (mortar attacks) on Mogadishu City. 94. In accordance with resolution 2124 (2013), the deployment of a United Nations Guard Unit in Mogadishu remains a priority for 2014. On 20 December, I wrote to the President of the Security Council regarding the deployment of this unit of 410 personnel to Mogadishu (S/2013/764). The President of the Security Council, in his letter dated 24 December (S/2013/765), informed me that the Security Council had taken note of my intention to deploy the guard unit, and preparations for its deployment are ongoing. VI. Observations 95. The change of Prime Minister in December 2013 and the appointment of a new cabinet in January 2014 through a constitutional process showed that Somalia's political institutions continue to evolve positively. 96. I welcome the public commitment of Prime Minister Abdiweli Sheikh Ahmed to move forward rapidly to achieve the objectives agreed in the New Deal Somali Compact. Progress is needed on political priorities, particularly the formation of Federal States, political reconciliation in the Somali regions and the acceleration of the constitutional review and implementation process. Strengthening of public financial management is also key. The President and Prime Minister have recently put in place structures to coordinate military, stabilization and political activities in the context of the renewed joint AMISOM and Somali military offensive. The United Nations will continue to support the Federal Government of Somalia in this task. 97. The peaceful election on 8 January 2014 of Abdiweli Mohamed Ali Gaas as President of the Puntland State of Somalia marks an important development. I commend the people of Puntland and the authorities, as well as my Special Representative and his colleagues in UNSOM, for ensuring that the process was peaceful, credible and legitimate. I also acknowledge and commend the statesmanship displayed by outgoing President Abdirahman Mohamed Mohamud Farole in recognizing the election results, and pledging support for stability, peace and democracy in Puntland. I welcome President Abdiweli Gaas' commitment to establish a one-person-one-vote electoral system and increase the participation and representation of women and youth in public life. I also hope that Puntland and the Federal Government of Somalia will seize the opportunity for an improved relationship. Puntland has an important role to play in the building of a strong federal Somalia. 98. I welcome progress made in implementing the Addis Ababa Agreement of August 2013, including steps towards the establishment of an Executive Council and a regional assembly. These should be inclusive and act in the best interests of all communities and address concerns as they arise. I encourage the Somali parties to continue to make progress and work towards the implementation of all aspects of the Addis Agreement in the spirit of dialogue and compromise. 99. I support the active engagement of the Federal Government of Somalia with those involved in the political deliberations in Baidoa. It is important that they reach a settlement that leads to the formation of a new Federal State through a process which is inclusive and reinforces other emerging federal structures in Somalia. 100. Somalia continues to face considerable security challenges. I pay tribute to AMISOM and the Somali National Army for the sacrifices they continue to make in the fight against Al-Shabaab. I commend the leadership of the African Union Commission in the development of a new AMISOM concept of operations, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2124 (2013), in consultation with the Federal Government of Somalia, the United Nations and the international community. I am encouraged by the commitment of the African Union and the Federal Government of Somalia to immediately commence the implementation of the priorities outlined in the concept of operations. I express my heartfelt appreciation to international partners, in particular the European Union and IGAD, for their commitment to support the Federal Government of Somalia and AMISOM. All international partners and African Union member States are urged to provide AMISOM with adequate support, especially force multipliers, to ensure that it can effectively fulfil its mandate. 101. Political, security and development gains in Somalia are still reversible. The campaign against Al-Shabaab will not be successful through the use of military means alone. I welcome the coordination mechanism established by the Federal Government of Somalia to link the military offensives with political and stabilization efforts. A multidimensional approach is critical to consolidate military gains and ensure that all Somalis benefit from better governance, rule of law, economic opportunities and basic services. Further steps towards dealing with disengaged combatants in newly accessible areas are also necessary. International contributions to stabilization and early recovery efforts in newly accessible areas must be forthcoming quickly in support of the priorities of the Federal Government of Somalia. I look forward to continued fruitful collaboration in these efforts among the African Union, IGAD, other partners and the United Nations. 102. The international community's support to the Federal Government of Somalia is essential to enable the Somali National Army to conduct operations with adequate equipment, training and human resources. I welcome efforts to ensure full accountability for the targeted logistical support provided to the Somali National Army and its alignment with the broader security sector reform objectives of the Government. I encourage Member States to make sustained and generous contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for this purpose. I underline the importance of full implementation of the steps agreed with the Federal Government of Somalia and AMISOM to ensure that the United Nations support package for AMISOM and the Somali National Army is consistent with the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy. 103. Inter-clan conflicts remain a potent source of instability and insecurity for Somalis on a day-to-day level. It is imperative that the Federal Government of Somalia promote peacemaking and reconciliation efforts at a local level and act to prevent and halt conflicts over land and productive resources throughout the country. 104. Concerted efforts by the international community have continued to ensure a downward trend in piracy off the coast of Somalia. Development efforts ashore have also made some progress. The Federal Government of Somalia is taking steps towards asserting its ownership of security off the coast. Continued efforts by the Federal Government of Somalia and international efforts, including naval efforts at sea, remain vital in sustaining progress in maritime security. 105. Continuous support to strengthen the police, justice and corrections institutions and address judicial security is critical to the establishment of the rule of law. I reiterate my call on the Government to place human rights at the forefront of its State-building agenda, in line with its Provisional Constitution and international obligations. This includes the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission, a moratorium on the death penalty and the advancement of the rights and empowerment of women. 106. I remain concerned about the continued export of Somali charcoal in violation of the ban set out in Security Council resolution 2036 (2012). I call upon the Federal Government of Somalia and AMISOM to prevent the export and on Member States to prevent the import of Somali charcoal. I would like to express my appreciation for the important work of the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group in this regard and call upon Member States to cooperate with it. 107. Early warnings in late 2013 indicated poor harvests in early 2014, and humanitarian actors worked to strengthen preparedness and response to the possible downturn in food security. Early action has softened the impact and helped prevent a worsening of the crisis. However, recent gains could easily be reversed without sustained assistance. I urge the international community to contribute generously to the 2014 Consolidated Appeal Process for Somalia. It is critical that the level of assistance to Somalia is maintained to ensure that gains made thus far are not eroded. 108. I am pleased to note that following the Brussels conference in September, implementation of the Somali Compact has begun. I urge international partners to ensure that assistance is delivered in line with the Somali Compact partnership principles and to support national efforts in a coordinated manner, including through increased programmatic funding towards restoring law and order and addressing the root causes of the conflict. I encourage meaningful engagement from all stakeholders in the policy discussions of the meetings of the High-Level Partnership Forum meetings in Mogadishu and in Copenhagen later in 2014, to ensure that implementation of the Compact remains on track and translates into the timely delivery of peace dividends to the Somali people. 109. Ultimately, the people of Somalia bear the primary responsibility for bringing lasting peace and stability to the country. It is, therefore, important that the various local stakeholders strive tirelessly to pursue measures, including embracing genuine reconciliation through the spirit of compromise that would enable them to realize this ultimate goal. 110. I pay tribute to my Special Representative, Nicholas Kay, and the members of the staff of UNSOM, and of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and other international and regional organizations in Somalia for their continued hard work. I am pleased that UNSOM became a fully integrated mission on 1 January as set out by the Security Council in its resolution 2093 (2013). I also pay particular tribute to the African Union, AMISOM, the European Union and IGAD for their sustained contribution to peace in Somalia. We must enhance partnership to meet the challenges together. 