%%%REGIONAL SECURITY|CENTRAL AFRICA|CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES|ILLICIT ARMS TRAFFICKING|SMALL ARMS|DECLARATIONS (TEXT)|CONFERENCES|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL A/54/530 S/1999/1141 5 November 1999 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: FRENCH GENERAL ASSEMBLY SECURITY COUNCIL Fifty-fourth session Fifty-fourth year Agenda item 77 (a) REVIEW AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONCLUDING DOCUMENT OF THE TWELFTH SPECIAL SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY: REGIONAL CONFIDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES: ACTIVITIES OF THE UNITED NATIONS STANDING ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON SECURITY QUESTIONS IN CENTRAL AFRICA Letter dated 5 November 1999 from the Permanent Representative of Cameroon to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to inform you that in the context of the activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, a subregional conference on the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa was held in N'Djamena from 25 to 27 October 1999. In addition, the Committee held its twelfth ministerial meeting in N'Djamena from 27 to 30 October 1999. On behalf of the current Chairman, I am transmitting to you herewith the reports adopted at these two meetings, as well as the N'Djamena Declaration and the special resolution (see annexes). I should be grateful if you would have this letter and its annexes distributed as a document of the General Assembly, under agenda item 77 (a) and of the Security Council. (Signed) Martin BELINGA EBOUTOU Ambassador English Page Annex I UNITED NATIONS STANDING ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON SECURITY QUESTIONS REPORT OF THE SUBREGIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE PROLIFERATION OF AND ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN SMALL ARMS IN CENTRAL AFRICA N'DJAMENA, CHAD, 25-27 OCTOBER 1999 I. INTRODUCTION In the context of the programme of activities of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, the Subregional Conference on the Proliferation of and Illicit Traffic in Small Arms was held in N'Djamena from 25 to 27 October 1999. The holding of the Conference was a response to the concerns repeatedly expressed at various meetings of the Advisory Committee regarding the devastating effects of the excessive accumulation of small arms in Central Africa and their spread among the population. Since its establishment in 1992 by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in implementation of a General Assembly resolution, the Committee has set itself the objective of reducing the considerable quantities of armaments existing in the subregion, particularly arms that are the subject of illicit traffic, because of the threats they pose to the peace, stability and development of the countries concerned. On the occasion of their first Summit, held in Yaoundé on 8 July 1996, the heads of State and Government of the countries members of the Committee emphasized that the increased and uncontrolled proliferation of weapons was a source of insecurity and a threat to the stability of States in the subregion, and declared that they were in favour of cooperation to fight that phenomenon with the assistance of the United Nations. The ministers of the countries members of the Committee have also regularly included in the agenda for their meetings questions relating to arms limitation, and have called for the adoption of measures capable of promoting it. At their tenth meeting, which took place in Yaoundé from 26 to 30 October 1998, the ministers of the countries members of the Committee, having once again expressed their grave concern about the phenomenon of the illegal circulation of small-calibre weapons, which constituted a major factor for insecurity in the subregion, recommended the holding of a subregional conference on those questions and the elaboration of legal monitoring instruments and the adoption of other appropriate measures to deal with that scourge. In that connection, they gave the Bureau of the Committee a mandate to request the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the heads of the international organizations concerned to provide the necessary assistance for speedily organizing such a conference. The following 10 members of the Committee took part in the Conference: Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe. Rwanda was invited, but did not attend. This Conference, which brought together senior civilian members of government services, senior officers in the armed forces and senior police officials from the Central African countries, afforded an opportunity for an in-depth, open and direct exchange of views among them on the extent, manifestations and consequences of this scourge in the subregion, the efforts under way in their countries to deal with it and possible bilateral or subregional initiatives to that end. The participants' analysis and discussions of these sensitive issues were enriched by presentations given by experts active in the front line of the campaign against small arms in other regions of Africa and the world, or coming from international organizations particularly concerned with the issue. They included: Mr. L. T. P. Dzonzi, Deputy Inspector-General of Police in Malawi, representing the Southern African Regional Police Chiefs Cooperation Organization (SARPCCO); Mr. Mohamed Coulibaly, Executive Assistant in the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, representing the Programme for Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development in Africa (PCASED); Lieutenant Colonel Mai Moctar Kassouma, Chairman of the National Commission for Illicit Arms Collection and Control (CNCCAI) in Niger; Mr. Orlando Correa, expert in institutional security, Cabinet of the President, Brazil; Mr. Okan Aysu, of the Anti-Terrorist Department of Interpol, France. Mr. William Aurélien Eteki Mboumoua, former Head of the Advisory Mission on the Proliferation of Small Arms in the Sahara-Sahel Subregion, who had been engaged by the Secretariat as a consultant for purposes of preparing for the conference, gave introductory presentations on the themes discussed. The Secretariat General of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) was represented by H.E. Mr. Nelson Cosme, Deputy Secretary-General for Human Integration, Peace, Stability and Security of ECCAS. The secretariat of the conference comprised Ms. Pamela Maponga, Secretary of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, assisted by Ms. Annette Ekberg, Ms. Nicole Moran and Mr. Ferdinand Ngoh Ngoh. H.E. Mr. Claude Baillargeon, Ambassador of Canada to Cameroon, the Central African Republic and Chad, also took part in the work of the conference, and informed participants of his country's interest in the question of the proliferation of small arms and its concern to contribute to the international effort to combat that scourge. The opening ceremony was presided over by H.E. Mr. Mahamat Saleh Ahmat, Minister of State and Minister of Justice of Chad, on behalf of H.E. Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Chad. The following public figures also graced the ceremony by their presence: H.E. Mr. Oumarou Yerima Djibrilla, Minister of the Interior, Security and Decentralization of Chad; H.E. Brigadier General Oumar Kadjallami Boukar, Minister of National Defence and Reintegration of Chad. Three important statements were made on this occasion by: Ms. Pamela Maponga, Secretary of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa; H.E. Nelson Cosme, Assistant Secretary-General for Human Integration, Peace, Stability and Security of ECCAS; H.E. Mr. Mahamat Saleh Ahmat, Minister of State and Minister of Justice of Chad. The participants drew inspiration from these statements for their discussions. The participants decided to entrust guidance of the work of the conference to the Bureau of the Committee. The work of the conference was therefore chaired by Lieutenant General Pierre Semengue of Cameroon. Mr. Séraphin Kabila of the Democratic Republic of the Congo acted as Rapporteur General. The closing ceremony was presided over by H.E. Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chad. The work of the Conference covered the following subjects: THEME I The proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa: overview Overall presentation of the theme: Mr. William Aurélien Eteki Mboumoua, former Head of the United Nations Secretary-General's Advisory Mission on the Proliferation of Small Arms in the Sahara-Sahel Subregion, in his capacity as consultant Subtheme 1: The extent of the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa and its impact on the stability, security and development of the countries of the region Subtheme 2: National efforts to combat the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa Subtheme 3: Bilateral and subregional initiatives and prospects for combating the phenomenon in Central Africa THEME II Towards an effective programme of action for combating the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa Overall presentation of the theme: Mr. William A. Eteki Mboumoua Subtheme 1: The experience of other regions Southern Africa: Southern African Development Community (SADC)/SARPCCO Mr. L. T. P. Dzonzi, Deputy Inspector-General of Police, Malawi West Africa: PCASED Mr. Mohamed Coulibaly, Executive Assistant, Lomé Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa The experience of Niger: CNCCAI Lieutenant Colonel Mai Moctar Kassouma, Chairman of the National Commission for Illicit Arms Collection and Control Mr. Orlando Correa, expert in institutional security, cabinet of the President, Brazil Subtheme 2: The activity of international organizations Interpol: Mr. Okan Aysu, senior international civil servant United Nations Department of Disarmament Affairs WORKSHOP ACTIVITIES: Recommendations on specific measures for combating the proliferation of small arms in Central Africa Workshop 1: National measures Workshop 2: Subregional measures II. THE WORK OF THE CONFERENCE In conformity with the methodology proposed by the organizers, the N'Djamena conference gave rise to substantial communications by the participants on the situation of their respective countries and to presentations by the invited high-level experts, followed by dynamic and constructive exchanges both during the work in plenary and in the workshops, resulting in relevant recommendations on specific measures to be taken to face the scourge of the proliferation of small arms in Central Africa. A. Under Theme No. 1 on the overview of the situation with respect to the proliferation of small arms in Central Africa, participants unanimously recognized the seriousness of the current situation. Small arms have indeed become a real scourge for the countries of the subregion in recent years. Used indiscriminately in the many internal and inter-State armed conflicts that are constantly rending Central Africa and making it the preferred area of action for smugglers and arms merchants wishing to market their engines of death, small arms have claimed a considerable number of victims, particularly among civilians. They have in addition led to a general rise in insecurity and violence, even in countries that have been spared war, thus contributing to political destabilization and endangering development efforts. 1. Participants began by discussing the issue of the extent of the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa and its impact on the stability, security and development of the countries of the region. (a) With respect to the causes of the excessive and destabilizing accumulation of small arms, participants mentioned: The murderous conflicts which are the order of the day in Central Africa. Clashes, mutinies and tension have occurred or are persisting in many countries of the region, setting factions, armed groups, mutineers, militias, insurgent troops and rebel movements against government forces; The permeability of borders; The uncontrolled movements of refugees which mean that these arms spread throughout the subregion, bringing about a general rise in violence and insecurity; The insufficiency of the services provided by humanitarian organizations for refugees and displaced persons, which transforms the refugee camps into centres of arms trafficking; The uncontrolled supply of armaments to specialized security units and to public figures who do not hand back their arms when their term of office ceases; The establishment by officials of militias or private armies; The establishment of parallel militarized units; The raiding of armed forces and police arsenals to obtain weapons for use in mutinies, thefts or the activities of unreliable elements of the security forces; The establishment of self-defence groups and the distribution of weapons to civilians by political parties, mutineers or poachers; The infiltration of armed troops from countries at war; The increase in the number of security companies and political party militias; Transit of weapons headed for conflict zones; The existence of small-scale and clandestine arms manufacture; The sale and rental of weapons by dishonest elements in the forces of law and order; The irregular purchase of weapons for purposes of individual protection; Secessionist and insurrectionist tendencies; The difficulties involved in demobilizing and disarming former combatants; Foreign interference in the conflicts in the subregion; Organized cross-border crime; The proliferation of mercenary companies affiliated with multinational mining, oil and other corporations; The falsification of genuine government orders and the issuing of fake orders by arms traders. (b) With respect to the manifestations and consequences of the proliferation and accumulation of small arms in their respective countries, the participants deplored: (i) The rise in major crime characterized by a significant increase in theft, looting, armed robbery, attacks on private homes, rapes, racketeering, extortion of funds, and murders including premeditated murders, in short a rise in crime in both urban and rural areas; (ii) The development of the phenomenon of bandits on major road routes known as road blockers or zaraguinas; (iii) The destruction of fauna in the national parks by poachers; (iv) The increased feeling of insecurity among the population; (v) The decline in foreign investment and tourist activities; (vi) The exacerbation of inter-tribal conflicts as well as of conflicts between livestock raisers and farmers; (vii) The development of transnational organized crime; (viii) The loss of control by the central authorities over certain parts of the national territory; (ix) Political destabilization and the disruption of democratization processes; (x) The slowing down of economic activity and hence of development. 2. The participants in the Conference also examined the efforts being made by their various countries at the national level to combat the proliferation of the illicit traffic in small arms. These efforts, as was noted, are taking place on two levels, the regulatory and legislative level and the level of establishment of structures responsible for suppressing unlawful activities associated with the possession or use of firearms. Where the legal arsenal is concerned, every Central African State has laws or regulations governing the manufacture, possession, holding, purchase, marketing or transfer of firearms, munitions and explosives. This regulatory system is more or less flexible depending on the type of weapons concerned, weapons of war or hunting weapons. The penalties for firearms-related offences may also vary from country to country, as may the judicial bodies responsible for trying such offences. In all cases, possession of a firearm is subject to prior authorization by the competent authority. Participants nevertheless recognized that the existence of such legislation was not sufficient to prevent the proliferation, traffic or unlawful use of arms. Violations of the legislation in question are generally committed by criminals, or by individuals seeking to ensure their own protection and that of their families and property, fulfil political aims or engage in a lucrative form of trade. It was also noted that political authorities could encourage breaches of arms-related legislation for political reasons, particularly by distributing weapons to the population or to groups committed to their cause. The structures responsible for combating the proliferation of small arms vary from country to country. It was recognized that combating the proliferation of small arms within each of these countries is the task of various structures - the gendarmerie, the police, the army, the customs service, etc. The problem of rapid coordination among these various structures was noted, by virtue of the absence of national structures specializing in combating the proliferation of small arms. The participants then indicated the various actions or initiatives being taken at the national level to combat this scourge, such as: Operations for the recovery of arms by force by means of searches and monitoring of the security forces; Awareness promotion among the population to encourage voluntary handing in of arms; The application of programmes for buying back arms; The granting of amnesty to persons in possession of arms who voluntarily return them to the authorities; Restrictions on the arming of private security firms; The strengthening of security measures at arms depots. In many cases, those various actions had permitted the recovery of appreciable quantities of arms. 3. In additional to the efforts at the national level, participants referred to bilateral and subregional actions and initiatives for combating the phenomenon of small arms proliferation. Thus, bilateral or multilateral agreements had been signed between and among various central African countries providing for exchange of information between security services on illicit movements of arms, organization of joint monitoring or search operations, organization of joint and/or simultaneous patrols to ensure security of common borders, cooperation between custom services on the borders, and intensification of the periodic meetings between administrative and military authorities on the borders. Those joint actions had in many cases yielded satisfactory results. Some subregional initiatives capable of making an active contribution to combating the proliferation of small arms were referred to, in particular the establishment of the Committee of Central African Police Chiefs. Still with respect to subregional cooperation, participants deplored the fact that the many decisions and recommendations relating to combating the proliferation of small arms adopted in previous years in the context of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa had for the most part never been implemented through lack of follow-up. They recognized in that respect the need to establish in each country national structures for following up on the Committee's recommendations, and the need for real political will to implement them. B. Under Theme No. 2, relating to the drawing up of an effective programme of action for combating the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa, before setting about the elaboration of national and subregional measures capable of enabling them to find appropriate responses to this scourge, participants listened to and drew inspiration from the introductory statement by the consultant and the communications presented by the invited experts on the experience of their countries, their subregion or their respective organizations. 1. The review of the experience of other regions and of the activities of international organizations covered the following topics: - The activities of SARPCCO, which was established in 1995 as an SADC effort to combat the traffic in weapons and cross-border crime; - The activities of PCASED, which was established by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in order to support the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) member States' efforts to implement the moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of small arms adopted by the heads of State and Government of West Africa in October 1998; - The efforts made since 1994 by CNCCAI to combat the proliferation of illicit and small arms; - Efforts to combat the proliferation of small arms in Brazil and Latin America; ongoing projects conducted by the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) and the Organization of American States (OAS); and, in particular, the implementation of the Inter-American Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Weapons, Munitions, Explosives and Other Related Materials; - Interpol activities in support of mutual assistance and exchange of information between the police forces of its countries members in order to combat arms trafficking; and, in particular, its International Weapons and Explosives Tracking System (IWETS); and - Activities of the United Nations and, in particular, the Department for Disarmament Affairs, to combat the proliferation of small arms at the global level; and assistance provided to States in that regard. 2. Recommendations for practical measures to combat the proliferation of small arms, based on comments made during the review of Theme 1 and on the statements made by the experts and the consultant, were formulated during the workshops. These workshops, one devoted to the development of national measures and the other to that of subregional ones, led to a rich, constructive discussion during which the participants considered various solutions and approaches that might provide an appropriate response to the scourge of small arms proliferation in Central Africa. The Conference later adopted the following recommendations: National measures 1. Application of the rules of good management and good governance; 2. Creation of a national committee responsible for coordinating efforts to combat the proliferation of and illicit traffic in arms in States that lack such a body and strengthening of those committees in countries where they exist; 3. Creation of a committee to follow up the Committee's recommendations in States that lack such a body and strengthening of those that already exist; 4. Review and strengthening of national legislation to combat the possession of firearms; 5. Public awareness-raising as to the danger of firearms possession; 6. Collection and destruction of unauthorized weapons; 7. Collection and use of all available statistics and information on the manufacture of and trade in small arms and ammunition; 8. Strengthening of inspections at border crossings; 9. Strengthening of the operational capabilities of existing mechanisms by training the relevant officials and providing adequate material and technical resources; 10. Prohibition of private or political party militias and regulation of the activities of security firms; 11. Involvement of political parties, traditional authorities, organizations of civil society and, in particular, women's groups in all aspects of the effort to combat the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms. Subregional measures 1. Effective functioning of ECCAS bodies, including the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX); 2. Harmonization of the Central African States' national legislation to combat the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms; 3. Creation of a uniform weapons register at the national and subregional levels and of a database on the current inventory, classified according to country, arms merchant and shipper; 4. Request by the ECCAS Secretariat General for support from the Secretary-General of the United Nations in the implementation of programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of combatants; 5. Recommendation that the ECCAS Secretariat General should request the Secretary-General of the United Nations to assist countries of the subregion in their efforts to reorganize the armed forces and the police; 6. Recommendation that the current Chairman of ECCAS should contact the Secretary-General of the United Nations with a view to urging all States to give effect to the recommendations contained in the guidelines for international arms transfers in the context of General Assembly resolution 46/36 H of 6 December 1991; 7. Recommendation that the ECCAS Secretariat General should request the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa to assist in implementation of the activities of COPAX and to provide other assistance in the areas of peace and security; 8. Recommendation that consideration should be given to the possible development, in cooperation with international institutions and donors, of regional projects for arms collection and small-scale development projects to promote the economic and social rehabilitation of criminals; 9. Recommendation that a subregional bureau of Interpol should be established and that the Central African countries should cooperate more actively with Interpol. - Implementation in each country of a mechanism responsible for follow-up to the recommendations of the Conference Lastly, the participants welcomed the cordial relations that had prevailed throughout their work and thanked the President of Chad, His Excellency Mr. Idriss Déby, and the Government and people of Chad for the warm welcome and fraternal care that they had received during their visit to N'Djamena. DONE at N'Djamena on 27 October 1999. Annex II REPORT OF THE TWELFTH MINISTERIAL MEETING OF THE UNITED NATIONS STANDING ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON SECURITY QUESTIONS N'DJAMENA, 27-30 OCTOBER 1999 INTRODUCTION The second Ministerial Meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa was held in N'Djamena from 27 to 30 October 1999. The following States members took part in the meeting: Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and Sao Tome and Principe. Rwanda was absent. The Secretary-General of the United Nations was represented by His Excellency Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central African Republic. His Excellency General Louis Sylvain-Goma, Secretary-General of ECCAS, also attended. The opening ceremony included an address by the current Chairman of the Committee, His Excellency Mr. Augustin Kontchou Kouomegni, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Cameroon; a message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations, read by his representative, His Excellency Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji; and an opening statement by His Excellency Mr. Nassour Guelengdouksia Ouaidou, Prime Minister of Chad. ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA The Committee adopted the following agenda: 1. Election of the Bureau 2. Adoption of the agenda 3. Report of the outgoing Bureau 4. Review of the geopolitical and security situation in Central Africa 5. Intergovernmental cooperation in security matters in Central Africa 6. Evaluation of the implementation of the previous decisions and recommendations of the Standing Advisory Committee: A. Establishment of an early warning mechanism B. Organization of military exercises in connection with peacekeeping operations between the armed forces of the countries of Central Africa C. Establishment of a subregional parliament in Central Africa D. Establishment of a subregional centre for human rights and democracy E. Establishment of a subregional mechanism for the prevention, management and settlement of conflicts in Central Africa 7. Consideration of the report of the Subregional Conference on the Proliferation of and Illicit Traffic in Small Arms in Central Africa 8. Consideration of the draft resolution on the activities of the Advisory Committee to be submitted to the United Nations General Assembly at its 54th session 9. Adoption of the programme of work of the Committee for the period 1999-2000 10. Date and place of the next Ministerial Meeting 11. Other matters 12. Adoption of the report of the twelfth Ministerial Meeting of the Standing Advisory Committee. CONDUCT OF WORK I. ELECTION OF THE BUREAU The Committee elected a new Bureau, consisting of: Chad (President); Burundi (first Vice-President); Democratic Republic of the Congo (second Vice-President); Central African Republic (Rapporteur). II. REPORT OF THE OUTGOING BUREAU The Committee took note of the report by His Excellency Mr. Augustin Kontchou Kouomegni, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Cameroon, as Chairman of the outgoing Bureau at the ministerial level. The Committee welcomed the energy and efficiency with which the outgoing Bureau had discharged the mandates entrusted to it by the tenth and eleventh ministerial meetings, particularly those concerning the lifting of the embargo against Burundi, the extension of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA), the holding of a high-level seminar on the report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations on conflicts in Africa, the organization of a subregional conference on the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa and the holding of a summit meeting of the heads of State and government of the Central African countries on the establishment of a mechanism for the prevention, containment and settlement of conflicts and crises. III. REVIEW OF THE GEOPOLITICAL AND SECURITY SITUATION Angola The Committee expressed concern at the continuing situation in Angola as a result of the refusal of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) to comply with the terms of the 1994 Lusaka Protocol and of the relevant Security Council resolutions. It urged the countries of the subregion to ensure implementation of the Security Council resolutions on Angola and, in particular, of the sanctions against UNITA. It called for the return of a lasting peace in Angola, which would put an end to the suffering of the Angolan people and promote peace and stability throughout the subregion. It urged the international community to provide assistance to displaced populations. It encouraged the Angolan Government to continue its efforts to pacify the country. Burundi The Committee welcomed the positive developments in Burundi and, in particular, the Government partnership with the country's political forces, and expressed the hope that that political understanding would be further strengthened. It paid tribute to the memory of recently deceased President Julius Nyerere and to his mediation of the inter-Burundian negotiations. The Committee appealed urgently for the appointment of a new impartial mediator and for all parties to the conflict to be invited to participate in the inter-Burundian talks being held in Arusha with a view to the rapid establishment of a lasting peace in that country. The Committee also welcomed the signing of the Lusaka Accord on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and, in particular, its provisions for the disarmament of the Burundian armed groups within its territory. The Committee appealed urgently to the international community to resume its economic cooperation with Burundi in order to alleviate the suffering of the Burundian people. Cameroon The Committee welcomed the climate of peace and stability prevailing in Cameroon owing to the installation of a peaceful democracy characterized by freedom of political parties and the press, respect for human rights, dialogue and cooperation. It welcomed the commendable efforts of the Cameroonian Government to combat poverty and promote recovery of the national economy. The Committee also welcomed the efforts of the Cameroonian Government to promote good governance, in particular to combat corruption and mismanagement of public property. The Committee expressed deep concern at the continuing incidents between Cameroon and Nigeria on the Bakassi peninsula and called on the two parties to refrain from any action that could heighten tensions while awaiting the decision of the International Court of Justice, which Cameroon had seized of the matter. The Committee, while reiterating its appeal to the international community and friendly countries to assist in maintaining the peace between Cameroon and Nigeria while awaiting the verdict of the International Court of Justice, requested the Court to take the necessary steps to ensure a rapid conclusion of the proceeding pending before it. The Committee again urged Nigeria to comply strictly with the interim measures of protection laid down by the Court in its ruling of 15 March 1996, and called upon the two parties to refrain from taking any action that could create difficulties for the application of the final judgement of the Court. The Committee welcomed the high-level contacts held between Cameroon and Nigeria with a view to promoting a climate of peace and harmony in their bilateral relations. It expressed the wish, accordingly, for the international community to contribute to strengthening the climate of confidence created by those contacts and to encourage the two countries to refrain from taking any action that could undermine the integrity of their respective territories. The Committee expressed concern at the ongoing cross-border phenomenon of roadblocks, the illegal circulation of small-calibre weapons and weapons of war and the increase in organized crime. Congo The Committee welcomed the gradual restoration of peace in the Congo, as a result of government pacification efforts, which had allowed the Panafrican Music Festival to take place in Brazzaville from 1 to 8 August, as well as the festivities commemorating the thirty-ninth anniversary of independence. The Committee reiterated its appeal to the entire Congolese people to adhere fully to the desire for peace and national harmony clearly stated by President Denis Sassou-Nguesso, as demonstrated by the amnesty granted to all combatants guilty of atrocities who renounce violence and agree to lay down their arms once and for all. It urged the international community to provide assistance to Congo in the management of the humanitarian tragedy caused by the painful events which that country had experienced. Gabon The Committee welcomed the climate of peace and political stability in Gabon, characterized by a peaceful democracy, normal functioning of institutions and the free exercise of activities by political parties. It commended the efforts undertaken by the Government of Gabon to address the economic difficulties the country was undergoing. It expressed concern at the grave situation created in Gabon by the massive influx of refugees from warring neighbouring countries and again appealed urgently to the United Nations, particularly the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and to the international community for the rapid implementation of a programme of emergency assistance to ease the suffering of the refugees and facilitate their return to their countries of origin. Equatorial Guinea The Committee welcomed the climate of peace, political stability and security prevailing in Equatorial Guinea following the latest legislative elections, in which all the political parties had participated. It welcomed the progress in the democratization process in the country, in particular the establishment of a pluralist parliament, the establishment of a Government of national union and the continuing dialogue between the Government and the opposition political parties. It welcomed the efforts of the Government of Equatorial Guinea in the fields of economic and social development, combating corruption and the promotion of human rights. Democratic Republic of the Congo The Committee expressed its concern at the continued attacks on the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It welcomed the recent signing of the Lusaka Accord by the heads of State and Government of the countries affected by the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the representatives of the Congo Liberation Movement and the Rassemblement Congolais pour la Democratie (RCD), which are also involved. It welcomed the progress made in the establishment of the various international mechanisms stipulated in the Lusaka Accord, and made an urgent appeal to all parties involved to respect scrupulously the terms of the agreement. It reiterated its appeal for the opening of a national dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and took note of the efforts made by the Government in preparation for that dialogue. It recommended the convening of an international conference on peace, security and development in the Great Lakes countries which could lay the foundations for a durable peace in this troubled region. Central African Republic The Committee welcomed the gradual restoration of peace and security to the Central African Republic following the serious crises generated by the successive rebellions of 1996 and 1997, thanks to the combined efforts of the Central African people, the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) and MINURCA. It welcomed the conditions of transparency, calm and democracy under which the 1998 legislative elections and the September 1999 presidential elections in the Central African Republic were held and expressed its gratitude to the international community for its support to the success of those elections. It took note with satisfaction of the continuing programme to collect weapons circulating in the country carried out with the assistance of MINURCA despite the material and logistical difficulties encountered. It welcomed the assistance provided to the Central African Republic by certain friendly countries for the repatriation of the numerous refugees and fugitive soldiers from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It welcomed the decision by the Security Council to extend the mandate of MINURCA until 15 February 2000, and commended the exhaustive efforts of the Bureau in that regard. Sao Tome and Principe The Committee welcomed the climate of peace and stability that obtained in Sao Tome and Principe and the efforts made by the Government to promote economic recovery, despite an unfavourable international environment characterized by falling cocoa prices. It welcomed with satisfaction the readiness of Sao Tome and Principe to work towards the restoration of peace in the countries of Central Africa afflicted by conflict and its determination to work for the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference on the Proliferation of and Illicit Traffic in Small Arms. Chad The Committee welcomed the efforts made by the Government of Chad to continue the process of national reconciliation through the establishment of such mechanisms as the Committee for National Reconciliation, the national mediator and the local committees for settlement of conflicts between communities. It noted with satisfaction the efforts undertaken by the Government to put in place democratic institutions, the forthcoming senatorial and local elections and the positive results achieved with the installation of a democracy based on consensus and participation begun by President Idriss Deby. It appealed to the international community to assist Chad in its mine clearance programme. IV. INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION IN SECURITY MATTERS IN CENTRAL AFRICA The Committee took note with satisfaction of the actions and initiatives taken by the States members within the framework of cooperation in security matters aimed, in particular, at lessening tensions and combating insecurity in the border areas, as well as making it possible to have exchanges between the various national structures dealing with these questions. In view of the cross-border nature of most of the security problems in the subregion and the need to respond to them in a joint and concerted manner, the Committee again strongly recommended greater cooperation and dialogue among the security forces of the Central African countries, particularly within the framework of periodic meetings and the organization of joint operations. The Committee particularly welcomed in this regard: ∙ The organization of mixed patrols between Congo and Angola and between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Congo to secure their common borders; ∙ Cooperation between Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the repatriation of refugees who had fled the fighting; ∙ Cooperation between the security forces of Gabon and Cameroon which had, in particular, led to the arrest and transfer by the Gabonese authorities of criminals who had committed offences in Cameroon; ∙ The holding of periodic meetings of the standing joint technical commission for security matters between Chad and Cameroon; ∙ The meetings between the military authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic on the population movements on the borders of the two countries; ∙ The signing in Yaoundé on 29 April 1999, at the meeting of the Committee of Central African Police Chiefs, of the agreement on criminal police cooperation. It appealed to the countries which had not yet done so to take all necessary steps to proceed to the rapid signing of this text and guarantee its full effectiveness. The Committee expressed grave concern about the resurgence of organized crime and insecurity in the countries of the subregion, particularly the development of the phenomenon of roadblocks. It also recommended the establishment of an anti-crime fund. The Bureau was mandated to study and propose ways and means of allocating sufficient resources to the fund. In an effort to promote peace and security in Central Africa and recalling the importance of the Non-Aggression Pact concluded in 1996 among the countries of Central Africa for peace and security in the subregion, the Committee invited the countries that had signed the Pact to ratify it. It recommended that the Bureau should draw the attention of the countries which had not yet done so to the need to sign and/or ratify the Pact so that it could enter into force before the end of 2000. The Committee expressed grave concern about the security problems created in the subregion by the massive influx of refugees and armed elements coming from other countries. It advocated increased bilateral contacts aimed at lessening the tension aroused by this situation. It also requested the Bureau to take the initiatives needed for the holding of a subregional conference on the matter during the fourteenth ministerial meeting. The Committee expressed its great concern over the disinformation campaign being waged by certain non-governmental organizations and representatives of the international media against the political situation, human rights and good governance in Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea. It noted with concern that other Central African countries had also been the victims of such false and unfounded accusations and stressed the need for a strong denunciation of such actions, taking into account their impact on peace and stability in the subregion. It called for increased vigilance and the active mobilization of international public opinion and public opinion in Central Africa against this phenomenon. It encouraged the States of Central Africa to continue with calm and determination to pursue the programmes of political, economic, social and cultural reforms which they had initiated. V. EVALUATION OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECISIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF PREVIOUS MINISTERIAL MEETINGS OF THE STANDING ADVISORY COMMITTEE The Committee took note of the progress made in the establishment of an early warning mechanism, in particular that the Gabonese Government had made available a building in Libreville which was undergoing renovation. The Bureau of the Committee was mandated to contact the United Nations about holding a meeting of ECCAS, Gabon, as host country of the mechanism, the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity, in order to take the necessary steps for its effective startup, particularly release of funds for this purpose. B. Organization of military exercises in connection with peacekeeping operations between the armed forces of the countries of Central Africa The Committee, after taking note of the meeting of the chiefs of the armed forces general staffs and the meeting of the military experts of ECCAS member States, held in Gabon from 14 to 15 May 1998 and 1 to 25 June 1998 respectively, stressed the importance of joint simulation exercises for peacekeeping operations as an effective means of promoting confidence and strengthening comradeship-in-arms and the operational capacities of the armed forces of the Central African countries in maintaining peace. It therefore reaffirmed its wish to plan and carry out exercises of this type. The Committee mandated the Bureau to take all appropriate steps to: ∙ Finalize the documentation for the Biyongho-98 exercise project designed by the military experts of the Committee and in particular to review the lowering of the budget as initially proposed; ∙ Obtain from the States members of the Committee a substantial contribution making it possible to hold this exercise; ∙ Expedite the initiatives undertaken vis-à-vis the United Nations, other international organizations and donor countries to request logistical and financial support for the effective implementation of the project. C. Establishment of a subregional parliament in Central Africa The Committee took note with satisfaction of the developments in the project to establish a subregional parliament in Central Africa, particularly the decision taken by the heads of State and Government of the countries in the subregion, meeting at Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, in June 1999 to set up a network of parliamentarians for that purpose. The Bureau of the Committee was mandated to take steps, in liaison with ECCAS, for the convening of a meeting of subregional experts and parliamentarians charged with studying the modalities for the implementation of the network and securing the financing necessary for its functioning. D. Establishment of a subregional centre for human rights and democracy The Committee took note of the initiatives of the Bureau vis-à-vis the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR) with a view to the establishment of the subregional centre for human rights and democracy and welcomed the proposal for the forthcoming appointment in Yaoundé, Cameroon, of an official of UNHCHR as a regional adviser for the launching of the project. It recommended that the Bureau should undertake consultations with UNHCHR towards the early launching of the Centre. E. Establishment of a subregional mechanism for the prevention, management and settlement of conflicts The Committee took note with satisfaction of the developments in the implementation of the project, particularly: - The establishment by the heads of State and Government of the countries in the subregion, meeting at Yaoundé, Cameroon, on 25 February 1999, of a Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX); - The decision taken by the heads of State and Government of Central African countries, meeting at Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, on 24 June 1999, to integrate COPAX into the structures of ECCAS; - The Committee also welcomed the efforts of the Secretariat General of ECCAS to revise the Treaty establishing the Community, in accordance with the decision taken by the heads of State and Government of the countries in the subregion and, in particular, the formation of a group of lawyers responsible for preparing the respective draft text. The Committee indicated its willingness to provide assistance to the Secretariat General of ECCAS with a view to expediting the revision of the Treaty establishing the Community, decided on at the Malabo Summit, particularly, in order to take the integration of COPAX into consideration. VI. CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE SUBREGIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE PROLIFERATION OF AND ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN SMALL ARMS IN CENTRAL AFRICA The Committee took note of the report and recommendations of the Subregional Conference on the Proliferation of and Illicit Traffic in Small Arms in Central Africa, held in N'Djamena (Chad) from 25 to 27 October 1999, and congratulated participants on the relevance and quality of their conclusions. The Committee mandated the Chairman of the Bureau to transmit the conclusions of the Conference to the member States, the Secretariat General of ECCAS and the Secretary-General of the OAU and the Secretary-General of the United Nations with a view to their implementation. VII. CONSIDERATION OF THE DRAFT RESOLUTION ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE STANDING ADVISORY COMMITTEE The Committee examined and adopted the draft resolution on the activities to be submitted to the General Assembly of the United Nations at its fifty-fourth session. It recommended that all the member States should contact their permanent missions to the United Nations in New York, requesting them to give consistent support to the adoption of the draft resolution. VIII. ADOPTION OF THE PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE COMMITTEE FOR THE PERIOD 1999-2000 The Committee adopted the following programme of work for the period 1999-2000, based on the recommendations of the previous meetings they had organized: A. For the Bureau of the Committee - Study of the measures required to set up a fund to combat crime; - Awareness-raising among the member States with a view to signature and/or ratification of the Non-Aggression Pact and the Mutual Assistance Pact; - Organization of the subregional conference on refugees in preparation for the fourteenth Ministerial Meeting; - Consultations with the United Nations, OAU and ECCAS with a view to launching the early warning mechanism as soon as possible; - Acceleration of the approaches to the United Nations, OAU and ECCAS, by the member States and donor countries in order to permit the conduct of the 98 Biyongho exercise; - Convening of a meeting of experts and parliamentarians in order to establish a network of parliamentarians and seek financing for its operating expenses; - Assistance by the Committee to ECCAS in the revision of the Treaty establishing the Community, particularly in order to take into account the integration of COPAX; - Transmission of the final report on the Subregional Conference on the Proliferation of and Illicit Traffic in Small Arms, held at N'Djamena (Chad) from 25 to 27 October 1999, to the United Nations, OAU, ECCAS and the member States; - Follow-up, in consultation with ECCAS and the Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, of: - The establishment and/or revitalization of the national commissions to coordinate the fight against the proliferation of and illicit traffic in small arms in Central Africa; - The establishment of a standard arms registration system at the national and regional level; - Continuation of consultations with UNHCHR in order to permit the subregional centre for human rights and democracy to operate effectively; - Making of the necessary arrangements to convene a Summit of Heads of State and Government devoted to respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States of Central Africa; - Holding of the thirteenth ministerial meeting devoted to COPAX, at N'Djamena, by the end of April 2000 at the latest; - Holding of the fourteenth ministerial meeting and the subregional conference on refugees, by August 2000 at the latest. B. For States - Signature and/or ratification of the Non-Aggression Pact and the Mutual Assistance Pact; - Establishment or revitalization of the national commissions to coordinate the fight against the proliferation of and illicit traffic of small arms; - Establishment or revitalization of national committees responsible for follow-up of the recommendations of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa. IX. OTHER MATTERS The Committee adopted a special resolution stressing the need to make COPAX operational rapidly and accelerate the revision of the ECCAS Treaty in order to take into account the integration of COPAX into ECCAS. The Committee also requested delegations to ensure that their respective Governments honoured the commitments they had made with regard to their contributions to the budget of ECCAS in order to allow the Secretariat General to implement the decisions taken. Lastly, the participants in the meeting expressed satisfaction at the cordial atmosphere that had prevailed throughout their work and thanked the President of Chad, H.E. M. Idriss Deby, and the Government and people of Chad, for the warm welcome and hospitality extended to them during their stay in N'Djamena. DONE at N'Djamena on 30 October 1999 Appendix I DECLARATION We, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Defence and Security of the member States of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), meeting at N'Djamena (Chad), on 30 October 1999, on the occasion of the twelfth ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa: Considering that tensions, crises and conflicts and also violence persist in Central Africa, Considering that the primary responsibility of each State is to ensure the security and welfare of its people, Emphasizing that there is a close relationship between security and sustainable development, Emphasizing the need to promote development as the means to prevent conflicts and guarantee the stability of States, - Firmly support the implementation of the Chad Export Project (CHAD/CAMEROON Pipeline Project) - Fully adhere to the Declaration of the Heads of State and Government of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) on this project, signed at Bangui on 22 October 1999. For the Republic of Angola: (Signed) Afonso LUNFUANQUENDA Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs For the Republic of Burundi: (Signed) Jacques HAKIZIMANA Adviser in the Cabinet of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation For the Republic of Cameroon: (Signed) Augustin KONTCHOU KOUOMEGNI Minister of State responsible for Foreign Affairs For the Central African Republic: (Signed) Marcel METEFARA Minister for Foreign Affairs and La Francophonie For the Republic of Chad: (Signed) Mahamat SALEH ANNADIF Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation For the Republic of the Congo: (Signed) Rodolphe ADADA Minister of Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and La Francophonie For the Democratic Republic of the Congo: (Signed) Katako MBOLADINGA Ambassador and Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation For the Gabonese Republic: (Signed) Jean-Pierre MENGWANT-ME-NGYEME Minister delegated to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and La Francophonie For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea: (Signed) Jose ELA EBANG Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation For the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe: (Signed) Justino DOS RAMOS LIMA Deputy Commander of the Armed Forces Appendix II SPECIAL RESOLUTION The ministerial meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa: Convinced that the subregion can enjoy sustainable development only in a climate of peace, security and stability; Recalling all the previous decisions taken by the Committee, and particularly those regarding confidence-building measures and the implementation of a mechanism for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts in Central Africa; Recalling, in particular, the Brazzaville Declaration on Cooperation for Peace and Security in Central Africa, the Bata Declaration for the Promotion of Lasting Democracy, Peace and Development in Central Africa and the Yaoundé Declaration on Peace, Security and Stability in Central Africa; Taking into consideration the decisions of their heads of State and Government taken at Yaoundé and at Malabo on the establishment of the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX) and its integration into the structures of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS); Bearing in mind the decision to amend the Treaty establishing ECCAS also taken by our heads of State and Government, at Malabo on 24 June 1999; Bearing in mind also the need to make the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa operational as soon as possible, Decides: 1. To make the effective establishment of the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa the priority of their programme of action; 2. To hold a ministerial meeting of the Committee at N'Djamena in April 2000 to examine the draft texts on integrating COPAX into the structures of ECCAS and making it fully operational; 3. To convene, in preparation for that meeting, a special meeting of experts from the countries of the subregion at the same time as that being organized by the Secretariat General of ECCAS for the sole purpose of preparing the draft texts. It will be held at Malabo before the end of December 1999; 4. That once the draft texts have been examined and adopted by the Ministers, they will be submitted to the heads of State and Government for signature and ratification as provided by the constitution of each member country; Requests the Secretary-General of OAU and the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the European Union, donors, friendly countries and international organizations to give their support to the implementation of this noble objective. DONE at N'Djamena on 29 October 1999 