%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|OBSERVER STATUS|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|

99-32270 (E) 051199 United Nations A/54/577 General Assembly Distr.: General 29 October 1999 English Original: Spanish Fifty-fourth session Agenda item 90 Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects Report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) Rapporteur: Mr. Gualberto Rodríguez San Martín (Bolivia) I. Introduction 1. At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 17 September 1999, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects” and to allocate it to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee). 2. The Fourth Committee considered the item at its 10th to 13th meetings, from 18 to 21 October 1999, and held a general debate on the item at the same meetings (see A/C.4/54/SR.10-13). 3. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (A/54/87) and the report of the Secretary-General on the enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity (A/54/63-S/1999/171). 4. At the 10th meeting, on 18 October, the representative of Egypt, in his capacity as Rapporteur of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, introduced the report of that Committee (see A/C.4/54/SR.10). 5. At the same meeting, the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations made a statement (see A/C.4/54/SR.10). A/54/577 II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.4/54/L.2 6. At the 10th meeting, on 18 October, the Chairman drew attention to the draft resolution entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects” (A/C.4/54/L.2), sponsored by Argentina, Canada, Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and Poland. 7. At the 13th meeting, on 21 October, the Secretary of the Committee made a statement (see A/C.4/54/SR.13). 8. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.4/54/L.2 without a vote (see para. 9). III. Recommendation of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) 9. The Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions, Recalling in particular its resolution 53/58 of 3 December 1998, Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/54/1). Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable, Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the field of peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping operations, Considering the contribution that all States Members of the Organization make to peacekeeping, Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations expressed by many Member States, in particular troop-contributing countries, Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee, 1. Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations; A/54/87. 2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee, contained in paragraphs 43 to 130 of its report; 3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take all necessary steps to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee; 4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to United Nations peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the future in the Special Committee for three consecutive years as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chairman of the Special Committee, become members at the following session of the Special Committee; 5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects and shall review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this field; 6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session; 7. Decides to keep open during its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”. 