%%%HUMAN SETTLEMENTS|SETTLEMENT POLICY|RESOURCES ALLOCATION|FUND-RAISING|CONFERENCES|

United Nations A/54/587/Add.2 General Assembly Distr.: General 10 December 1999 English Original: Arabic Fifty-fourth session Agenda item 99 (b) Sustainable development and international economic cooperation: implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) Report of the Second Committee The report of the Committee on this item will be issued in nine parts, under the symbol A/53/587 and Add.1-8. Rapporteur: Mr. Hussam Edin A’Ala (Syrian Arab Republic) I. Introduction 1. The Second Committee held a substantive debate on agenda item 99 (see A/54/587, para. 2). Action on sub-item (b) was taken at the 25th, 42nd, 46th and 47th meetings, on 28 October and 18 November and on 3 and 7 December 1999. An account of the Committee’s consideration of the item is contained in the relevant summary records (A/C.2/54/SR.25, 42, 46 and 47). II. Consideration of proposals A. Draft resolutions A/C.2/54/L.12 and A/C.2/54/L.33 2. At the 25th meeting, on 28 October, the representative of Guyana, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Preparations for the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda” (A/C.2/54/L.12) which read: “The General Assembly, “Recalling its resolution 53/180 of 15 December 1998, in which, inter alia, it decided that the special session for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) would be held in June 2001 for a period of three working days, and that the Commission on Human Settlements should serve as the Preparatory Committee for the special session, “Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the special session on its organizational session, “1. Endorses the decisions of the Preparatory Committee, in particular regarding its rules of procedure and the dates, venue and provisional agenda for its first substantive session; “2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session an item entitled ‘Preparations for the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)’.” 3. At the 42nd meeting, on 18 November, the Vice-Chairman of the Committee, Alexandru Niculescu (Romania), introduced a draft resolution entitled “Preparations for the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda” (A/C.2/54/L.33), submitted on the basis of informal consultations held on draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.12. 4. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.33 (see para. 13, draft resolution I). 5. In the light of the adoption of the draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.33, draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.12 was withdrawn by its sponsors. B. Draft resolutions A/C.2/54/L.13 and A/C.2/54/L.66 6. At the 25th meeting, on 28 October, the representative of Guyana, on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)” (A/C.2/54/L.13), which read: “Recalling its resolution 51/177 of 16 December 1996, in which it endorsed the Istanbul Declaration on Human Settlements and the Habitat Agenda, adopted by the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) at Istanbul on 14 June 1996, “Further recalling its resolutions 52/190 of 18 December 1997 and 52/192 of 18 December 1997 on the follow-up to decisions of Habitat II and the future role of the Commission on Human Settlements, “Also recalling its resolution 53/242 of 28 July 1999 on environment and human settlements, “Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on environment and human settlements, “Having also considered the report of the Commission on Human Settlements on the work of its seventeenth session, A/54/587/Add.2 “1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Commission on Human Settlements on the work of its seventeenth session; “2. Welcomes the steps taken by the Acting Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements to strengthen the normative and operational activities of the Centre so as to enable it to effectively exercise its vital role as focal point for the implementation of the Habitat Agenda; “3. Welcomes the progress made by the Acting Executive Director in the revitalization of the Centre, and further welcomes the decision of the Commission on Human Settlements mandating the Executive Director to implement the Centre's new strategic vision comprehensively through the launching of the Global Campaign for Secure Tenure and the Global Campaign on Urban Governance; “4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the staffing of the new organizational structure is completed as a matter of urgency in accordance with the principle of equitable geographical representation and gender balance, in accordance with the relevant United Nations rules and regulations; “5. Also requests the Secretary-General as a matter of urgency to appoint a full-time Executive Director for the Centre in accordance with General Assembly resolution 53/242; “6. Takes note of the increased cooperation and collaboration between the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements and the United Nations Environment Programme within the framework of their respective mandates and separate programmatic, budgetary and organizational identities; “7. Calls upon Governments to ensure the provision of sufficient financial support to the Centre; “8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide additional resources from the regular budget to the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements in accordance with current budgetary practices and procedures; “9. Welcomes the decision by the Economic and Social Council to devote its coordination segment in the year 2000 to human settlements issues and the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the report submitted to the Council under the segment along with its recommendations be made available to the General Assembly for its consideration under the sub-item entitled ‘Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)’; “10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution; “11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the sub-item entitled ‘Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)’.” 7. At the 47th meeting, on 7 December, the Vice-Chairman of the Committee, Alexandru Niculescu (Romania), introduced a draft resolution entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)” (A/C.2/54/L.66), submitted on the basis of informal consultations held on draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.13. 8. At the same meeting, the Secretary of the Committee read out a statement of the programme budget implications pertaining to draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.66. 9. Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.66 (see para. 13, draft resolution II). 10. In the light of the adoption of draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.66, draft resolution A/C.2/54/L.13 was withdrawn by its sponsors. C. Draft resolution recommended by the Commission on Human Settlements 11. At the 46th meeting, on 3 December, the Vice-Chairman of the Committee, Alexandru Niculescu (Romania), informed the Committee on the outcome of the informal consultations held on a draft resolution entitled “Follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)”, which was recommended by the Commission on Human Settlements at its seventeenth session for adoption by the General Assembly. See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/54/8), annex I, sect. A.1, resolution 17/1. 12. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted the draft resolution (see para. 13, draft resolution III). III. Recommendations of the Second Committee 13. The Second Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolutions: Draft resolution I Preparations for the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda The General Assembly, Recalling its resolution 53/180 of 15 December 1998, in which, inter alia, it decided that the special session for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) would be held in June 2001 for a period of three working days, and that the Commission on Human Settlements should serve as the Preparatory Committee for the special session, Having considered the report of the Commission on Human Settlements acting as Preparatory Committee for the special session on its organizational session, See A/54/322. 1. Endorses the decisions of the Commission on Human Settlements acting as the Preparatory Committee for the special session, in particular regarding its rules of procedure and the dates, venue and provisional agenda for its first substantive session; Ibid., chaps. V and VI. 2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)”. Draft resolution II Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) Recalling its resolution 51/177 of 16 December 1996, in which it endorsed the Istanbul Declaration on Human Settlements Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, Istanbul, 3-14 June 1996 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I. and the Habitat Agenda, Ibid., annex II. adopted by the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) at Istanbul on 14 June 1996, Recalling also its resolutions 52/190 of 18 December 1997 and 52/192 of 18 December 1997 on the follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and the future role of the Commission on Human Settlements, Recalling further its resolution 53/242 of 28 July 1999 concerning environment and human settlements, Having considered the report of the Commission on Human Settlements on the work of its seventeenth session, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/54/8). 1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Commission on Human Settlements on the work of its seventeenth session;6 2. Welcomes the steps taken by the Acting Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements to strengthen the capacity of the Centre, in particular the normative area, and to improve the linkages between the normative and operational activities of the Centre so as to enable it to effectively exercise its vital role as focal point for the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;5 3. Welcomes the progress made by the Acting Executive Director in the revitalization of the Centre, and encourages the Executive Director to implement fully, as a matter of urgency, all administrative and financial management reforms, as part of the ongoing revitalization process; 4. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the staffing of the new organizational structure is completed as a matter of urgency in accordance with the principle of equitable geographical representation and gender balance, including, in particular, improving the status of women in the Secretariat, and bearing in mind the need for recruitment of qualified staff in accordance with the relevant United Nations rules and regulations; 5. Also requests the Secretary-General as a matter of urgency to appoint a full-time Executive Director for the Centre in accordance with General Assembly resolution 53/242; 6. Takes note of the increased cooperation and collaboration between the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements and the United Nations Environment Programme within the framework of their respective mandates and separate programmatic, budgetary and organizational identities with a view to improving the effectiveness of their work; 7. Stresses the importance of strengthening the United Nations Office at Nairobi as the only United Nations headquarters located in a developing country; 8. Calls upon all countries to ensure the provision of sufficient financial resources, on a stable and predictable basis, for the successful implementation of the work programme for the biennium 2000-2001, and reiterates the recognition by the Commission on Human Settlements at its seventeenth session that this implementation will require substantial additional funding and its request to the Executive Director to raise more funds from all sources and to broaden the donor base; 9. Calls upon the Secretary-General to provide the necessary resources from the regular budget to the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements for the biennium 2000-2001 in accordance with current budgetary practices and procedures; 10. Welcomes the decision by the Economic and Social Council to discuss human settlements issues at its coordination segment in 2000 and to have as its sectoral theme the coordinated implementation by the United Nations system of the Habitat Agenda See Economic and Social Council decision 1999/281 of 30 July 1999. , and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the report submitted to the Council on the question, along with the recommendations of the Council thereon, be made available to the General Assembly for its consideration under the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)”; 11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution; 12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the sub-item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)”. Draft resolution III Follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) Bearing in mind its resolutions 52/192 of 18 December 1997 on the follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and the future role of the Commission on Human Settlements and 53/180 of 15 December 1998 on the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, Noting that the work programme for the biennium 2000-2001 approved by the Commission on Human Settlements at its seventeenth session, See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/54/8), annex I, sect. A.2, resolution 17/20. in line with General Assembly resolution 52/192, is organized according to the structure of the Habitat Agenda, Noting also that the two subprogrammes of the work programme for the biennium 2000-2001 correspond to the goals of the Habitat Agenda Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, Istanbul, 3-14 June 1996 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II. adequate shelter for all and sustainable human settlements development in an urbanizing world, Recognizing that the overall thrust of the new strategic vision for the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements and its emphasis on two global campaigns — on secure tenure and urban governance — are strategic points of entry for effective implementation of the Habitat Agenda, Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements as focal point for the implementation of the Habitat Agenda and the need for the Centre adequately to perform this role through the active mobilization and broadening of its network of United Nations, governmental and non-governmental partners, Stressing the need to provide strategic support to the efforts of local authorities and partners from civil society in the global, regional and local implementation of the Habitat Agenda, 1. Calls upon all relevant United Nations organizations and specialized agencies to take initiatives and continue with their specific actions towards the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;9 2. Also calls upon relevant United Nations organizations and specialized agencies that have not yet done so to identify specific initiatives and actions to be undertaken in preparation for the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda; 3. Invites the United Nations coordinator system to strengthen its support to the implementation of the Habitat Agenda through, inter alia, assistance in the implementation of national local plans of action based on the full involvement of local authorities and partners from civil society; 4. Calls upon all Member States to initiate preparations for reporting on in-country implementation of the Habitat Agenda, in line with the recommendations by the Commission on Human Settlements as described in its resolution 17/1 of 14 May 1999, See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/54/8), annex I, sect. A.1. with a view to contributing fully to the preparatory process for the special session of the General Assembly to be held in the year 2001 for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda including the strengthening and activation, wherever necessary, of national coordination mechanisms, inclusive of local authorities and civil society partners, along the models pioneered at the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II); 5. Invites all Member States in a position to do so to provide financial resources for the preparatory process for the special session, in particular to enable least developed countries and their national civil-society partners to prepare adequately for and be fully involved in the preparatory process and the special session itself. 