%%%DIPLOMATIC VEHICLES|HOST COUNTRY RELATIONS|PERMANENT MISSIONS|TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS|UNITED STATES|AUTOMOBILE PARKING|

United Nations A/54/612 General Assembly Distr.: General 30 November 1999 Original: English Fifty-fourth session Agenda item 157 Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country Report of the Sixth Committee Rapporteur: Mr. Joško Klisović (Croatia) I. Introduction 1. The item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country” was included in the provisional agenda of the fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly pursuant to Assembly resolution 53/104 of 8 December 1998. 2. At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 17 September 1999, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee. 3. The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 35th meeting, on 18 November 1999. The views of the representatives who spoke during the Committee’s consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary record (A/C.6/54/SR.35). 4. For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country. Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/54/26). 5. At the 35th meeting, on 18 November, the Chairman of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country introduced the report of the Committee (see A/C.6/54/SR.35). II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/54/L.17 6. At the 35th meeting, on 18 November, the representative of Cyprus, on behalf of Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire and Cyprus, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country” (A/C.6/54/L.17) and orally revised the fifth preambular paragraph by introducing a footnote to the words “four additional Member States”, reading: “Cuba, Hungary, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Malaysia”. 7. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/54/L.17, as orally revised, without a vote (see para. 8). III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee 8. The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution: The General Assembly, Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, Ibid. Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, Resolution 22 A (I). the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations See resolution 169 (II). and the responsibilities of the host country, Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel, Noting the spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding that has guided the deliberations of the Committee on issues affecting the United Nations community and the host country, Noting also that the membership of the Committee has been increased by four additional Member States, Cuba, Hungary, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Malaysia. and welcoming their participation in the work of the Committee, 1. Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 43 of its report;2 2. Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations is in the interest of the United Nations and all Member States, and requests the host country to continue to take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with the functioning of missions; 3. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host country, and hopes that the issues raised at the meetings of the Committee will continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law; 4. Notes that during the reporting period the travel controls previously imposed by the host country on staff of certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities remained in effect, and requests the host country to consider removing such travel controls, and in this regard notes the positions of affected States, of the Secretary-General and of the host country; A/54/612 5. Requests the host country to continue to take steps to resolve the problem relating to the parking of diplomatic vehicles in a fair, balanced and non-discriminatory way, with a view to responding to the growing needs of the diplomatic community, and to continue to consult with the Committee on this important issue; 6. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of the relations of the United Nations with the host country; 7. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971; 8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session the item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”. 