%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|PROPERTY|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|

99-39086 (E) 161299 United Nations A/54/669 General Assembly Distr.: General 15 December 1999 Original: English Fifty-fourth session Agenda item 151 Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations Losses of United Nations property in peacekeeping operations Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report has been submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 53/230 of 8 June 1999 on the financing and liquidation of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, and 53/235 of 8 June 1999 on the financing of the Military Observer Group of the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to provide an updated report on losses of United Nations property in peacekeeping operations to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session. A/54/669 Contents Paragraphs Page I. Introduction II. United Nations property lost during the reporting period III. Causes of losses IV. Measures taken to mitigate losses V. Action to be taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session Annexes I. Summary of losses of United Nations property in peacekeeping operations, due to all means, for the two-year period from 1 January 1996 to 31 December 1997, excluding the United Nations Peace Forces II. Summary of losses of United Nations property in the United Nations Peace Forces 1. Following its consideration of the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing and liquidation of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) (A/53/340) and on the financing of the Military Observer Group of the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) (A/53/775), the General Assembly, in its resolutions 53/230 and 53/235, respectively, requested the Secretary-General to provide an updated report to the Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on losses of United Nations property in peacekeeping operations. The General Assembly also requested the Secretary-General to report on the safety measures taken with regard to the protection of United Nations assets. 2. It will be recalled that the Secretary-General, in his report on the losses of United Nations property in UNTAC (A/53/340), provided a comprehensive analysis of the types and causes of loss of assets covering the three years from 1 January 1993 to 31 December 1995. The detailed review included the definition of terms utilized to categorize the various types of losses, the methodology used for determining the value of the assets and the measures instituted to limit losses, and a description of the initiatives undertaken by the Secretariat to mitigate losses of United Nations property during the period from 1993 to 1998. The present report, using the same categorization and methodology, provides statistics on losses of United Nations property in peacekeeping missions for the period from 1 January 1996 to 31 December 1997, and an update on additional measures taken to ensure the safety of assets since 1998. 3. The data contained in the present report have been compiled from documentation presented to the Property Survey Boards established for each mission, following the same methodology as that used in the report of the Secretary-General contained in document A/53/340. The Boards’ case files take into account all property lost in a single incident, and may therefore include various spare parts and accessories of low value contained in the units, which are not listed separately. 4. For the purpose of this reporting exercise, the term “United Nations property” refers to non-expendable items valued at $1,500 or more per unit at the time of acquisition, and special items that are considered to be of an attractive nature and have a minimum value of $500, such as televisions, cameras and video equipment. The various causes of loss are defined as accidents, acts of war or hostilities, theft, negligence and items that are unaccounted for. The information provided excludes those assets that have been written off or disposed of, owing to normal wear and tear, or because of obsolescence. 5. The data collected from the field missions and consolidated into the present report include all peacekeeping missions that were operational or under liquidation during 1996-1997, with the exception of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR), for which the liquidation exercise has just been finalized. It is expected that the report of the Secretary-General on the final disposition of assets with regard to UNAMIR will be presented to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session. 6. Information from the following peacekeeping missions is included in a consolidated manner in the present report: MINUGUA, United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), United Nations Force in Cyprus, (UNFICYP), United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation Mission (UNIKOM), United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH), United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP), United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), United Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) and United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO). Although the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi is not a peacekeeping mission, it constitutes a large operation in terms of its inventory size and its data on losses are therefore included in this exercise. 7. Because of the vast size of property holdings of the United Nations Peace Forces (UNPF), data on the loss of assets in UNPF during the period under review is presented separately in annex II. Additional information on the disposal of assets by UNPF is available in the report of the Secretary-General to the General Assembly on the financing of the United Nations Protection Force, the United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia, UNPREDEP and UNPF headquarters (A/52/792). 8. Table 1 summarizes total losses by cause of loss, and table 2 provides a breakdown of losses by category of property. More detailed information on losses by category is provided in annex I. Table 3 provides a breakdown of losses due to theft. Table 1 Total losses by cause of loss (excluding the United Nations Peace Forces) (United States dollars) Year Accidents Negligence Acts of war/ hostilities Theft Unaccounted for Total inventory value of losses (Total (1)-(5)) Residual value Number of items lost Total Table 2 Total losses, by category of property (excluding the United Nations Peace Forces) Inventory value Category (Percentage of total inventory value) Residual value Vehicles Infrastructure, prefabricated hard-wall and soft-wall accommodations, container units and accommodation equipment and accessories Data-processing equipment VHF/UHF/HF and satellite equipment Telephone, fax, miscellaneous communications equipment and public information equipment Radio station and test/workshop equipment Generators Other equipment a 11 458 096 b a Including office equipment and furniture, observation equipment, petrol tank and metering equipment, water purification equipment, refrigeration equipment, miscellaneous equipment and mine-clearing equipment. b Total value includes high-value and low-value items, for example, prefabricated containers and related accessories, and generators and generator accessories and spare parts. Table 3 Losses due to theft (excluding the United Nations Peace Forces) Transport vehicles 4 898 025 b a Including office equipment and furniture, observation equipment, petrol tank and metering equipment, water purification equipment, refrigeration equipment, mine-clearing equipment, air-conditioners, etc. 9. Since they often operate in dangerous and volatile environments, peacekeeping missions face particularly difficult conditions with regard to the safeguarding of United Nations property. A case in point is UNOMIL which, as a result of the outbreak of hostilities in April 1996, suffered mass looting, general destruction of United Nations property and losses of assets, with an estimated inventory value of $3.8 million. Despite dangerous security conditions in Monrovia at the time, UNOMIL staff made efforts to secure property by arranging to transfer equipment to neighbouring Sierra Leone. However, as a result of a coup in that country in May 1997, a large portion of the relocated assets were also looted. Nevertheless, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General (A/53/340, paras. 13-14), valuable lessons drawn from missions such as UNTAC and UNPF have facilitated pre-emptive and remedial actions in other missions that are either ongoing or are in liquidation. 10. Inevitably, in the environment in which a peacekeeping mission operates, where law and order are not adequately maintained, weapons are readily available and socio-economic conditions place the local population, both civilian and military, in trying conditions which, in turn, contributes to difficult security conditions for the Organization. Protecting United Nations assets under such circumstances requires considerable effort on the part of mission personnel. As explained in detail in the report of the Secretary-General on UNTAC, measures have been instituted in peacekeeping operations in recent years to mitigate losses, ranging from the installation of physical protection devices and the assignment of additional security personnel, to the issuance of strict instructions on the use of high value assets such as vehicles, and the installation of control and monitoring devices. 11. Since the submission of the report of the Secretary-General in September 1998, the Secretariat has made progress in its ongoing efforts to safeguard United Nations property. With a view to providing an auditable chain of accountability for United Nations assets from their initial procurement to their final disposal, the field asset control system was developed to ensure that United Nations property is properly recorded, accounted for and controlled, and that appropriate decisions are made on the procurement, delivery, redistribution, replenishment, storage, write-off and disposal of mission equipment. 12. In September 1998, the Field Administration and Logistics Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations began implementing the system, which is expected to be fully operational in all missions by the end of 1999. The system can currently account for all non-expendable assets, consisting of items of property or equipment valued at $1,500 or more per unit at the time of purchase and with a serviceable life of five years or more. Items of lesser value, but not below $500, which are considered attractive, are also included. 13. With the implementation of the field asset control system, assets are now tracked from the onset to the liquidation stages of a mission in a controlled and coordinated manner. However, the mere existence of such a system is not sufficient to ensure adequate protection of United Nations property; it is crucial that missions be provided with sufficient numbers of experienced personnel, particularly during the early and final phases. Nevertheless, losses due to heightened insecurity in mission areas and acts of war or hostilities, as in the case of UNOMIL and, more recently, in the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone and the United Nations Mission in East Timor, are unavoidable. Experience shows that the commitment of host Governments to ensuring the protection of mission personnel and assets is also a crucial factor in terms of facilitating security. 14. With regard to the accountability procedures in place to deter loss of or damage to United Nations assets, all personnel are subject to United Nations financial and personnel regulations and rules. These documents establish responsibilities of staff, applicable disciplinary measures and recovery action that may be taken against them in this context. Furthermore, in order to reduce the number of incidents in which United Nations property is damaged or lost in peacekeeping operations, United Nations personnel are regularly reminded, through the issuance of administrative instructions and circulars, to take care of the property assigned to them. They are also made aware of the consequences if they are found to have been responsible for the loss or damage. 15. Efforts are ongoing to inculcate accountability as an integral part of the management culture. At the same time, it is pertinent to note that accountability is not merely the imposition of restrictions and sanctions. It also involves the clear definition of functions and responsibilities, regular training and a fair and accurate individual performance evaluation system. The Organization can only hold persons accountable when responsibilities are clearly spelled out. 16. The Field and Logistics Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is combining specific field requirements with the performance appraisal system. Enhanced monitoring systems can be built through the definition of performance indicators as a measure of quality control to assess the health of a process and to function as early warning systems, as well as through the further development of a flexible and user-friendly electronic reporting facility. 17. Notwithstanding the above, the Secretariat considers that an efficient recovery mechanism is one of the best means to ensure accountability of those responsible for losses of United Nations assets. However, written instructions and directives are effective only when their application is uniform and timely. In this connection, prompt action by the Property Survey Boards in the missions and Headquarters is essential. It is with this aim in mind that the Secretariat is reviewing a proposal to amend the delegation of authority to the field that would permit local property survey boards to assess United Nations personnel up to $500. 18. With regard to accountability of United Nations military and civilian police observers for losses of or damage to United Nations property caused by them, the current common practice in field missions is to withhold two weeks of mission subsistence allowance entitlements prior to the departure of the military or police observers concerned, in respect of cases in which they are involved, pending the taking of a decision by the Headquarters Property Survey Board. However, in a number of such cases, the amounts retained have proved to be insufficient to compensate the Organization. 19. Since contingent personnel and members of formed police units do not serve in an individual capacity, cases of loss or damage to United Nations property by those categories of personnel are handled directly with the Governments involved. 20. Finally, it is noted that, as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 53/225 of 8 June 1993, the Secretariat is preparing a follow-up to the report of the Secretary-General on management irregularities causing financial losses to the Organization (A/53/849). In preparing the report, the Secretary-General has been asked to take into account, among other related financial issues, measures to improve internal control and accountability. 21. The action required of the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on the losses of United Nations assets in peacekeeping operations is that it take note of the updated information contained in the present report and of the efforts made by the Secretariat and by peacekeeping missions to protect United Nations property. Annex I Summary of losses of United Nations property in peacekeeping operations due to all means for the two-year period from 1 January 1996 to 31 December 1997, excluding the United Nations Peace Forces Annex II Summary of losses of United Nations property in the United Nations Peace Forces Pages 9 to 19 prepared for offset 