%%%SUBSIDIARY BODIES|PROGRAMME PLANNING|LIAISON OFFICES|MEDIUM-TERM PLANNING|

99-11758 (E) 030599 United Nations A/54/6 (Part one) (annex) General Assembly Distr.: General 23 April 1999 Original: English Fifty-fourth session Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001* Part one (annex) Recurrent outputs not to be carried out in the biennium 2000-2001 * The present document contains part one (annex) of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001. The complete proposed programme budget will subsequently be issued in final printed form as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/54/6/Rev.1). 1. The General Assembly, in its resolution 53/207 of 18 December 1998, approved the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the revisions to the Regulations and Rules Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the Budget, Monitoring of Implementation and the Methods of Evaluation submitted by the Secretary-General in his report (A/53/133). 2. In accordance with Regulation 5.6, the Secretary-General would provide the General Assembly with a list of outputs included in the programme budget for the biennium 1998–1999 which, in his judgement can be discontinued and as a consequence, not included in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001. 3. In response to resolution 53/207, the table below presents the recurrent outputs that are in the programme budget for the current biennium, but which are not included in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001, and the justification for exclusion. Introduction Recurrent output to be discontinued Reason for discontinuation Section 14. Crime prevention and criminal justice Seven recurrent publications — Trends: United Nations Criminal Justice Information Network (UNCJIN) The publication has lost its programmatic relevance. Information which would have appeared therein will be made available on-line via the UNCJIN database. Section 15. International drug control Subprogramme 3: Prevention and reduction of drug abuse, elimination of illicit crops and suppression of illicit drug trafficking One expert group meeting on demand reduction and techniques of assessment of level of drug abuse. The expert group was originally set up to produce recommendations and a plan of action on improving the collection and analysis of drug abuse data in connection with the implementation of the Internal Drug Abuse Assessment System (A/RES/S-17-2, Economic and Social Council resolutions 1991/45, 1991/46 and 1993/35). The issue is now addressed in the Political Declaration and the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session in terms of key indicators on drug abuse and the establishment of an on-line information data collection system for the Internal Drug Abuse Assessment System. Section 16. Economic and social development in Africa Subprogramme 1: Facilitating economic and social policy analysis Report on the state of African children The publication is subsumed in the Survey of Economic and Social Conditions in Africa. Investment Focus The publication is not carried out, due to the abolition of the Joint ECA/UNCTAD Unit. Status report on poverty in Africa Subprogramme 2: Enhancing food security and sustainable development Information bulletin on water resources activities in Africa The bulletin has been reformulated and subsumed in Policy Briefs on Environment and Water Resources. Subprogramme 3: Strengthening development management Publication on peace and security in the African region The newsletter on public sector management in Africa is being broadened and renamed Development Management Newsletter and will address issues currently covered in the peace and security publication. People First newsletter The newsletter on public sector management in Africa is being broadened and renamed Development Management Newsletter and will address issues currently covered in the People First newsletter. Subprogramme 4: Harnessing information for development Africa in Figures The publication is to be replaced by an electronic database. Statistical annex to the Survey of Economic and Social Conditions in Africa The new format of the Survey of Economic and Social Conditions in Africa will not require a separate annex. Establishment of the Electronic Data Interchange for Administration, Commerce and Transport (EDIFACT) apparatus in the region This output is not relevant to the activities planned for the biennium 2000–2001. Acquisition, establishment and distribution of dynamic, regional data archive covering African Household Survey data files Subprogramme 6: Promoting the advancement of women Directory of women leaders in Africa As part of the new strategic direction of the African Centre for Women and requests from Member States, there has been a change of focus. The publication is being replaced by a compendium of good practices. Section 17. Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific Subprogramme 1: Regional economic cooperation Annual Trade Review of the Bangkok Agreement (2 issues per biennium) The review of trade of the members of the Bangkok Agreement will be incorporated into the relevant background documentation for the meeting of the Standing Committee meeting of the Bangkok Agreement. Subprogramme 4: Population and rural and urban development Fertilizer Trade Information, Monthly Bulletin (24 issues per biennium) The resources allocated to this publication have been discontinued by the donor, effective 1999. The publication is discontinued, due to (a) streamlining of the publications under this subprogramme; and (b) alternative dissemination of information through electronic issuance. Section 20. Economic and social development in Western Asia Human settlements in the Arab world: human settlements data sheets Human settlements indicators formerly covered by this publication will be addressed under the umbrella of a number of multidisciplinary activities on social indicators (data sheets, workshops). Section 22. Human rights Subprogramme 3: Advisory services, technical cooperation, support to human rights fact-finding procedures and field activities Report of the Special Rapporteur on Cuba The Special Rapporteur’s mandate was not renewed. Report of the Independent Expert on Guatemala The Independent Expert’s mandate was not renewed. Administrative Committee on Coordination machinery 4. In its report A/52/7 (chap. II, part IV, para. IV.4), the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions indicated that the number of meetings and the cost of the Administrative Committee on Coordination and its machinery should be more transparent. To that end, the Committee requested that the Secretary-General, as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, include in the next budget information in that regard, as well as information on the subsidiary machinery of the Committee. The following attempts to address the concerns of the Advisory Committee. 5. Given the nature of much of the work undertaken within the machinery of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, and the role that the United Nations Secretariat is called upon to play within that machinery, costs directly related to the work of the Administrative Committee on Coordination machinery cannot be readily separated, under the present budget structure, from costs related to the overall management of the relevant programmes and to the provision of substantive support to the intergovernmental machinery. Apart from the new Office of Inter-Agency Affairs (which is itself mostly staffed through secondment from other agencies and organizations) there is no unit or staff in the Secretariat assigned full time to Administrative Committee on Coordination-related activities, the degree of their engagement in those activities being a direct reflection of their substantive responsibilities for programme management, and of the inter-agency dimensions of the mandates of the intergovernmental bodies that they are called upon to support. 6. As to the resource requirements of the Administrative Committee on Coordination and most of its subsidiary bodies, these are met through indirect budgeting. Although references to Administrative Committee on Coordination-related activities are to be found throughout the budgetary proposals, as in the case of sections 1, 2, 8, 9, 13, 15, 16, 26 and 27, there is no direct provision made in all cases either for travel to participate in meetings or preparation of reports and studies. Such requirements appear largely within the programme of work of the respective sections. Further, it is the practice of some programme managers to programme their participation in Administrative Committee on Coordination-related meetings by combining them with other programmed activities, thus avoiding additional non-staff costs. 7. In the case of section 9, $280,700 is included in the budget for the Office of Inter-Agency Affairs for the servicing of the subsidiary bodies for which the Department of Economic and Social Affairs is responsible. These relate only to the fees of consultants and provisions for travel, but not the staff costs. 8. As indicated in the table below, there are a few bodies for which direct budgetary provisions or grants are made. The costs of those bodies are apportioned among the member organizations of the Administrative Committee on Coordination. But the majority of them operate on the basis of staff assigned to carry out the Administrative Committee on Coordination-related functions as a part of their regular programme of work, including such costs as may be necessary for travel of staff to meetings. United Nations share ACC subsidiary body Estimated budget Percentage Consultative Committee on Administrative Questions Inter-Agency Committee on Women and Gender Equity N/D/B* Inter-Agency Committee on Sustainable Development Consultative Committee on Programme and Operational Questions Information Systems Coordination Committee Joint United Nations Information Committee Inter-organizational Security Measures Subcommittee on Water Resources Subcommittee on Oceans and Coastal Areas Subcommittee on Statistical Activities Subcommittee on Demographic Estimates and Projections Subcommittee on Nutrition Subcommittee on Drug Control * No direct budgeting. ** Grant authorized under Economic and Social Council resolution 2107 (LXIII). Liaison offices 9. In its report on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1998–1999, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions took particular note of proposals related to liaison offices. The Committee indicated that, while the level of resources devoted to liaison offices was considerable, for some offices, it was not clear what was actually being accomplished and others seemed understaffed to carry out the stated objectives. 10. In that context, the Advisory Committee believed that there was a need to carry out a thorough review of liaison offices to determine what tasks still needed to be carried out by them in view of the ability to communicate instantly around the world and to reflect the results of such a review in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001. The following attempts to address the request of the Advisory Committee. 11. A number of United Nations activities and programmes operate with liaison offices in New York: the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), the United Nations Drug Control Programme, the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the United Nations Office at Vienna and the five regional commissions: the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) and the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA), which share the regional office in New York. 12. In addition, several other United Nations entities operate liaison offices in New York, among them, the World Food Programme (WFP), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR), the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) and the United Nations University (UNU). These are, however, not addressed hereunder. 13. The main functions of liaison offices include representation, coordination and harmonization. However, the situation is diverse among the various liaison offices. For example a number of liaison offices (UNCTAD, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements, UNHCR, UNRWA) are part of the Executive and Direction Management; a few others, such as the Regional Commissions New York Office which represents the five regional commissions, or the combined liaison office for the United Nations Drug Control Programme and the United Nations Office at Vienna, share a consolidated liaison office. Some liaison offices have been merged into regional offices; for example, the UNEP regional offices for Europe and North America perform liaison functions for UNEP at Geneva and New York Headquarters, respectively; and other liaison offices carry out special functions, for example UNHCR and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 14. Funding for the liaison offices also differ, with some funded (a) solely, under the regular budget and reflected accordingly under the corresponding budget section in the proposed programme budget for 2000–2001; (b) jointly, from regular budget and extrabudgetary resources; and (c) solely, through extrabudgetary resources. 15. In the present budget proposals, resources proposed under the regular budget for liaison office operations reflect an overall increase from the resources available in the 1998–1999 revised appropriation, largely attributable to posts. However, the intention is for extrabudgetary resources to remain unchanged from the 1998–1999 level. 16. The Regional Commissions New York Office serves the interest of the five regional commissions and is the focal point for all aspects of the substantive and operational activities of the five regional commissions with the departments, offices and programmes at United Nations Headquarters, as well as with United Nations funds and programmes based in New York. Further, it maintains contact, on behalf of the regional commissions, with permanent missions of Member States to the United Nations, relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the public in New York. It provides the commissions with analyses and syntheses of developments as they occur during the course of meetings of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council and their subsidiary bodies, as well as United Nations inter-agency meetings held at Headquarters. 17. The Office is also responsible for the publication of a biennial newsletter in hard copy, as well as on the United Nations home page on the World Wide Web, that is circulated to delegations, relevant departments and programmes of the United Nations and agencies of the United Nations system, other interested institutions and the general public; preparation of the annual report of the Secretary-General on regional cooperation in the economic, social and related fields, which is submitted to the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session; and provision of substantive servicing to the Council during its consideration of the regional cooperation item. 18. Resources for the Office are budgeted separately under section 16B of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001 and largely reflect staff costs for its six regular budget posts (three Professional and higher category and three General Service) and a smaller provision for non-post requirements related to other staff costs, travel hospitality and general operating expenses. 19. The United Nations Office at Vienna and the United Nations International Drug Control Programme share a common liaison office in New York as part of the Office of the Director-General of the United Nations Office at Vienna. In ensuring effective liaison with other United Nations partners at Headquarters, the office interacts with the Executive Office of the Secretary-General and other units of the Secretariat at Headquarters. In particular, it works with the United Nations Development Group, the Executive Committee on Economic and Social Matters and the United Nations Development Assistance Framework. It promotes the objectives of the Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention among delegations at Headquarters and also maintains close liaison with the international financial institutions in Washington, D.C. to ensure their continued support on anti-money-laundering activities and for the business plans for international drug control. 20. Post resources for the liaison office are funded jointly from regular budget and extrabudgetary sources: two posts (one Professional and higher category and one General Service) from regular budget sources and four posts (three Professional and higher category and one General Service) from extrabudgetary sources of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme. The non-post resources are funded exclusively from extrabudgetary sources and no change to the existing level is envisaged for the biennium 2000–2001. 21. The liaison office for the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) provides substantive support during intergovernmental consideration of matters relating to UNCTAD in the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other relevant intergovernmental bodies and their secretariats; maintains liaison with permanent missions; maintains substantive contacts with Headquarters departments of the United Nations, including the funds and programmes; cooperates with other liaison offices; organizes special events; and undertakes public outreach activities. 22. The liaison office forms part of the Executive and Direction Management component of UNCTAD, and its resources, funded from the regular budget under section 11A of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001, relate to posts (one at the Professional and higher category level and two General Service) and travel. 23. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) maintains liaison functions in New York (Regional Office for North America) and Geneva (Regional Office for Europe). The decision of the Executive Director to include all regional coordination and representation activities in the Environment Fund Programme activities was in response to the wishes of the Governing Council which, at its nineteenth session, held in February 1997, underscored the role of the regional offices and requested the Executive Director to strengthen them by providing appropriate functional capabilities to enable decentralized implementation of regional environment programmes and priorities. 24. By representing the function of regional cooperation and representation as a subprogramme/division in its programme structure, the Executive Director is building on the functional structure which he had proposed to the Governing Council at its special session held in May 1998, and which the Governing Council had favourably received, requesting him to develop the proposal further. 25. As part of their varied functions, the regional offices, inter alia, represent UNEP in the region by undertaking relevant information and data gathering and, as necessary, bringing regional perspectives to the development of UNEP policy and programmes; present UNEP global policies in the region and enlists support for them at all levels; implement and complement relevant parts of the global programmes of UNEP through initiating and coordinating regional and subregional cooperation and action in response to environmental problems and emergencies; assist in the development of policies and programmes on global and regional environmental issues between and within Governments in the region; provide advisory services to help Governments translate global commitments into national action for the protection and enhancement of the environment; raise public awareness of environmental problems and create a constituency for environmental action; promote cooperation between UNEP, non-governmental organizations and the private sector; mobilize financial resources for UNEP, especially its activities in the regions; serve as liaison offices in promoting cooperation and coordination between organizations and agencies of the United Nations system and other region-based institutions; and provide substantive and logistical support to region-based UNEP programmes, for example, the environment assessment programme. 26. Resources proposed under the regular budget for the biennium 2000–2001 cover six posts based in New York (three Professional and higher category and two General Service) and four posts based in Geneva (two Professional and higher category and two General Service). In addition, resources are included for non-post items, notably other staff costs, travel and general operating expenses, amounting to $97, 800 for New York and $45,500 for Geneva. 27. The liaison office for the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) provides support as it relates to the work programme of the Centre. Its main functions include coordination, harmonization and participation in sessions of the General Assembly, the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; addressing institutions in various parts of North America which are active in the field of human settlements; and carrying out liaison and information activities at United Nations Headquarters to promote the activities of the Centre. 28. Resources included under section 13 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001 provide for four posts (two Professional and higher category and two General Service) and general operating requirements, such as communications, supplies and materials and acquisition of equipment ($72,200). 29. The core functions of the liaison office for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights are, inter alia, to represent the High Commissioner at Headquarters, at meetings of policy-making bodies, with permanent missions of Member States, at interdepartmental and inter-agency meetings, with non-governmental organizations and professional groups, at academic conferences and with the media. In addition, it provides policy advice and recommendations on substantive matters to the High Commissioner; information and advice on human rights to the Executive Office of the Secretary-General; substantive support on human rights issues to the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other policy-making bodies in New York; and provides materials and information to the permanent missions, United Nations departments, agencies and programmes, non-governmental organizations, the media and others regarding the human rights programme. 30. The functions performed by the office result in enhanced coordination with other departments and contribute to strengthening the representation of the High Commissioner at Headquarters. Additionally, the office works with Headquarters-based offices and departments on the human rights components of early warning mechanisms. 31. The liaison office for Human Rights is supported by both regular and extrabudgetary resources. Resources proposed under section 22 of the regular budget relates to post (eight posts; five Professional and higher category and three General Service) and non-post requirements ($96,800). In addition, one post at the P-2 level is funded from extrabudgetary resources. 32. The New York Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is to act as a link between the High Commissioner and the main bodies of the United Nations, such as the General Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat, as well as with other United Nations organizations, non-governmental organizations, the media and other institutions and bodies accredited to or interested in work related to humanitarian questions of the United Nations. 33. The Office follows closely discussions in intergovernmental bodies that have a bearing on the activities of UNHCR and makes policy proposals and recommendations to the High Commissioner in respect of relevant developments arising in the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council and their subsidiary bodies. In addition, the Office keeps the High Commissioner, senior management and field offices informed of United Nations policies, activities and issues of concern which affect humanitarian work in the broadest sense. It is responsible for the promotion and dissemination of information on international refugee law and refugee situation, as well as for promoting the accession of States to international legal instruments. These services are provided to permanent missions, non-governmental organizations, media accredited to the United Nations, departments of the United Nations Secretariat, the general public and individual refugees. 34. In addition, the Director of the New York Office undertakes special responsibilities related, inter alia, to representing the High Commissioner in the Policy Coordination Group established by the Secretary-General and to services as the High Commissioner’s senior advisor on such meetings as Administrative Committee on Coordination and the Inter-Agency Standing Committee. 35. The Office is funded entirely from extrabudgetary resources and consists of three Professional and higher category staff and four staff in the General Service category. 36. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) maintains a liaison office in New York. It plays an important representational role, maintaining ongoing contacts with permanent missions of Member States, with other United Nations bodies whose head offices are away from Headquarters, with non-governmental organizations and other elements of civil society, and serves as the public information office of UNRWA for North America. These contacts are crucial in maintaining the high visibility of a humanitarian programme the operation of which depends significantly on voluntary funding and international goodwill and support. 37. The office is also involved in the presentation of the Commissioner-General’s annual report and other regular reports to the General Assembly, represents the Agency, as required, in deliberations of intergovernmental review bodies and acts as the key motivator of the Working Group of the General Assembly on the financing of UNRWA. It provides backup support to the Office of the Commissioner-General in its contact with Governments of the major donors; represents the Commissioner-General in regular meetings of inter-agency bodies of which UNRWA is a member, including the Executive Committee for Humanitarian Affairs and various subcommittees of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, as well as various task forces; and plays an active role in the preparation and implementation of the Agency’s budget and maintains substantive contact with departments and offices of the Secretariat. 38. Resources for the liaison office of UNRWA is provided under section 24 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001. Post resources for one Professional and higher category staff and two General Service staff and general temporary assistance is provided under the regular budget. Other non-post requirements are met from extrabudgetary resources. Publications 39. Publications are an important means by which the Secretariat implements the mandates given to it by intergovernmental bodies. They are essential for increasing the awareness, knowledge and understanding of the issues with which the Organization is seized, whether for informational, promotional or instructional purposes. Substantive legislative bodies play an important role in determining both the need for and the general content of publications, as well as in monitoring and evaluating them. 40. All departments and entities within the Secretariat have undergone a comprehensive review and assessment of their publications in the context of the preparation of the official publications programme for the biennium 1998–1999. They continue to pay close attention to rationalizing their publications and to ensuring their relevance and usefulness. 41. In order to enhance the role of publications in implementing the mandates of intergovernmental bodies, the Publications Board has updated the publications policies, procedures and directives, including instructions on electronic publishing. The annual reports of the Publications Board on its activities from 1995 through 1998, prepared for the Secretary-General, and administrative instructions on the control and limitation of documentation, provide current publications policy. A set of new and revised policy directives on publications is available in the Intranet site of the Publications Board. 42. With respect to the question of empowering the Publications Board and its Working Committee to oversee the contents of publications, however, the Secretariat is of the view that author departments must take primary responsibility for their outputs vis-à-vis substance, cost-effectiveness and relevance to mandates. The Board will strengthen its management and coordinating role and continue to provide guidance, establish policy and administer the publications programme. The Board will also ensure greater participation of programme managers in its work and that of its Working Committee. 43. The issue of author departments utilizing revenue from their publications for product development, maintenance of databases, start-up costs and other activities to increase sales revenue is under consideration by the Board. Sales promotion is an ongoing activity via the Internet, through the introduction of electronic commerce on the Sales and Marketing Web site, and through direct mail catalogues. In this connection, it is reiterated that cost-recovery is not a dominant factor in the dissemination of the Organization’s publications; the Secretariat maintains that its publications should be freely disseminated to institutions and people in the developing world, as necessary, and that the information materials of the Department of Public Information should be freely distributed as part of its information mandate. With respect to cooperative arrangements on joint publications with other organizations of the United Nations system, the Secretariat acknowledges the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit and the comments made by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon. 44. Enhanced technology, such as desktop publishing and digital reproduction, and increased in-house printing capacity, have made it possible to print most publications internally, thus reducing the expenditures for external printing. The external printing expenditures have dropped appreciably from $6.7 million to $4.6 million over a span of six bienniums. Electronic publishing, in particular the use of the Internet, has increased access to the materials of the Organization in a cost-effective manner. 45. The issues referred to above are addressed in the most recent report of the Joint Inspection Unit on United Nations publications (A/51/946), in the Secretary-General’s comments thereon (A/52/685) and the related recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/53/669). The General Assembly has yet to take a decision on them. The question of cost accounting will also be considered by the General Assembly on the basis of a further report to be prepared by the Secretary-General. 