%%%CONFERENCE AND MEETING SERVICES|

99-10264 (E) 230499 United Nations A/54/6 (Sect. 2) General Assembly Distr.: General 12 April 1999 Original: English Fifty-fourth session Proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001* Part I Overall policy-making, direction and coordination Section 2 General Assembly affairs and conference services (Programme 27 of the medium-term plan for the period 1998–2001) Contents Page Overview A. Policy-making organs 1. General Assembly 2. Trusteeship Council 3. Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples B. Executive direction and management C. Programme of work 1. General Assembly affairs and conference services, New York * The present document contains section 2 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001. The complete proposed programme budget will subsequently be issued in final printed form as Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/54/6/Rev.1). A/54/6 (Sect. 2) 2. Conference and library services, Geneva 3. Conference and library services, Vienna D. Programme support 2.1 Activities to be financed under this section of the proposed programme budget fall under programme 27, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference services, of the medium-term plan for the period 1998–2001, as revised (A/53/6/Rev.1). They also include library services in Geneva and Vienna, which fall under subprogramme 23.3, Library services, of programme 23, Public information, of the medium-term plan for the period 1998–2001, as revised. 2.2 The Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services was established by the Secretary-General in 1997 in the context of his management reform measures, with a view to streamlining and strengthening technical support to the United Nations intergovernmental processes. The functions of the Department, which are under the responsibility of the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, are detailed in the Secretary-General’s bulletin of 15 September 1997 (ST/SGB/1997/6). 2.3 The major objectives of the Department will be to ensure, through the provision of authoritative advice and technical and substantive services, the orderly and procedurally correct conduct of the meetings and other work of the General Assembly and most of its Main Committees and subsidiary bodies, the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies and related conferences and meetings, and the Trusteeship Council; and to provide to intergovernmental and expert bodies the high-quality meeting and documentation services they require to carry out their work, making the most cost-effective use of conference services and facilities worldwide. In line with the above objectives, the Department will provide technical and secretariat support to the General Assembly, its General, First, Second, Third and Fourth Committees and various subsidiary organs, to the Economic and Social Council and most of its subsidiary and ad hoc bodies and to United Nations conferences dealing with economic, social and related matters, including the preparation of analytical studies on rules and procedures and consultations with the Presidents of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, the presiding officers and bureaux of subsidiary and other intergovernmental organs and Member States. It will provide meeting and documentation services to all intergovernmental organs and expert bodies meeting at Headquarters and at other locations for which it is responsible, as well as translation and publishing services, and provide advice to the Secretary-General and to Secretariat departments and offices on matters relating to the work of the bodies it services. 2.4 In the biennium 2000–2001, the Department will continue its efforts towards improving the utilization of conference-servicing resources, in particular through coordination of technical and conference services, better planning and organization of the services and progressive investment in new technologies, especially in the area of remote translation and interpretation, making conference servicing more efficient and cost-effective. 2.5 The activities of the Department are overseen by the Committee on Conferences, which is maintained as a permanent subsidiary organ of the General Assembly in accordance with its resolution 43/222 B of 21 December 1988, with responsibility for advising the Assembly on all matters related to the organization of conferences and meetings in the United Nations, including the calendar of conferences. Technical conference-servicing requirements are programmed through the biennial calendar of conferences and meetings, which is approved by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Committee on Conferences in the year preceding the biennium to which the calendar applies, and is subsequently adjusted during the course of the biennium. Since there is a degree of uncertainty inherent in the timing and volume of the demand for services, conference-servicing capacity of the Department is programmed below the foreseeable levels required. It is supplemented as necessary through the use of temporary assistance for meetings. 2.6 The Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services is also responsible for conference services in Geneva and Vienna. This arrangement will allow the management of the conference-servicing resources in all three duty stations in an integrated manner, with a view to achieving the most efficient utilization of the resources. Therefore, the conference-servicing resources in Geneva and Vienna will continue to be budgeted under this section. In Vienna, the United Nations will continue to provide conference services to UNIDO and IAEA, and beginning in the biennium 2000–2001, to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty Organization as well, on a cost-sharing basis. As in the biennium 1998–1999, United Nations conference-servicing requirements in Vienna are prepared on a net-budgeting basis (that is, the appropriation required under this section represents only the United Nations share of conference services). The gross budget for conference services in Vienna is nevertheless also submitted in this section to the General Assembly for its review and approval. The conference-servicing requirements of ECE are covered by the provisions for conference services in Geneva, which are included in the present section. The requirement for conference services at other duty stations, notably Nairobi and the headquarters of four regional commissions (ECLAC, ESCAP, ECA and ESCWA), are covered under the following sections: 27G, Administration, Nairobi; 19, Economic and social development in Latin America and the Caribbean; 17, Economic and social development in Asia and the Pacific; 16, Economic and social development in Africa; and 20, Economic and social development in Western Asia. 2.7 The estimated requirements under this section also include the requirements for special sessions of the General Assembly to be held in the biennium 2000–2001 and for other international meetings and conferences to be organized under the auspices of the United Nations, in accordance with specific decisions of the General Assembly. Those major meetings include four special sessions of the General Assembly — two in the year 2000, to review the implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social Development and to appraise and assess the implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women and the Beijing Platform for Action; and two in the year 2001, to review the achievements of the World Summit for Children and for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II). Furthermore, the General Assembly has decided to hold in the year 2000 its Millennium Assembly, the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders and the tenth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; and in the year 2001, the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries and the International Conference on the Financing of Development. In accordance with General Assembly resolutions, conference services will also be provided to meetings of regional groups and other major groupings of Member States on an “as available” basis from within the existing capacity of the Department. 2.8 The overall level of the technical and secretarial support services workload under this section has been estimated for the biennium 2000–2001 as broadly equivalent to the volume of services to be provided for the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and all other United Nations organs and special meetings during the biennium 1998–1999. At the same time, the overall level of resources proposed for the biennium 2000–2001 ($423,593,800) reflects a net reduction in resources of $3.5 million, or 0.8 per cent, as compared to the revised appropriation for the biennium 1998–1999. This will be achieved through various cost-saving measures currently in place, including improved control of resources budgeted for temporary assistance for meetings, increased capacity utilization, introduction of computer-assisted translation and the application of new technologies in the documentation and publishing services, while providing for full coverage of the programmed meetings and ensuring sufficient quality of services. The disposition of resources within the section reflects the efforts of the Department to streamline its organizational structure, concentrate resources in priority areas through internal redeployment and invest in new technologies. Section 2 General Assembly affairs and conference services 2.9 The regular budget resources under this section would be supplemented by extrabudgetary resources, which are estimated at $7,279,900. These would be largely derived from reimbursement income to be received in payment for services provided to extrabudgetary activities, funds and programmes, as well as from contributions to specific trust funds established for funding of certain activities in the conference-servicing area. 2.10 The estimated percentage distribution of resources in the biennium 2000–2001 under this section would be as follows: Regular budget Extra- budgetary (percentage) 58.0a Total a Including the share of UNIDO, IAEA and the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty Organization in unified conference services. Table 2.1 Summary of requirements by component (Thousands of United States dollars) (1) Regular budget Component expendi- tures appropri- ations Resource growth before recosting Recosting estimates Amount Percentage (2) Extrabudgetary resources turesa Source of funds (a) Services in support of: United Nations organizations Support to extrabudgetary administrative structures (b) Substantive activities Trust Fund for German Language Translation International Seabed Authority Library Endowment Fund Trust Fund for Cooperation between the United Nations and Switzerland in the Field of Archives Sheikh Ashmawi Trust Fund Otherb Total (1) and (2) a Excluding reimbursable conference services in Geneva. b Conference services provided to extrabudgetary meetings on a reimbursable basis, excluding reimbursement relating to the use of permanent capacity, which is credited to miscellaneous income. Estimates for the 1998–1999 and the 2000–2001 bienniums have been prorated on the basis of the 1996–1997 experience. Table 2.2 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Object of expenditure Posts Other staff costs Travel Contractual services General operating expenses Hospitality Supplies and materials Furniture and equipment Grants and contributions Object of expenditure Other staff costsb b Conference services provided to extrabudgetary meetings on a reimbursable basis, excluding reimbursement relating to the use of permanent capacity, which is credited to miscellaneous income. Estimates for 1998–1999 and the 2000–2001 bienniums have been prorated on the basis of the 1996–1997 experience. Table 2.3 Post requirements Organizational units: Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, New York; Conference Services Division, Geneva Established posts Temporary posts Extrabudgetary resources Professional category and above USG ASG D-2 D-1 P-5 P-4/3 P-2/1 General Service category Principal level Other level Other categories Trades and crafts Grand total 21a 22a a Posts in support of extrabudgetary administrative structures: 10 General Service (Other level) in 1998–1999 and 11 General Service (Other level) in 2000–2001; posts financed from the Trust Fund for German Language Translation: 2 P-5, 3 P-4, 1 P-3, 1 General Service (Principal level) and 4 General Service (Other level). 2.11 Provision is made under this subsection for requirements relating to the policy-making organs for which the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services has responsibility for technical servicing. Table 2.4 Summary of requirements by programme Programme a 2. Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples a Requirements for the biennium 1996–1997 were budgeted for under other sections of the budget and are included in the expenditures of those sections. Table 2.5 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.6 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure 2.12 Provision is made under this heading for certain estimated direct costs of the fifty-fourth (resumed), fifty-fifth (regular and resumed) and fifty-sixth (regular) sessions of the General Assembly. While most meetings of the General Assembly are held from September to December, the pattern of those meetings has changed dramatically in recent years, with the Assembly now meeting with increasing frequency during the rest of the year. Resource requirements (at current rates) 2.13 The estimated requirements of $249,200 would provide for general temporary assistance ($228,500) and overtime ($20,700) to meet peak workload requirements for technical servicing of meetings of the General Assembly and those of its Main Committees that are serviced by the Department. 2.14 The provision of $94,000 relates to the external printing of official records and supplements of the General Assembly in the six official languages of the United Nations. 2.15 The Trusteeship Council, composed of five Member States, is a principal organ of the United Nations established under Article 7 of the Charter of the United Nations. Its function is to assist the General Assembly and the Security Council in carrying out their responsibilities with respect to the international trusteeship system. On 2 November 1994, the Security Council, by its resolution 956 (1994), determined that the applicability of the trusteeship agreement had terminated with respect to the last Trust Territory, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (Palau). Consequently, at present, no resources are earmarked for the Council. 2.16 In accordance with its amended rules of procedure, the Trusteeship Council shall meet as and where occasion may require, by decision of the Trusteeship Council or its President, or at the request of a majority of its members or of the General Assembly, or of the Security Council acting in pursuance of the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. If the need arises in the future for the Trusteeship Council to meet, the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services would provide it with the required technical and conference servicing of its meetings from within the overall level of resources to be made available to the Department under the present section. Table 2.7 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure 2.17 The Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, composed of 24 Member States, is the principal subsidiary organ of the General Assembly charged with examining the application of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted by the Assembly in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960. 2.18 The Special Committee’s mandate includes: (a) Seeking suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and formulating specific proposals to that end; (b) Making concrete suggestions to the Security Council with regard to developments in Non-Self-Governing Territories that are likely to threaten international peace and security; (c) Examining the compliance of Member States with resolution 1514 (XV) and other relevant resolutions; (d) Studying the conditions in the remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories, including the dispatch of visiting missions, as required, and reporting thereon to the General Assembly; (e) Enlisting worldwide support for the achievement of the objectives of the Declaration; (f) Reviewing the list of Territories to which the Declaration applies and making specific proposals to the General Assembly to that end. 2.19 In pursuance of its mandate, the Special Committee may hold meetings, including some away from Headquarters, to examine the implementation of the Declaration and may send visiting missions to Non-Self-Governing Territories. It may also have consultations and contacts with Governments, specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. Its members may participate in conferences, seminars and other special meetings dealing with decolonization sponsored by non-governmental organizations and the United Nations bodies concerned. In accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions, the Special Committee promotes an international campaign for the dissemination of information on decolonization and publicity for the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and reports thereon to the Assembly. 2.20 There are currently 17 Territories on the list of Non-Self-Governing Territories. The programme of work of the Special Committee is decided upon on an annual basis, taking into account relevant decisions of the General Assembly. On the basis of the scope of its responsibilities and its programme of work approved by the Assembly for 1999, it is anticipated that the Special Committee may carry out the following activities during the biennium 2000–2001: (a) Sending up to three visiting missions to the Territories, in consultation with the administering Powers; (b) Dispatching missions of representation to the international meetings and conferences and having consultations and contacts on the issue of decolonization with Governments, United Nations bodies, in particular specialized agencies, and international institutions associated with the United Nations (several missions of consultation each year); contributing to the activities of the Economic and Social Council during regular sessions of the Council when it deals with issues of decolonization; and participating in meetings of CARICOM, the South Pacific Forum and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries; (c) Participating each year in conferences, seminars and other special events dealing with decolonization sponsored by non-governmental organizations and the United Nations bodies concerned, as well as in regional seminars anticipated to be organized in the Caribbean and the Pacific regions within the context of the Plan of Action for the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism; (d) Organizing hearings before the Special Committee, in consultation with the administering Powers and the regional organizations concerned, of representatives from Non-Self-Governing Territories and, taking into account the views expressed by those representatives at the regional seminars organized by the Committee since 1990, as well as recommendations contained in the Plan of Action for the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, the Special Committee will continue to consider how to intensify and improve the participation of such representatives in the work of the Special Committee within available resources. 2.21 Without prejudice to the decisions to be taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth and fifty-sixth sessions on the programme of work of the Special Committee for 2000 and 2001, the estimates are based on the level of activities approved for 1999. 2.22 The estimated requirements of $419,200, at the maintenance level, would cover the cost of travel of representatives ($213,500) to undertake the activities outlined in paragraph 2.20, including dispatching the visiting missions, attendance at two regional seminars (one per year) to be held in the Caribbean and the Pacific regions within the context of the Plan of Action for the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism; travel of representatives from Non-Self-Governing Territories to participate in the work of the Special Committee and to attend regional seminars ($40,200); and travel of staff ($165,500) to assist the Special Committee in carrying out the activities. 2.23 Provision of $32,100, at the maintenance level, is proposed for the rental of premises ($5,000) and of furniture and equipment ($13,400), communications ($4,400) and miscellaneous services ($9,300). These are required for the Special Committee’s missions and its regional seminars. 2.24 The provision of $2,600 would cover hospitality expenditures of the Special Committee during its missions and regional seminars. 2.25 The provision of $2,000 would cover various supply requirements arising from missions of the Special Committee and the regional seminars. Table 2.8 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.9 Post requirements Organizational unit: Office of the Under-Secretary-General 2.26 Overall policy direction and management, supervision and coordination of the activities of the Department are provided by the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services. The Under-Secretary-General is responsible for all the activities of the Department, as well as its administration, and represents the Secretary-General in meetings related to the functions of the Department and in intergovernmental organs and expert bodies as required. The Under-Secretary-General directs the development of conference-servicing policies, procedures and practices for the United Nations worldwide, the coordination of the global provision of such services by the Secretariat and the allocation of resources therefor. The Under-Secretary-General is responsible for conference services in New York, Geneva and Vienna, and chairs the Inter-Agency Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publications. In the discharge of the above functions, the Under-Secretary-General is assisted by the Assistant Secretary-General, who acts as Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General. In the discharge of their responsibilities, the Under-Secretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-General are supported by the immediate Office. The Office provides assistance in the development of management strategies and policies, prepares the programme of work of the Department for approval by the Under-Secretary-General, monitors its implementation and coordinates the programme evaluation. 2.27 The resource requirements under this heading ($1,994,500), reflecting an increase of $725,300, would provide for continuation of the posts detailed in table 2.9. The increase results from the consolidation of the executive branch of the Department, which reflects the redeployment to the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services of the posts of the Assistant Secretary-General and his assisting staff (1 P-5 and 1 General Service (Other level) posts), which were previously budgeted under the programme of work of this section. 2.28 The total provision of $19,300, at the maintenance level, would cover general temporary assistance ($8,900) and overtime ($10,400) requirements during periods of peak workload, in particular during the sessions of the General Assembly. 2.29 Resources totalling $31,200, at the maintenance level, are proposed for travel of the Under-Secretary-General, the Assistant Secretary-General and other staff of the Office in the discharge of their functions, and coordination of conference services among the United Nations duty stations. 2.30 The total estimated requirements of $27,900 relate to the share of the Office of the Under-Secretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-General in the maintenance and support of the local area network (LAN) technical infrastructure (including central servers) necessary for the support of central management services such as e-mail ($10,400) and maintenance of office automation equipment ($17,500). 2.31 A provision of $1,700 would cover the cost of supplies for the Office. 2.32 The estimated requirements of $6,700 relate to the upgrading and/or replacement of existing office automation equipment. 2.33 The programme of work under this section comprises four subprogrammes at each of the three duty stations. For Geneva and Vienna that also includes library service activities, which fall under programme 23, Public information, of the medium-term plan for the period 1998–2001, as revised (A/53/6/Rev.1). Regular budget New York Geneva Vienna All duty stations Viennaa General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs Planning, development and coordination of conference services Translation and editorial services Interpretation, meeting and publishing services Library servicesb a Including the share of UNIDO and IAEA in unified conference services. b Including printing services in Vienna. Table 2.10 Summary of requirements by component General Assembly affairs and conference services, New York 1. General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs 2. Planning, development and coordination of conference services 3. Translation and editorial services 4. Interpretation, meetings and publishing services Subtotal Conference and library services, Geneva 1. Planning, development and coordination of conference services 2. Translation and editorial services 3. Interpretation, meetings and publishing services 4. Library services Conference and library services, Vienna United Nations and Switzerland in the Field of Archives b Conference services provided to extrabudgetary meetings on a reimbursable basis, excluding reimbursement relating to the use of permanent capacity, which is credited to miscellaneous income. Estimates for 1998–1999 and 2000–2001 have been prorated on the basis of the 1996–1997 experience. Table 2.11 Summary of requirements by programme (i) United Nations organizations (ii) Extrabudgetary activities (a) General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs Table 2.12 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.13 Post requirements Organizational unit: General Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs Division 2.34 Activities provided for under this heading, covered by subprogramme 27.1, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs, of programme 27, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs and conference services, of the medium-term plan for the period 1998–2001, as revised (A/53/6/Rev.1), relate to technical services of the General Assembly, the Trusteeship Council, the Economic and Social Council and their subsidiary machinery. These are carried out by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council Affairs Division. Organizational units of the Division provided for under this subprogramme consist of the Office of the Director, the General Assembly Servicing Branch, the Disarmament and Decolonization Organs Servicing Branch and the Economic and Social Council Servicing Branch. 2.35 The major objective of this subprogramme is to ensure, through the provision of authoritative advice and technical secretariat services, the orderly and procedurally correct conduct of the meetings and other work of the General Assembly, its General and Main Committees and its various subsidiary bodies, of the Trusteeship Council and of the Economic and Social Council and most of its subsidiary bodies, as well as ad hoc bodies and conferences in the disarmament, decolonization, economic, social and related fields in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the rules and procedures and established practices of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Trusteeship Council. Outputs 2.36 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Servicing of intergovernmental/expert bodies (i) Parliamentary documentation. Preparation and submission for issuance of all documents relating to the organization of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council: the preliminary list of items, the provisional and final agendas, the supplementary list of items, the memorandum of the Secretary-General on the organization of the work of the Assembly and reports of the General Committee to the Assembly; and ensuring the duly authorized submission and processing of draft resolutions and decisions and the lists of resolutions and texts of decisions adopted by the Assembly and by the Council; (ii) Substantive and technical servicing of meetings a. Provision of secretariat and technical support services to the plenary meetings and informal consultations of the regular, special and emergency sessions of the General Assembly (approximately 150 meetings and 30 meetings of informal consultations per year), to its General Committee (5–10 meetings per year) and to various subsidiary bodies, working groups and high-level meetings between the United Nations and regional organizations; planning and organization of activities and services related to the sessions of the General Assembly; provision of assistance to the President of the General Assembly on all matters relating to the conduct of the Assembly, including the work of the Main Committees and subsidiary organs; provision of advice to the President of the Assembly, Member States and observer delegations and Secretariat officials and others in the United Nations system on the work of the Assembly; preparation of procedural notes for the President of the General Assembly and the Chairman of the General Committee; dealing with matters relating to the Official Records of the General Assembly; planning, preparation and coordination of lists of speakers for the general debate and for all other agenda items of the General Assembly sessions; provision of advice to the Permanent Missions on communications distributed as official parliamentary documents; and provision of secretariat services to subsidiary bodies and working groups of the Assembly and special conferences and meetings; b. Provision of secretariat and technical support services to: i. The First Committee of the General Assembly (approximately 70 meetings and 10 informal consultations). Pre- and in-session documentation on the organization of work; ii. The Second Committee of the General Assembly (approximately 80 plenary meetings and 40 informal consultations, 4 meetings of the United Nations pledging conferences and 40 meetings of General Assembly working groups). Preparation of notes on programmes of work and notes on the status of documentation; iii. The Third Committee of the General Assembly (approximately 100 plenary meetings and 6 informal consultations, and 40 meetings of General Assembly working groups). Preparation of notes on programmes of work and on the status of documentation; iv. Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) (approximately 50 meetings and 10 informal consultations). Pre- and in-session documentation on the organization of work; v. Disarmament Commission (organizational session: approximately 10 meetings; substantive session, including sessions of subsidiary bodies and consultation groups: approximately 100 meetings; and year-round consultations as necessary: approximately 10 meetings); vi. Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean (approximately 10 meetings); vii. Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. Servicing of approximately 50 plenary meetings, 10 informal consultations and 10 plenary meetings of the Open-ended Bureau; preparation of pre-, in- and post-session documentation of the Special Committee and the Bureau; processing of approximately 200 communications and requests for hearings relating to Non-Self-Governing Territories; organization and servicing of two regional seminars in accordance with the Plan of Action for the International Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism and preparation of pre- and in-session documentation for the seminars; and organization and support of up to three visiting missions to Non-Self-Governing Territories and consultations with the administering Powers concerned, as required; viii. Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the Security Council. Servicing of approximately 50 formal and informal and 60 drafting meetings per year; preparation of substantive notes and drafts provided to the Bureau; sessional notes and other documents prepared for meetings of the Working Group; and conference room papers of the Working Group; ix. High-level Open-ended Working Group on the Financial Situation of the United Nations (approximately 30 meetings per year). Preparation of substantive notes and working papers for meetings of the Working Group; x. Open-ended Working Group on An Agenda for Peace and its four subgroups: Preventive Diplomacy and Peacemaking; Question of United Nations Imposed Sanctions; Post-conflict Peace-building; and Coordination. Servicing of meetings of the Working Group, including formal, informal and Bureau meetings (approximately 80 per year); and preparation of substantive notes and drafts provided to the Bureau of the Working Group, sessional notes and other documents for the Working Group and conference room papers on the Working Group; xi. Economic and Social Council (approximately 10 meetings in organizational session; 120 meetings in substantive sessions, 60 informal consultations and 40 meetings of working groups). Preparation of notes on programmes of work, notes on the status of documentation and annotated agendas; xii. Subsidiary organs of the Economic and Social Council. Technical servicing of the Statistical Commission (approximately 20 meetings), the Commission on Population and Development (approximately 20 meetings), the Commission for Social Development (approximately 36 meetings), the Commission on the Status of Women (approximately 40 meetings), the Commission on Science and Technology for Development (approximately 20 meetings), the Commission on Sustainable Development (approximately 120 meetings), the Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations (approximately 60 meetings), the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (approximately 40 meetings) and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources for Development (approximately 40 meetings); (iii) Other services provided. Assistance to the intergovernmental bodies serviced by the Division in the preparation of their reports, including reports to the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council; (b) Other substantive outputs (i) Recurrent publications. Information for Delegations (2000 and 2001); (ii) Non-recurrent publications. Relevant sections of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs (2000 and 2001); (iii) Maintenance of a reference library, including a computerized information system; (iv) Maintenance of an electronic reference system on General Assembly practices, precedents, rules of procedure and subsidiary organs; (v) Maintenance of the General Assembly home page (Web site) and live Webcast coverage of General Assembly proceedings; (c) Coordination and liaison (i) Coordination of activities and services related to the organization of regular, emergency and special sessions of the General Assembly between the Secretariat and delegations, organizations of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental bodies; and coordination with substantive units and the secretariats of the Main Committees on questions related to the servicing of the Assembly, including scheduling; (ii) Coordination of activities and services related to the organization of the meetings of working groups of the General Assembly and other ad hoc bodies and conferences; (iii) Liaison with the permanent missions of Member States and Observer Missions concerning agendas of meetings and proceedings; (iv) Coordination and liaison with international institutions and agencies, regional organizations, research institutions, non-governmental and intergovernmental organizations and members of the academic community on issues within the purview of the Division; and contribution to seminars and other related activities. 2.37 The estimated requirements under this heading ($8,092,200), including an increase of $153,900, would provide for continuation of 46 posts, as detailed in table 2.13. The increase of $153,900 results from the internal redeployment of a P-2 post from the Copy Preparation and Proofreading Section of the Interpretation, Meetings and Publishing Division to this Division to accommodate the additional workload arising from the level and scope of services to be provided to programmed meetings. 2.38 Resources totalling $662,800, including an increase of $321,300, would be required to cover the general temporary assistance requirements of the Division during the biennium. The proposed increase in resources would accommodate the considerable additional workload experienced in the past few years, in particular in the Economic and Social Council Servicing Branch. The evolution of the work of the Economic and Social Council over the last five years has resulted in an increase in the frequency of its meetings, as well as increased participation at the ministerial level. The Economic and Social Council now holds a series of high-level segments, with ministerial participation, requiring the General Service staff to be involved in providing extensive technical services to ensure the smooth running and efficient functioning of those meetings. Moreover, the Economic and Social Council Servicing Branch is now also responsible for providing technical servicing for sessions of the preparatory bodies for the special conferences, meetings and summits listed in paragraph 2.7, as well as sessions of treaty bodies that are included in the United Nations calendar of meetings and conferences. 2.39 Resources of $85,400, at the maintenance level, would cover the travel requirements of the Division relating mainly to travel of staff in connection with the technical servicing of meetings of the Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary organs held away from Headquarters and other relevant United Nations meetings and conferences. 2.40 Resources totalling $88,800, at the maintenance level, relate to rental and maintenance of data-processing and office automation equipment, including the Division’s share in maintenance costs of LAN technical infrastructure and central management services ($39,200), communications ($41,100) and miscellaneous services ($8,500). 2.41 The estimated requirements of $9,500, at the maintenance level, relate to the cost of the Division’s supplies. 2.42 The estimated requirements of $29,500 relate to the upgrading and replacement of existing office automation equipment. (b) Planning, development and coordination of conference services, New York Table 2.14 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.15 Post requirements Organizational unit: Central Planning and Coordination Service 2.43 The objective of this subprogramme is to improve the local and global planning and coordination of conference services, with rational allocation and capacity utilization of existing conference resources; to develop and implement conference-servicing policies through regular consultation with committees and bodies at Headquarters and other duty stations; to ensure the provision of conference services in accordance with the resolutions and rules establishing language arrangements in the United Nations; and to upgrade technological capacity in conference services. 2.44 The Under-Secretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, through the Central Planning and Coordination Service, direct the development of conference-servicing policies, procedures and practices for the United Nations and coordinate the global provision of conference services in the Secretariat. The Central Planning and Coordination Service also provides substantive services to the Committee on Conferences and to the Inter-Agency Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publications. 2.45 In the biennium 2000–2001, the Service will concentrate on further upgrading the technological capacity in conference services generally, and specifically on computerizing the calendar of conferences, integrating information provided electronically by all conference centres and ensuring the connectivity of the document information and tracking systems at the three largest duty stations. 2.46 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (i) Substantive servicing of meetings. Servicing of the organizational and substantive sessions of the Committee on Conferences in 2000 and 2001 and provision of assistance to the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly in its consideration of the agenda item on the pattern of conferences; (ii) Parliamentary documentation. Reports to the General Assembly and the Committee on Conferences on topics related to the pattern of conferences; and preparation of the daily Journal of the United Nations in English and French; (iii) Other services provided. Assistance to the Fifth Committee and the Committee on Conferences in the preparation of their reports to the General Assembly; (b) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison. Contribution to the activities of the Inter-Agency Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publications; (c) Conference services (i) Planning and meeting services. Preparation for approval by the Committee on Conferences and monitoring of the implementation of the approved biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations through the use of a computerized meetings database linked to other major conference centres; planning and servicing of meetings at Headquarters; and coordination and servicing of meetings away from Headquarters; (ii) Documents control. Planning of the production schedule for documentation in accordance with the requirements of meetings; ensuring compliance with the instructions and guidelines on the control and limitation of documentation; and maintenance of statistical records of conference servicing. Significant workload indicators (actual) (revised estimates) (estimates) (a) Calendar meetingsa With interpretation Without interpretation (b) Non-calendar meetings (c) Calendar and non-calendar meetings (total (a) and (b)) Note: Calendar meetings are meetings of intergovernmental or expert United Nations bodies, regardless of the nature of the meetings (formal, informal consultations, etc.). Non-calendar meetings are all other meetings, including mainly meetings of regional groups, other groups of Member States or intergovernmental organizations, and meetings organized by the Secretariat on its own initiative. Non-calendar meetings are provided with conference services on an as available basis. a Including meetings held away from Headquarters formerly reported separately. 2.47 The estimated requirements of $6,673,800, reflecting a reduction of $956,300, would provide for the continuation of the posts detailed in table 2.15. The reduction is attributable to the redeployment of posts as follows: (a) consolidation under the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services of the post of the Assistant Secretary-General and his supporting staff of one P-5 and one General Service (Other level) posts which were previously maintained under part C, Programme of work, of this section; and (b) the redeployment of a P-4 post from the Journal Unit of the Central Planning and Coordination Service (no longer required owing to reorganization of the Service and the absorption of the functions by the existing staff of the Service) to the Copy Preparation and Proofreading Section of the Interpretation, Meetings and Publishing Division to accommodate the functions of the Chief of the Spanish Group in that Section. 2.48 The requirements under this heading relate to the central provision made under the Central Planning and Coordination Service for temporary assistance and overtime in support of the meetings under the calendar of meetings and conferences in New York. The resource requirements for this purpose are estimated at $24,984,900, as follows: (a) Temporary assistance for meetings. A provision of $18,647,400, reflecting a decrease of $2,110,400, is proposed for temporary assistance for meetings to allow for the flexibility essential in the scheduling of meetings and for peak requirements during the General Assembly sessions. The proposed resources would cover interpretation, translation and text-processing services, as well as the cost of travel of conference-servicing staff to meetings away from Headquarters. The decrease ($2,110,400) reflects the impact of measures applied in the control of resources and capacity utilization and the expanded use of remote translation for meetings held away from Headquarters; (b) General temporary assistance. The estimated requirements of $849,900, reflecting a decrease of $667,700, relate to replacement of staff on maternity or extended sick leave and the recruitment of temporary staff during periods of peak workload. They also include a provision for 24 work-months of editorial assistance for sessions of the General Assembly. The decrease ($667,700) reflects the impact of the application of resource control and capacity utilization measures; (c) Overtime. The estimated requirements of $5,487,600, reflecting a decrease of $164,200, relate to the servicing of meetings beyond normal working hours, as well as the advance processing of documentation for meetings having priority, in particular those of the Security Council. 2.49 A provision of $24,600, at the maintenance level, would be required for travel in connection with the coordination of conference-servicing activities outside Headquarters. 2.50 The estimated requirements of $324,000, reflecting a decrease of $1,892,400, would cover systems design and development, including software, of management information technology systems and specialized applications for conference services ($297,600), as well as the costs of printing expendable office supply forms that cannot be printed internally ($26,400). The substantial decrease in resources relates to one-time resources provided in the previous biennium for design and development of the Document Recording and Information Tracking System (DRITS), which will be in place and fully operational by the end of 1999. 2.51 The estimated requirements of $2,407,300, including an increase of $361,800, relate to rental and maintenance of data-processing equipment, including support to the LAN technical infrastructure (including central servers) necessary for the support of central management services, such as e-mail ($40,400); communications ($91,900); and maintenance of office automation equipment ($2,275,000). The increase is attributable to additional requirements for maintenance of office automation equipment estimated on the basis of established standard costs for such maintenance. 2.52 A provision of $2,400, at the maintenance level, is requested for official functions during the session of the Committee on Conferences, usually in August each year. 2.53 The estimated requirements of $379,300, including an increase of $98,000, would cover the costs of reproduction supplies, stationery and office supplies, data-processing supplies, library books and subscriptions for the Department as a whole. 2.54 The estimated requirements of $2,477,100, including an increase of $2,144,600, relate to the technological innovation programme of the Department for the biennium 2000–2001. It would include, inter alia, requirements for the replacement of obsolete office automation equipment (personal computers and printers), the acquisition of new Microsoft NT servers, the expansion of the digital recording system in the Verbatim Reporting Service, the provision of laptop computers for the Verbatim Reporting and Interpretation Services and the acquisition of software upgrades. The additional resources are expected to contribute to the efficiency and the quality of services provided by conference services. (c) Translation and editorial services, New York Table 2.16 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.17 Post requirements Organizational unit: Translation and Editorial Division 11a a Posts financed from the Trust Fund for German Language Translation. 2.55 The activities under this subprogramme are the responsibility of the Translation and Editorial Division. The main objective of the subprogramme is to ensure that an appropriate mix of permanent, temporary and contractual staff and adequate technological resources are available so that the documentation produced is of high quality and is issued in a timely fashion in strict observance of the resolutions and rules establishing language arrangements for the various bodies and organs of the United Nations, and to increase the efficiency and improve the quality of the translation and editorial services. 2.56 During the biennium, continued emphasis will be placed on the quality of translation through various measures: (a) the use of self-revision within reasonable limits, safeguarding quality standards; (b) in-service training for translators and participation by translators in external studies programmes; and (c) imposing sustained quality-control measures on both in-house and contractual translations. Machine-assisted translation, introduced on a relatively small scale in the biennium 1998–1999, will be expanded to its full potential in the course of the biennium 2000–2001. It is expected that 15 per cent of all material translated can be processed using this technology. In addition, the work of translators will be enhanced through generalized access to the optical disk system and computer-based terminology data banks, as well as increased reliance on information technology. The use of remote translation will be further expanded to improve workload sharing between New York and other duty stations. The editing of parliamentary documentation will be improved through wider use of newly enhanced databases and other electronic sources of information. In the editing of official records, the full production of the resolutions of the principal organs in a camera-ready or electronic form will increasingly become the norm. 2.57 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Conference services (i) Translation and summary record writing. Translation of parliamentary documentation and other material from and into the six official languages of the Organization; translation into German and related services using extrabudgetary resources; arranging for contractual translation and text processing; preparation and translation of summary records of conferences and meetings; and provision of reference and terminology services for editors, translators and interpreters; (ii) Editing. Editing and preparation for reproduction of official records and meeting records; editing and processing of parliamentary documentation and technical publications; establishment of editorial standards; and issuance of drafting and editing instructions; (b) Other substantive activities Non-recurrent publications. Drafting of terminology notes and bulletins on various subjects: abbreviations, country names, currencies, UNDP, UNFPA, UNCITRAL, peacekeeping, titles and functions, cartography, human rights, forestry, drugs/narcotics and sustainable development (both in electronic form and in hard copy). (Thousands of words) Translation service (a) Staff Arabic Chinese English French Russian Spanish (b) German (XB) (c) Contractual translation funded by the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services (d) Contractual translation funded by other offices Total, translation services Editorial services Parliamentary documentation 18 012a b 33 206b 28 373b Official records Total, editorial services a Excluding the workload of the former Division of General Assembly Affairs. b Excluding the workload of the Economic and Social Council Servicing Branch. 2.58 The estimated requirements of $91,341,000, reflecting a decrease of $110,900, would provide for the continuation of posts as detailed in table 2.17. The decrease of $110,900 is attributable to a redeployment of one General Service (Other level) post from this Division to the Information Management Technology Unit of the Executive Office in line with the strengthening of the programme of technological support to the substantive activities of the Department. The functions relating to the post in this Division would be reassigned among existing staff. 2.59 The provision of $4,193,700, at the maintenance level, is for the contractual translation of parliamentary documentation suitable for that mode of translation in terms of deadlines and specific requirements. (d) Interpretation, meetings and publishing services, New York Table 2.18 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.19 Post requirements Organizational unit: Interpretation, Meetings and Publishing Division Trades and Crafts 2.60 The activities under this subprogramme would be implemented by the Interpretation, Meetings and Publishing Division. The main objectives of the subprogramme are (a) to provide meeting and documentation services in a timely and efficient manner while maintaining a high standard of quality, and (b) to ensure the timely and efficient production, distribution and storage of documents and publications in the official languages of the Organization six weeks in advance of all meetings. 2.61 In the biennium 2000–2001, the Division will continue the application of advanced electronic information management and communications technology in order to establish an appropriate balance between printed and electronic products, to set up new electronic links in the production process and to develop the remote interpretation and verbatim reporting services. External printing will be further reduced through the use of desktop publishing in all official languages and, when cost-effective, in-house reproduction capacity. The reproduction and distribution functions will be streamlined as print runs are reduced with widespread access to electronic documents stored on optical disk and an expanded capacity for printing on demand. 2.62 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: Parliamentary documentation. Verbatim records of meetings of the General Assembly, the Security Council and other bodies entitled to such records; (b) Conference services (i) Interpretation. Provision of interpretation services for meetings held at and away from Headquarters; (ii) Text processing. Preparation of fair copy for reproduction of documents in the six official languages; electronic archiving of those documents; and processing and dispatching of letters and notes verbales; (iii) Copy preparation. Preparation of mechanicals of official records and other materials using desktop publishing software; (iv) Reproduction. Printing and binding of documents and other materials; (v) Distribution. Distribution and storage of documents and other materials; and control of the storage of materials in the optical disk system, including archiving of materials in image form. Assignments of interpreters Calendar meetings Non-calendar meetings Verbatim reporting (meetings with verbatim records) Text processing (thousands of words) Staff assignments Contractual text processinga Reproduction services (thousands of page impressions) Distribution services (thousands of items processed) a Includes work done on a reimbursable basis. 2.63 The estimated requirements of $92,945,300, reflecting a reduction of $257,500, would provide for the continuation of posts as detailed in table 2.19. The decrease ($257,500) represents the net result of several proposed changes in the organizational structure of the Division as follows: (a) the reassessment of functions and subsequent reorganization of the Copy Preparation and Proof-reading Section in the course of which the functions of four P-2 posts were classified at the P-3 level, one P-2 post was redeployed to the General Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs Division and another P-2 post was proposed for abolition, and at the same time a P-4 post was proposed to be redeployed from the Central Planning and Coordination Service to the Section to accommodate the post of Chief of the Spanish group; (b) redeployment of a General Service (Other level) post from the Division to the Information Management Technology Unit of the Executive Office in line with the strengthening of the programme of technological support to the substantive activities of the Department as a whole; and (c) redeployment to the Division from the Office of Central Support Services (section 27D) of a P-4 post of typographical coordinator to meet the related requirements in the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services. This post had been redeployed to the Office of Central Support Section from the Department in the biennium 1998–1999 in the context of consolidation under the Office of the technological servicing of the Department. The experience in the area of typographical services gained so far has proven that the function, in fact, properly belongs to conference-servicing activities, namely to the area of designing typographical formats in both hard copy and electronic forms of official documents for all language versions. 2.64 The resources of $484,900 under this heading, reflecting a decrease of $134,100, would provide for the maintenance of existing reproduction and distribution equipment in the Reproduction and Distribution Sections. 2.65 A provision of $5,827,300, reflecting an increase of $42,900, is proposed for the purchase of internal reproduction supplies such as paper, film, chemicals, ink, plates and other supplies for the printing plant of the Division to accommodate the document printing requirements at Headquarters. 2.66 The resource requirements totalling $765,300, reflecting resource growth of $665,200, would provide for: (a) the acquisition of specialized equipment for a printing plant, namely, an insertion machine ($84,300), an automated computer-to-plate system to reinforce the present automated plate-setting equipment ($338,900), a small two-colour printing press ($59,500) and a large-format printer ($29,700); and (b) the replacement of some existing equipment including a three-knife trimmer ($143,800), two Macintosh computers ($19,800), the head of the automated plate-setter ($49,600) and the servers for the automated plate-setting system ($39,700). Table 2.20 Summary of requirements by programme a Excluding reimbursable conference services. Table 2.21 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.22 Post requirements Organizational unit: Conference Services Division, Geneva 10a a Posts financed from reimbursement for support to extrabudgetary administrative structures. 2.67 The Conference Services Division, Geneva, which operates under the policy guidance and substantive authority of the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, comprises the Office of the Director, the Central Planning and Coordination Service (including meetings coordination, documents control, administration and management control, information technology and contractual translation), the Languages Service (including translation, official records, editing, terminology and text processing), the Interpretation Service, the Publishing Service (including reproduction, distribution and printing) and the Library. 2.68 The main objective of the Conference Services Division, Geneva, is to provide high-quality conference services, including interpretation, translation, official records, text-processing, printing, distribution and other documentation services, for meetings held at the United Nations Office at Geneva and other locations under the responsibility of the United Nations Office at Geneva. The main objective of the Library is to serve as a central library for the United Nations Office at Geneva, specialized agencies and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations headquartered at Geneva, as well as for research and academic institutions. (a) Planning, development and coordination of conference services, Geneva Table 2.23 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure b Conference services provided to extrabudgetary meetings on a reimbursable basis, excluding reimbursement relating to the use of permanent capacity, which is credited to miscellaneous income. Table 2.24 Post requirements Organizational units: Office of the Director; Central Planning and Coordination Service 1a a Posts financed from reimbursement to extrabudgetary administrative structures. 2.69 The activities under this subprogramme are carried out by the Office of the Director of the Conference Services Division and the Central Planning and Coordination Service. The Director of the Conference Services Division ensures general policy direction and maintains central control over the planning and provision of services to conferences under his/her responsibility held at Geneva and at other locations. During the biennium 2000–2001 the main emphasis will be placed on improving management methods and techniques, transparency and accountability to ensure the most effective use of available resources. 2.70 The Central Planning and Coordination Service will make further efforts to establish a more balanced calendar of meetings avoiding peaks and valleys in the workload in order to achieve the provision of high-quality services through maximum and efficient utilization of the existing permanent resources. The following projects will be implemented during the biennium: (a) a meeting planning and coordination system, including interpretation management; (b) computerization of the calendar of conferences and meetings; and (c) integration into a single programme of the calendar of conferences and the requirements for documentation and other technical services for the purpose of planning and estimating costs. The electronic transfer of documents will be further improved and extended, and remote translation will be used for all external conferences to the extent possible. 2.71 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: Conference services (a) Planning and meeting services. Planning and implementation of the annual calendar of conferences and meetings for which the United Nations Office at Geneva is responsible; scheduling of meetings; allocation of related resources and facilities; provision of interpretation services; coordination and servicing of meetings held away from the United Nations Office at Geneva; and issuance of the Daily Bulletin; (b) Documents control. Planning of production schedules in accordance with documentation requirements of meetings and the publishing programme; and ensuring compliance with instructions and guidelines on the control and limitation of documentation. Significant workload indicatorsª (a) Calendar meetings a Including extrabudgetary meetings. 2.72 The estimated requirements of $9,570,500, at the maintenance level, would provide for the continuation of posts as detailed in table 2.24. 2.73 The estimated requirements of $12,277,400, reflecting a reduction of $1,669,100, relate to centrally administered resources for temporary assistance for meetings ($11,526,600), general temporary assistance ($329,800) and overtime ($421,000). The proposed provision is based on the estimated conference-servicing workload for the biennium 2000–2001 and would cover conference-servicing requirements over and above the permanent capacity of the Conference Services Division. The decrease ($1,669,100) reflects anticipated savings resulting from the implementation of cost-saving measures, better planning of resources and control over issuance of documentation. 2.74 A provision of $43,300, including an increase of $14,300, is requested to cover the travel requirements of the Division for consultations with Headquarters on the coordination of conference services. 2.75 The resources requested under this heading ($239,900), including an increase of $135,900, relate to the cost of desktop computer access to external databases for translators and terminologists ($6,200) and to rental and maintenance of various proprietary software ($233,700). 2.76 The estimated requirements of $121,300, reflecting a decrease of $129,400, would cover the maintenance costs of computer equipment beyond the warranty period. 2.77 A provision of $1,200, at the maintenance level, is requested for an official function on the occasion of the Inter-Agency Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publications. 2.78 The estimated requirements of $72,300, reflecting an increase of $11,900, would cover non-standard office supplies, including special printer accessories (toner, ribbons, photoelectric belts), diskettes, tape cartridges, disks, CDs, cables, filters, switches and other small accessories. 2.79 The estimated requirements of $947,200, including an increase of $83,200, relate to the acquisition, upgrading and replacement of data-processing equipment and software, including servers, computers, and other items under the programme of technological innovations of the Division. These include the acquisition of the following: (a) a UNIX server; (b) three servers for live audio and video broadcasting of meetings; and (c) six interactive display stations. (b) Translation and editorial services, Geneva Table 2.25 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Contractual servicesa turesb Otherc a For the biennium 1996–1997, expenditures relating to contractual translation were recorded under the account of the Office of the Director. b Excludes reimbursable conference services. c Conference services provided to extrabudgetary meetings on a reimbursable basis, excluding reimbursement relating to the use of permanent capacity, which is credited to miscellaneous income. Estimates for 1998–1999 and 2000–2001 have been prorated on the basis of the 1996–1997 experience. Table 2.26 Post requirements Organizational unit: Language Servicea a Excluding the Text-Processing Section, which is reflected under table 2.28 below. 2.80 For the biennium 2000–2001, the main orientation of the subprogramme will be to provide improved language services through better planning and allocation of resources, the fullest and most efficient utilization of existing resources and more effective use of all technological advances available. In the field of translation, improved efficiency and productivity of translators should be achieved through increased and more proficient utilization of computer-assisted translation tools. 2.81 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Translation and summary record writing. Translation and revision of documentation and publications; provision of summary records for those meetings entitled to them; and reference and terminology services for translation, interpretation and editing; (b) Editing. Editing of parliamentary documentation and official records. Translation services Staff Contractual 2.82 The estimated requirements of $46,307,500, reflecting an increase of $314,600, would provide for continuation of the posts detailed in table 2.26. The increase relates to the redeployment to this subprogramme of two General Service posts from the Text-Processing Section in order to strengthen the terminology and technological documentation reference areas. 2.83 The estimated requirements of $1,609,200, reflecting an increase of $46,200, relate to contractual translation of parliamentary documentation suitable for that mode of translation in terms of deadlines and specific requirements. (c) Interpretation, meetings and publishing services, Geneva Table 2.27 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.28 Post requirements Organizational units: Interpretation Service; Publishing Service; Text-Processing Section of the Languages Service 2.84 The main objective of this subprogramme is the provision of high-quality interpretation and documentation services to meetings included in the calendar of conferences and meetings. A flexible use of resources, including increased exchange of staff among the various duty stations, as well as the use of information technology, will allow for better planning of the calendar and optimum use of the resources available to service meetings. 2.85 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Interpretation. Provision of interpretation services for meetings held at and away from the United Nations Office at Geneva; (b) Text processing. Preparation of fair copy for reproduction of documents in the six official languages; electronic archiving of those documents; and processing and dispatching of letters and notes verbales; (c) Copy preparation. Preparation of mechanicals of official records and other material using desktop publishing software; (d) Reproduction. Printing and binding of documents and other materials; (e) Distribution. Distribution and storage of documents and other materials; and control of the storage of materials in the optical disk system, including electronic storage on optical disk and archiving of documents on microfiche. Interpretation services (number of assignments Copy preparation and proof-reading (thousands of page impressions) Copy preparation Proof-reading Revision Camera-ready copy (started end-1997) Reproduction (thousands of page impressions) Distribution (thousands of items distributed) Electronic Number of documents input on the optical disk system in Number of paper copies printed on demand from the optical disk system (pages) Microfiches produced Microfiche originals produced (masters) Total microfiche copies produced Microfiche copies produced at request of the Sales and Marketing Section, Department of Public Information Paper pages retrieved from microfiches microfiches at the request of the Sales and Marketing Section, Department of Public Statistics of the Postal Control and Sorting Unit Total weight of mail controlled, sorted and routed (in kg) Total items handled (envelopes) a Only the total figure was included in the statistics. 2.86 The estimated requirements of $63,239,100, reflecting a decrease of $786,500, would provide for the posts detailed in table 2.28. The decrease relates to the redeployment of five General Service (Other level) posts to the other areas of the Conference Services Division as follows: (a) two posts to the Translation and Editorial Service to strengthen the terminology and technical documentation reference areas; and (b) three other posts to the Library. The redeployment results from the reorganization of the Division and the concentration of resources in priority areas. 2.87 The estimated requirements of $1,277,500, reflecting a reduction of $50,200, relate to the rental, lease and maintenance of all reproduction and distribution equipment for the Division as a whole. 2.88 The estimated requirements of $1,508,100, reflecting a decrease of $38,600, would cover the cost of internal reproduction supplies, such as paper, ink, printing plates and all other consumables required for production of the documentation under the programme of work of the Division. 2.89 The estimated requirements of $338,900, reflecting an increase of $77,600, would provide for the acquisition and/or replacement of various office automation and data-processing equipment in the context of the Division’s programme of technological innovations. (d) Library services, Geneva Table 2.29 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.30 Post requirements Organizational unit: United Nations Library, Geneva 2a 2.90 The United Nations Library in Geneva is responsible for the implementation of activities under this subprogramme. To implement the objectives formulated in the medium-term plan for the period 1998–2001, the Library will carry out its activities in parallel and in close collaboration with the Dag Hammarskjöld Library in New York, networking as well with other United Nations system and local libraries in Geneva. 2.91 During the biennium 2000–2001, the Library will focus on the following major goals: supporting the documentary and informational needs of its users; managing its valuable collections heritage; and processing and extracting information from its collections for inclusion in its databases and publications. In fulfilment of the first goal, the Geneva Library will provide reference and documentary support services to Secretariat and other Geneva-based United Nations programmes and agencies, as well as to the permanent missions, accredited media services, international governmental organizations and affiliated non-governmental organizations. The Library also extends its international research facilities to outside scholars. The second goal involves the acquisition of new books, periodicals, microforms and electronic publications to complement and update its existing social science collections, as well as the careful preservation and maintenance of its valuable retrospective resources. To implement the third goal, the Library will continue to catalogue and index its collection materials for coverage in its Endeavour integrated management system and to collaborate with the Dag Hammarskjöld Library for input in the joint United Nations indexing output. 2.92 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Other substantive activities (i) Recurrent publications. Monthly Bibliography; Weekly Bibliography; Current Tables of Contents; Library News/Nouvelles de la Bibliothèque; United Nations Office at Geneva Library Periodicals; and contribution to the shared UNBIS-Horizon database and to the annual cumulative updates of UNBIS Plus on CD-ROM and Human Rights Bibliography on CD-ROM; (ii) Non-recurrent publications. Updated leaflets on the Library’s collections, cyberspace activities and user services; and ongoing production of ad hoc topical bibliographies; (iii) Electronic issuances. Collaboration with Radio Suisse Romande, Télévision Suisse Romande and United Nations departments for the issuance of audio compact disks and video products in its “Voices of History” series; (iv) On-line services. Updating and adding bibliographical and historical information to its Internet home page, G-Net and cc:mail; (v) Guided tours of the Library and League of Nations Museum for visiting governmental officials, information science professionals and student groups. The League of Nations Museum will be open to visitors, and the Library will participate in the annual United Nations Day open house at the Palais des Nations; (vi) A promotional brochure or a series of thematic leaflets on the Library’s collections and services for distribution to user clientele. (b) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison. Participation in the annual professional activities of the International Association of Law Libraries, the International Federation of Library Associations and the Online Congress; liaison and collaboration, in particular with European libraries for training programmes; and collaboration with the Information Systems Coordination Committee inter-agency task force for libraries; Library services (i) Selection, acquisition and maintenance of collections for the Geneva Library. Selection from periodical book reviews, government lists and publisher catalogues of the materials to be included in the collections; acquisition, by purchase, gift or exchange, of books, periodicals, microforms and electronic products, as well as distribution by United Nations affiliated agencies of their documents and publications; and checking in, classifying and claiming official documents and publications received from Member States, intergovernmental organizations and the United Nations system; (ii) Cataloguing, indexing and processing of information. Cataloguing of books, serials and governmental documents, as well as indexing of selected periodical articles and Geneva-issued United Nations documentation for input into the database and its published outputs; and reinforced collaboration with the Dag Hammarskjöld Library on the shared database; (iii) Provision of multimedia information support services for programmes of the United Nations Office at Geneva as well as for official and other users. Responding to research requests from Geneva-based Secretariat and affiliated staff, United Nations officials and delegates, representatives of accredited media, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and external scholars, using traditional book and periodical collections as well as the Internet and other multimedia resources that are now essential for servicing the new cyberspace virtual information environment; organizing training courses for Secretariat staff on library research techniques; providing specialized advisory workshops for missions, information centres and depository libraries; and arranging for specialized training sessions for staff of the United Nations Office at Geneva to perfect their external database research and information processing skills; (iv) League of Nations archives. Maintenance and restoration of League documentation and other related historical collections; provision of services to users of League archival materials; and responsibility for the League of Nations Museum, including special ad hoc exhibitions. Significant performance indicators Recurrent publications (issues produced) Recurrent CD-ROMs Electronic issuances Library guided tours Training tools: 2 slide/transparency sets (English and French) Special events (2 exhibits and 2 United Nations open house events) International cooperation and inter-agency coordination and liaison Participation in international meetings (global) Participation in United Nations system meetings Participation in the Administrative Committee on Coordination and its subsidiary machinery Conference services/library services Selection of material for library collections Books purchased Gifts and exchanges Acquisition of documents and publications Government documents/periodicals (issues) United Nations system documents/publications Information processing of collection materials (Endeavor and UNBIS database records) Cataloguing records (books, serials) Indexing (United Nations documents) Indexing (periodical articles) Responding to requests for information Reference queries (oral, phone and written) Library users Provision of loan, photocopy and routing services Loans Reading room usage Periodicals routing Photocopying (pages) 2.93 The estimated requirements of $7,362,000, reflecting an increase of $314,600, would provide for the continuation of 42 posts as detailed in table 2.30. The increased requirements are the net result of the redeployment to the Library of three General Service (Other level) posts from the interpretation, meetings and publishing service for the strengthening of its activities and the abolition of one General Service (Other level) post made possible through restructuring and consolidation of functions. 2.94 The estimated requirements of $185,000, reflecting an increase of $21,000, would provide for general temporary assistance to cover peak workload periods and replacement of regular staff on maternity or extended sick leave. It will also be used to provide clerical support for work on retrospective collection management projects, special bibliographies and computerization projects, including the continued keyboarding of data on past holdings of serials into the Geneva Library’s integrated management system. 2.95 A provision of $7,500, reflecting an increase of $2,000, is requested for two trips to New York by the Chief Librarian for annual consultations on coordination of library programmes. 2.96 The estimated requirements of $164,400, reflecting an increase of $24,000, relate to fees for access to on-line external databases as part of the Library’s established services to users, as well as to contractual work by outside publishers with respect to the development of library electronic products such as CD-ROMs. 2.97 A provision of $134,700, reflecting a decrease of $11,200, would be used for the maintenance of computer, microform and copying equipment, which constitute the basic necessities of the Geneva Library’s technological infrastructure. 2.98 The estimated requirements of $654,900, at the maintenance level, would provide for the acquisition of specialized library supplies, including books, newspaper and periodical subscriptions, microforms and CD-ROMs, as well as for the binding of library collections, interlibrary loan expenses and data-processing materials. 2.99 The estimated requirements of $201,200, at the maintenance level, would provide for (a) furniture, bookshelves and microform filing cabinets; (b) specialized software with enhanced computing potential required for the Geneva Library’s new integrated management information system; (c) a Web server to connect the software applications used by the Library to the Internet; and (d) acquisition and replacement of office automation equipment. 2.100 Conference services for the United Nations and UNIDO at the Vienna International Centre were managed jointly until 1 April 1995, with the United Nations administering meetings and interpretation services and UNIDO handling translation and documentation services. With the establishment of unified conference services under United Nations management on that date, translation and related documentation services were transferred from UNIDO in accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/237 of 31 March 1995. In that resolution, the General Assembly established the following conditions and criteria: (a) the arrangements for the unified service should be accomplished within existing resources, taking into account increased income in respect of reimbursements from UNIDO for services provided by the United Nations; (b) an examination of the cause of the high vacancy rate in the Professional category should be undertaken prior to any proposal for increasing the staffing table of conference services in Vienna; (c) the requirements for both conference-servicing staff and the organigramme of the unified conference services at the United Nations Office at Vienna should be reviewed on the basis of updated workload statistics, workload standards and the future requirements for conference servicing at Vienna. The above criteria and subsequent budgetary and operational developments have been taken into account in formulating the budget proposals contained herein. 2.101 Since 1992, the United Nations has provided interpretation services to IAEA, which maintains that, because of its specialized requirements, it will continue to operate a separate translation and publications programme. Under the terms of the tripartite memorandum of understanding between the Vienna-based organizations, IAEA provides common printing and library services for all three organizations. 2.102 The provisional Technical Secretariat of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization was established at the Vienna International Centre in 1997. Since then, the United Nations has been providing a full range of conference services to that organization. While the conference-servicing needs of the organization have been met through separate programme support arrangements, they are included in the full budget proposal for 2000–2001, and are treated in the same manner as those of UNIDO and IAEA in connection with net budgeting, rather than being accounted for separately. 2.103 Under the policy guidance and substantive authority of the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services, the Chief of Conference Services at Vienna supervises the Planning and Coordination Section; the Interpretation Section; six Translation Sections; the Editorial, Publishing and Correspondence Section; and the Linguistic Support Unit, and provides overall direction and management of conference services at Vienna. 2.104 Prior to the biennium 1998–1999, reimbursement for conference services provided by the United Nations was accounted for under income section 2 of the programme budget. Beginning with the biennium 1998–1999, the requirements of conference services at Vienna were budgeted on a net basis, whereby the appropriation under the United Nations regular budget was made for just the United Nations share of those activities. The full budget, for which the United Nations has responsibility under the arrangements for unified conference services and which is the basis for the net budget, is, however, also presented for review and approval by the General Assembly. Thus, the estimates that follow are presented on both a gross and a net basis, as summarized by subprogramme in the table below. ture revised appropriation at current rates Subprogramme Central planning and coordination United Nations (gross) Reimbursement from UNIDO and the Comprehensive Nuclear- Test-Ban Treaty Organization United Nations (net) Interpretation, meeting and publishing services Reimbursement from UNIDO, IAEA and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization Reimbursement b ab a Prior to the biennium 1998–1999, the full cost of conference services in Vienna was provided for under the United Nations regular budget, and reimbursements received from UNIDO and IAEA were accounted for under income section 2 of the programme budget. b No reimbursement is received from UNIDO, IAEA or the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization for library information services, as the services under this subprogramme are provided by IAEA, with the United Nations reimbursing IAEA for its share of costs. 2.105 The above table shows that for 2000–2001, the estimated reimbursements for conference services provided to UNIDO, IAEA and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization total $10,072,000. They are based on workload projections and the present cost-sharing arrangements and take into account a number of forthcoming meetings and their preparation by substantive programmes based in Vienna. United Nations share in the cost of conference services, Vienna (provided by the United Nations) and in the cost of printing, library and computer services (provided by the International Atomic Energy Agency) Table 2.31 Summary of requirements by programme (net budget) Table 2.32 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure (net budget) 2.106 The total requirements under the regular budget of the United Nations for conference services, Vienna, are estimated at $28,835,700, reflecting a net reduction of $588,100. With the exception of the direct cost for library books ($205,700), which is not a shared cost and which relates to books acquired on behalf of all entities of the United Nations Office at Vienna, United Nations requirements for conference and library services in Vienna are budgeted under grants and contributions. The total requirements of $28,630,000 under grants and contributions include the share of the United Nations in unified conference services ($27,095,400) and reimbursement to IAEA for the United Nations share in the cost of common printing services ($693,200) and library and computer services ($841,400). 2.107 The resource increase of $619,200 for activities under planning, development and coordination of conference services, reflected in table 2.31, is attributed mainly to increases in terms of the full cost of computer support ($325,500), the inward redeployment of one General Service (Principal level) post and upgrading of one P-3 post to the P-4 level ($196,000) and a reduction in the estimated reimbursement for documents control ($98,000). The reduction in requirements under interpretation, meetings and publishing services of $526,000 is due mainly to the change in terms of full costs as a result of the outward redeployment of one General Service (Principal level) post ($155,500) and a reduction in general temporary assistance ($425,100). The decrease in requirements under translation and editorial services of $566,300 is the net effect of a reduction in temporary assistance for meetings ($1,058,000), an increase in the use of contractual translation ($728,700) and an increase in the estimated reimbursement for translation ($237,000). An additional factor contributing to reduction of the United Nations share of the above three subprogrammes is the servicing of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, which has diminished the share of costs apportioned to the United Nations as well as to UNIDO. The reduction in library services is due to the redeployment of $115,000 for the provision for books and other legal publications to UNCITRAL under section 8, Legal affairs. Total requirements of conference services, Vienna (full budget) Table 2.33 Summary of requirements by programme Table 2.34 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.35 Post requirements Organizational unit: Conference Services, Vienna (a) Planning, development and coordination of conference services, Vienna (full budget) Table 2.36 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.37 Post requirements Organizational units: Office of the Chief of Conference Services; Planning and Coordination Sectiona a Excluding the Distribution and Reproduction Unit and the Contractual Translation Unit, which are reflected under other subprogrammes. 2.108 The Planning and Coordination Section is the focal point for the planning, coordination and monitoring of conference services at Vienna, leading to the rational allocation and capacity utilization of resources, both internal and external. It is responsible for centralizing all information and statistics, introducing electronic methods where they do not exist, analysing all data and preparing budgets. 2.109 During the biennium 2000–2001, the main emphasis of this subprogramme will be on: (a) Better utilization of human resources, including posts, temporary assistance and contracted services, through reinforced centralized planning and coordination, streamlined reporting lines and improved monitoring and management, with the aim of achieving the most cost-effective pattern while maintaining the quality of services; (b) Expanding contractual services for translation, editing and proof-reading/copy preparation, as well as extending it to design and typography; (c) Further streamlining forms and processes in order to provide customers with a single electronic tool for planning and forecasting their meeting and documentation requirements. 2.110 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Planning and coordination of meetings services. Planning and coordinating meeting and documentation requirements of the United Nations, UNIDO and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization in and away from Vienna, as well as for other bodies meeting in Vienna; and allocation of staffing, equipment and other relevant services for each meeting; (b) Documents control. Planning and coordination of the production schedule for documentation in accordance with the requirements of meetings; ensuring the timely and efficient processing of all United Nations, UNIDO and Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization documentation by means of forecasting, scheduling, setting priorities, deciding on the most cost-effective mode of work, monitoring and expediting the work required; arranging for the exchange of work between duty stations; coordinating remote translation for meetings held away from Headquarters and electronic transmission of documentation; and generating workload statistics through Documents Control and the performance monitoring system; (c) Meeting servicing. Servicing meetings in and away from Vienna by providing assistance, logistical support and information to delegates and substantive offices and coordinating technical facilities for meetings, meeting rooms and office assignments. Meetings planning services United Nations UNIDO Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 2.111 The estimated requirements of $2,765,000, reflecting an increase of $196,000, would provide for the posts detailed in table 2.37. The increase is due (a) to the inward redeployment of one General Service (Principal level) post to the Documents Control Unit of the Planning and Coordination Section from the Interpretation Service to accommodate additional workload resulting from expansion of contractual translation arrangements; and (b) to the reclassification of the post of Chief, Documents Control Unit, from P-3 to P-4 to reflect adequately the supervisory functions and additional responsibilities of the post arising from the expansion of contractual translation arrangements and the introduction of a new system of documents control. 2.112 The resource requirements for other staff costs are estimated at $716,400, reflecting a decrease of $4,100, as follows: (a) temporary assistance for meetings ($435,600) based on past expenditure patterns; (b) general temporary assistance ($77,900) to provide for maternity leave and extended sick leave replacements and for peak workload activities for Conference Services as a whole; and (c) overtime ($202,900), which is centralized in the Office of the Chief of Conference Services and maintained under strict control. Planned utilization and flexible working-hour arrangements are used to ensure that overtime costs are kept to a minimum with limited overtime required for peak workload periods. 2.113 Travel resources estimated at $38,900, reflecting an increase of $4,500, are required for coordination of activities with Headquarters and other duty stations and for participation in the Inter-Agency Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publications. 2.114 The estimated requirements of $403,200, reflecting an increase of $325,500, would cover the workstation fees for servicing of the personal computers of Conference Services, Vienna. A workstation fee of $1,100 per personal computer per annum is being introduced by the United Nations Office at Vienna in the biennium 2000–2001. A portion of this fee was included in the Conference Services budget for 1998–1999, while the rest was budgeted under section 27G, Administration, Vienna. This fee is being introduced as a cost-sharing arrangement for the service provided to users in response to the recommendation of the Board of Auditors (A/53/5, vol. I) that common service costs should be shared. The fee is charged under a service agreement for each desktop workstation, and incorporates the costs for: (a) workstation and central infrastructure hardware and software maintenance; (b) central infrastructure hardware/software upgrades and replacement; (c) standard software suite and operating system upgrades (excluding non-standard software and the initial workstation operating system); and (d) network and help desk support. This support is provided by the Information Technology Section, Division of Administration and Common Services, Vienna. 2.115 A provision of $451,600 is made under this heading for the acquisition of office automation equipment ($80,100) and the replacement of obsolete equipment ($371,500). The acquisition of the following equipment would be required: one personal computer, three notebook computers, four laser printers, one small printer, one standard and one large-format scanner, one label printer, two built-in motorized projection screens and one video data projector. The expansion of the current shared CD-ROM facility would also be required. It is also proposed to replace 99 computers, 25 laser printers and 20 other printers and to upgrade a portion of the installed specialized software (excluding standard text-processing software suites covered under the service agreement/workstation fee). 2.116 An estimated amount of $20,300 would be required to reimburse IAEA for printing forms, documents and schedules. (b) Translation and editorial services, Vienna (full budget) Table 2.38 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.39 Post requirements Organizational units: Translation Sections;a Contractual Translation Unit of the Planning and Coordination Section; Office of the Chief of Section and the Editorial Control Unit of the Editorial, Publishing and Correspondence Section; Linguistic Support Unit a There are six Translation Sections: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish. This table does not include the text-processing component of the Translation Sections. Posts in text-processing services are reflected under subprogramme (c), Interpretation, meetings and publishing services. 2.117 During the biennium 2000–2001, the main objective of the translation and editorial services will be to reinforce quality assurance for in-house production and for documentation produced under contractual arrangements, through, in particular, the extensive use of new technologies. Particular attention will be paid to expansion of contractual translation as the most cost-effective and economical arrangement. 2.118 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Translation services. Translation and revision of documents, official correspondence and publications; assessment of the quality of contractual translations; quality control of contractual translation; and provision of reference and terminology services for translators, interpreters and editors, as well as to external contractors; (b) Editorial services. Editorial services for parliamentary and other official documentation and the publication programmes of the United Nations Office at Vienna, UNIDO and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization; and quality control for contractual editing; (c) Contractual services. Outsourcing translation, editing, proof-reading, typesetting, typing and other work; providing assistance and feedback to contractors; coordinating the quality control system; maintaining, updating and expanding the roster of individual and corporate contractors; and preparing contracts and providing information to personnel and financial services. Comprehensive Nuclear-Test- Ban Treaty Organization Staff and contractual 2.119 The estimated requirements of $13,065,300 would provide for the continuation of the posts detailed in table 2.39. 2.120 Resources in the amount of $2,816,800, reflecting a reduction of $1,058,000, relate to requirements for temporary assistance for meetings. The established translation and editorial capacity is supplemented by freelance staff during meetings held at Vienna and other sites. Temporary assistance requirements for this purpose are mostly for translation. The decrease in requirements is due to the expansion of contractual translation and productivity gains in the work performed for translation, editing and text processing. 2.121 The resource requirements under this heading ($1,460,400), including an increase of $728,700, relate mainly to external contractual translation and other related services. The increase proposed is based on positive experience gained in prior periods that confirmed that with proper quality control contractual translation can be maintained at the level of 25 to 30 per cent of the overall translation workload, while proving to be the most cost-effective approach. (c) Interpretation, meeting and publishing services, Vienna (full budget) Table 2.40 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure Table 2.41 Post requirements Organizational units: Interpretation Section; text-processing services component of each of the Translation Sections; Correspondence Unit and Electronic Publishing Unit of the Editorial, Publishing and Correspondence Section; Distribution and Reproduction Unit of the Planning and Coordination Section 2.122 Under the general supervision of the Chief of Conference Services, the Interpretation Section is responsible for providing interpretation services for meetings of the United Nations Office at Vienna, UNIDO, IAEA, and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization in Vienna and at conference sites away from Vienna. 2.123 During the biennium 2000–2001, emphasis will be placed on further integration of the text-processing and electronic publishing functions into a single electronically supported work process based on more versatile utilization of staff resources, leading to higher efficiency; and improvement of composition and graphic work by increasing in-house productivity on the basis of new technologies and through contractual arrangements. 2.124 During the biennium 2000–2001, the following outputs will be delivered: (a) Interpretation services. Provision of simultaneous interpretation in the six official languages for UNIDO, IAEA, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization and other Vienna-based United Nations units, as well as for meetings convened in Vienna by other departments and offices of the Secretariat and for meetings of Vienna-based bodies held outside Vienna; (b) Verbatim reporting services. Provision of unedited transcripts for the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in lieu of verbatim records; (c) Text processing. Text processing in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish and editorial text processing, primarily of pre-session, in-session and post-session documentation for the United Nations Office at Vienna, UNIDO and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, as well as some publications work; (d) Copy preparation. Copy preparation and proof-reading of documents and publications in English, French and Spanish, page make-up, layout and graphic presentation services; (e) Reproduction. Reproduction of printed matter through the use of high-speed photocopying equipment or the common printing service of IAEA; (f) Distribution. Distribution of documentation and publications to delegations and users at UNIDO, as well as to organizations and institutions worldwide. Interpretation services (interpreter-days) IAEA Interpreter-days (total) Copy preparation (thousands of words) Distribution (thousands of units) 2.125 The estimated requirements of $10,346,200, reflecting a reduction of $155,500, would provide for the posts detailed in table 2.41. The decrease is due to the redeployment of a General Service (Principal level) post from the Interpretation Service to the Documents Control Unit of the Planning and Coordination Section in order to accommodate additional workload in that Unit. 2.126 Based on experience gained so far with unified conference services, it is estimated that requirements of $5,083,300, reflecting a decrease of $425,100, would be used for temporary assistance for meetings to provide interpretation, text-processing, reproduction and distribution services for meetings to be serviced by Conference Services, Vienna. This provision would also cover the travel of conference-servicing staff to meetings held away from Vienna. (d) Library services, Vienna (full budget) Table 2.42 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure 2.127 Library services will continue to be provided by IAEA on behalf of the United Nations in accordance with the terms of the memorandum of understanding of 31 March 1977. For administrative purposes, resource requirements for the United Nations share of the common printing service provided by IAEA are also included under this subprogramme. 2.128 For library services, the sharing of staff and operating costs is based on the ratio of Professional staff per organization. However, the cost of acquisition of books, as well as subscriptions to journals, depends on requirements of the units of the United Nations Office at Vienna and is budgeted separately under this subprogramme. The cost-sharing procedures and formulas for library services are subject to regular review and negotiation. Given the tripartite nature of the existing agreement, a consensus of the three organizations is a requisite for any amendment. 2.129 Following the transfer of the International Trade Law Branch from New York to Vienna in 1979, a separate trade law library was established in Vienna. All functions within this library are performed by Branch staff, and the trade law library is located within the premises allocated to the Branch, and not in the Vienna International Centre Library. Previously, the acquisition of legal publications was provided for under this budget section. However, as the publications are dependent on the work programme of UNCITRAL, the budgetary provision for legal publications will be reflected in section 8, Legal affairs, of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001, and shown as part of the UNCITRAL budget. This is in line with the function of the library to provide the Commission’s secretariat and government representatives with books, journals and updates. 2.130 The proposed requirements of $205,700, reflecting a decrease of $115,000, would cover the acquisition of library books for the United Nations Office at Vienna. The proposed reduction relates to the provision for the cost of books and other legal publications to be acquired on behalf of UNCITRAL ($115,000), as explained in paragraph 2.129. 2.131 The resource requirements of $1,534,600, at maintenence level, relate to the following: (a) Joint printing services. The proposed provision of $693,300 is to cover the cost of reimbursement to IAEA for printing services for production of United Nations documentation for the United Nations Office at Vienna; (b) Joint library and computer services. The proposed amount of $841,300 is mainly to cover the Office’s share of the library services costs. Table 2.43 Summary of requirements by object of expenditure a The significant resource growth relates to general temporary assistance required for the preparation of Volume II and of draft studies for Volume IV of Supplement 6 of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs and the Repertoire of Practice of the Security Council. Table 2.44 Post requirements Organizational unit: Executive Office 2.132 The Executive Office of the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services provides central administrative support services to the Department in the areas of personnel, financial and general administration. It also provides administrative support to senior managers of the Department by advising on personnel, financial, budgetary and administrative policies and practices. A distinct, yet related, function is the provision of information management technology support, which is carried out by the Information Management Technology Unit of the Executive Office. 2.133 The Information Management Technology Unit, established in the biennium 1998–1999, deals with the specific software development and equipment maintenance aspects of the Department, in particular those relating to the production of documents in all the official languages. During the biennium 2000–2001, the Unit will focus on the following priorities: (a) expansion of the submission of documents to the Reproduction Section in digital versions rather than hard copy, considerably simplifying the reproduction process; (b) transmission of documents in electronic format throughout the entire production process; (c) expansion of the computer-assisted translation project to encompass 15 per cent of translation work; (d) consolidation of computerized terminology data banks, accessible on-line to all language staff at the main duty stations; (e) determination of the technical, financial and organizational feasibility of large-scale remote interpretation; (f) integration of the computer applications used for the planning and servicing of meetings as well as the scheduling of interpreters, thereby improving the coordination of all work components; (g) digitalization of the meetings recording system to facilitate the further development of remote verbatim reporting and the use of server-based speech libraries rather than dictaphone tapes; (h) introduction of a new stock control system for documents that will integrate printing on demand and create an inventory control system, with faster document delivery, shorter response time and greater output; and (i) incorporation of data on distribution patterns in the digital versions of documents, in order to streamline and speed up their distribution to final recipients after printing. 2.134 The total estimated requirements under this heading ($3,205,200), reflecting an increase of $221,800, would provide for the posts detailed in table 2.44. The increase relates to the inward redeployment of two General Service (Other level) posts to the Information Management Technology Unit of the Executive Office, one from the Translation and Editorial Division and one from the Text-Processing Section of the Interpretation, Meetings and Publishing Division, in order to centralize and strengthen technological support for the Department’s operations. 2.135 The total provision of $393,700, including an increase of $389,000, would cover: (a) overtime during periods of peak workload ($4,700); and (b) general temporary assistance required for tasks involved in the preparation of Volume II and of draft studies for Volume IV of Supplement 6 of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs and the Repertoire of Practice of the Security Council ($389,000). 2.136 The total estimated requirements of $89,500, reflecting a reduction of $8,400, relate to the following: the share of the Executive Office in the maintenance and support of the LAN infrastructure (including central servers) necessary for the support of central management services such as e-mail, UNIX for IMIS, etc. ($11,500); communications ($15,600); and maintenance of office automation equipment ($62,400). 2.137 The estimated requirements of $24,800, reflecting a decrease of $2,300, relate to the cost of stationery and other office supplies. 2.138 The estimated requirements of $102,200, reflecting a reduction of $32,200, relate to the upgrading and replacement of existing office automation equipment. Table 2.45 Summary of follow-up action taken to implement relevant recommendations of the internal and external oversight bodies and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions Brief description of the recommendation Action taken to implement the recommendation Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/52/7 (Chap. II, Part VIII)) A computer-based system of cost accounting needs to be in place before the concept of “charge-back” is introduced (paras. VIII.8 –VIII.13). There are no plans to introduce a comprehensive “charge-back” system for the services provided by the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services. The development of a computer-based accounting system is being considered; actions taken have been reported to the Committee on Conferences, the Advisory Committee and the General Assembly. Workload standards should be re-evaluated, given the potential for increase in productivity as a result of utilization of new technology (para. VIII.153). The workload standards for translation services were reviewed last by the General Assembly in 1993 in the context of its review of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1994–1995. Following a request from the Advisory Committee in its first report on the proposed programme budget for the biennium 1998–1999, the issue of workload standards has been revisited. It has been found that self-revision, which is entrusted to experienced revisers at the P-4 and P-5 levels, is less time-consuming than was expected at the time the standards were established. On the other hand, the introduction of self-revision now restricts full revision to complex documents and the output of less experienced translators at the P-2 and P-3 levels, thus making it more time-consuming than initially anticipated. Accordingly, a revision of the workload standards approved by the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session is proposed as follows: (a) Translation: Current standard: one work day for every 1,650 words Proposed standard: no change from current standard (b) Revision: Current standard: one work day for every 4,950 words Proposed standard: one work day for every 3,960 words (c) Self-revision: Current standard: one work day for every 1,400 words Proposed standard: one work day for every 1,815 words The Advisory Committee recommended that there be close coordination between the systems for remote interpretation to be introduced in New York, Geneva and Vienna (para. VIII.157). A pilot project in remote interpretation is being implemented by the Department for all three duty stations at this time. Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/52/7/Add.1) Servicing arrangements provided by the Department of General Assembly Affairs should be kept under review, and the review should include arrangements for servicing the Security Council (para. 10). Servicing arrangements provided by the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services are constantly under review by both Member States and the Secretariat. Joint Inspection Unit (A/51/686) Enhanced consultative arrangements involving all Headquarters entities should be established; a user-management committee representing all Headquarters entities should be set up (paras. 26–27 and 57). The Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services is engaged in an active dialogue with substantive secretariats of all bodies based in New York. Meetings to discuss servicing issues are held quarterly (weekly during the main part of the General Assembly regular session). Any further initiatives should be taken by users. Board of Auditors (A/53/5, vol. I, chap. II) Consideration should be given to establishing a system whereby users of common services are required to pay for such services on cost apportionment basis (paras. 130 and 131). Common service arrangements are being considered for New York in a task force convened by the Office of Central Support Services. The United Nations Office at Geneva and the United Nations Office at Vienna should adopt the set of key performance indicators proposed by the Secretary-General for conference services and develop performance indicators to cover other services (paras. 11 (k) and 136–138). Workload standards for conference-servicing functions apply equally at Headquarters, the United Nations Office at Geneva and the United Nations Office at Vienna. Other performance indicators are being developed. Conference services at both the United Nations Office at Geneva and the United Nations Office at Vienna should improve their performance and secure more timely receipt of documents from client departments (paras. 145–152). Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 53/208, all author departments are being asked to comply strictly with the rules for preparation and submission of documents. 