%%%CAPITAL PUNISHMENT|UGANDA|HUMAN RIGHTS|

99-13290 (E) 070599 070599 United Nations A/54/93 General Assembly Distr.: General 6 May 1999 English Original: French Fifty-fourth session Item 117 (b) of the preliminary list A/54/50. Human rights questions: human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms Letter dated 5 May 1999 from the Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General I have the honour to bring to your attention a statement on the death penalty in Uganda issued on 4 May 1999 by the Presidency of the European Union (see annex). I should be grateful if you would have the text of this letter and its annex circulated as a General Assembly document. (Signed) Dieter Kastrup Permanent Representative of Germany to the United Nations A/54/93 Annex [Original: English and French] Statement on the death penalty in Uganda issued on 4 May 1999 by the Presidency of the European Union The European Union deeply regrets the execution of 28 Ugandan nationals on 29 April 1999 and the decision of the Ugandan authorities thus to break the de facto moratorium on executions that Uganda had kept since 1996. The European Union regrets that its approach to the Ugandan authorities for the commutation of the sentences has not been heard. The European Union considers that the abolition of the death penalty contributes to strengthening human dignity and to the progressive development of human rights. The European Union attaches the utmost importance to respect for the right to life proclaimed in article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The European Union firmly supports the fight against crime and terrorism, but it does not recognize capital punishment as an effective instrument in preventing crime. The European Union believes that use of the death penalty — especially in such numbers — may, on the contrary, raise the already high level of violence in Uganda. The European Union works resolutely for the universal abolition of the death penalty; it calls on the Ugandan authorities to resume the moratorium on executions. The Central and Eastern European countries Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia, the associated country Cyprus and the European Free Trade Association countries members of the European Economic Area align themselves with the present statement. 