%%%TREATIES|OUTER SPACE|SPACE LAW|

V.99-85591 (E) United Nations A/AC.105/724 General Assembly Distr.: General 22 June 1999 Original: English Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space List of International Agreements and Other Available Legal Documents Relevant to Space-related Activities (and where they might be found), prepared by the Secretariat as a working document for member States Note by the Secretariat 1. At its thirty-seventh session, in 1998, the Legal Subcommittee agreed that the Secretariat should be requested to prepare, within existing resources, a list of international agreements and other available legal documents relevant to space-related activities, indicating where they might be found, as a working document for member States. The Subcommittee also noted that, in preparing the list, the Secretariat might wish to seek assistance from member States (A/AC.105/698, para. 59). The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space subsequently endorsed that recommendation of the Legal Subcommittee at its forty-first session. Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/53/20), para. 144. 2. A preliminary list was prepared by the Secretariat in accordance with the above-mentioned request and presented to the Legal Subcommittee at its thirty-eighth session, in 1999, for its consideration. It was anticipated that a revised version of the list, taking into account any comments of the Subcommittee, would be made available in electronic format and as an official document of the United Nations for the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III). In addition, following the thirty-eighth session of the Legal Subcommittee, Member States were requested by the Secretariat to provide information on their national legislation and other legal documents relevant to space-related activities, including where they might be found, for inclusion in the list. The responses received provided the basis for most of the information appearing in the section on national law and legislation. A/AC.105/724 3. A revised version of the above-mentioned list, incorporating the comments and responses received from Member States, has been published in a booklet, International Agreements and Other Available Legal Documents Relevant to Space-related Activities, for reference during UNISPACE III. Given the limited resources available in view of the preparations for UNISPACE III, it has not been possible to edit or translate the publication as an official United Nations document. An electronic version of the list may be obtained upon request from the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. Notes 