%%%SELF-DETERMINATION OF PEOPLES|MILITARY ACTIVITY|NON-SELF-GOVERNING TERRITORIES|

United Nations A/AC.109/1999/27 General Assembly Distr.: General 6 July 1999 Original: English Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Decision adopted by the Special Committee at its 11th meeting, on 6 July 1999 Military activities and arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their administration 1. The Special Committee, having considered the item entitled “Military activities and arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their administration” and recalling General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and all other relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to military activities in colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories, reaffirms its strong conviction that military bases and installations in the Territories concerned could constitute an obstacle to the exercise by the people of those Territories of their right to self-determination, and reiterates its strong views that existing bases and installations, which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, should be withdrawn. 2. Aware of the presence of such bases and installations in some of those Territories, the Special Committee urges the administering Powers concerned to continue to take all necessary measures not to involve those Territories in any offensive acts or interference against other States. 3. The Special Committee reiterates its concern that military activities and arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories under their administration might run counter to the rights and interests of the colonial peoples concerned, especially their right to self-determination and independence. The Committee once again calls upon the administering Powers concerned to terminate such activities and to eliminate such military bases in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. 4. The Special Committee reiterates that the colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories and areas adjacent thereto should not be used for nuclear testing, dumping of nuclear wastes or deployment of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. 5. The Special Committee deplores the continued alienation of land in colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly in the small island Territories of the Pacific and Caribbean regions, for military installations. The large-scale utilization of the local resources for this purpose could adversely affect the economic development of the Territories concerned. 6. The Special Committee takes note of the decision of some of the administering Powers to close or downsize some of those military bases in the Non-Self-Governing Territories. 7. The Special Committee requests the Secretary-General to continue to inform world public opinion of those military activities and arrangements in colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories which constitute an obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. 8. The Special Committee decides, subject to any directives that the General Assembly may give in this connection at its fifty-fourth session, to continue to consider the item at its next session. 