%%%TERRORISM|TREATIES|

99-07382 (E) A/AC.252/1999/WP.20 17 March 1999 Original: English Ad Hoc Committee established by General Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 Third session 15–26 March 1999 Proposal submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning articles 1 and 2 Article 1 For the purpose of this Convention: 1. “Funds” means cash or any other property, tangible or intangible. 2. (a) Terrorist offences means such offences specified in the treaties listed in the Annex to this Convention as are mentioned expressly in the Annex. (b) On depositing its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession of this Convention, a State which is not a party to a treaty listed in the Annex may declare that, in the application of this Convention to that State Party, offences specified in that treaty shall not be treated as terrorist offences. Such declaration shall cease to have effect as soon as that treaty enters into force for that State Party, which shall notify the depositary of that fact and the depositary shall so notify the other States Parties. (c) States Parties may propose the addition to the list in the Annex of offences specified in another treaty. Once the depositary has received such a proposal from [22] States Parties, the Annex shall be deemed to have been so amended [90] days after the depositary has informed all States Parties that he has received [22] such proposals. However, a State Party which is not a party to such treaty may, within the said period of [90] days, declare that the amendment shall not apply to that State Party. Such declaration shall cease to have effect as soon as the treaty enters into force for the State Party. The State Party shall inform the depositary, which shall so notify the other States Parties. (d) All declarations and other communications concerning the Annex shall be made to or by the depositary and be in writing. 3. “Organization” means ... Article 2 1. Any person commits an offence within the meaning of this Convention if that person provides funds by any means, lawful or unlawful, directly or indirectly, to any person or organization, either: (a) With the intention that the funds should be used for the preparation or commission of terrorist offences; or (b) In the knowledge that the funds are to be used for such purposes; or (c) When there is a reasonable likelihood that the funds will be used for such purpose. 