%%%SOUTH AFRICA|OBSERVER STATUS|PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|FINANCING|

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each Committee. United Nations A/BUR/54/SR.3 General Assembly Distr.: General Fifty-fourth session 9 December 1999 Official Records Original: English General Committee Summary record of the 3rd meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Friday, 8 October 1999, at 9.15 a.m. Chairman: Mr. Gurirab (Namibia) Contents Adoption of the agenda of the fifty-fourth regular session of the General Assembly and allocation of items (continued) Request for the inclusion of an additional item submitted by Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and Sao Tome and Principe Request for the inclusion of an additional sub-item submitted by South Africa Letter from the Chairman of the Second Committee addressed to the President of the General Assembly A/BUR/54/SR.3 The meeting was called to order at 9.25 a.m. Request for the inclusion of an additional item submitted by Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and Sao Tome and Principe (A/54/232) 1. The Chairman invited the Committee to consider a request for the inclusion of an additional item entitled ”Observer status for the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries in the General Assembly”. The representative of Angola had asked to address the Committee in accordance with rule 43 of the rules of procedure. 2. At the invitation of the Chairman, Mr. Van Dunem Mbinda (Angola) took a place at the Committee table. 3. Mr. Van Dunem Mbinda (Angola) said that the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) had been created in 1996 when the Heads of State and Government of Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, and Sao Tome and Principe, meeting in Lisbon, had decided to provide a response to the aspirations of the approximately 200 million people who considered the Portuguese language a means of communication, a historic link and a common heritage. They considered it imperative to consolidate the cultural identity of the Portuguese-speaking countries, while reflecting the special character of their relationship and cooperation over the years, to enhance the international identity of those countries, which, although geographically separated, shared a common language, and to reaffirm the commitment to strengthen their ties by taking concerted initiatives to promote their economic and social development and to disseminate the Portuguese language. 4. The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries had established the Conference of Heads of State and Government, the Council of Ministers, the Standing Committee for Consultation and the Executive Secretariat to carry out its tasks. In order to pursue its objectives with greater efficiency and enhance cooperation, the status of observer in the General Assembly would be extremely beneficial. 5. The Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the item should be included in the agenda, and that it should be considered directly in plenary meeting. 6. Mr. Van Dunem Mbinda (Angola) withdrew. Request for the inclusion of an additional sub-item submitted by South Africa (A/54/233) 7. The Chairman invited the Committee to consider a request by South Africa for the inclusion of an additional sub-item entitled “Relocation of South Africa to the group of Member States set out in paragraph 3 (c) of General Assembly resolution 43/232”. The representative of South Africa had asked to address the Committee in accordance with rule 43 of the rules of procedure. 8. At the invitation of the Chairman, Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) took a place at the Committee table. 9. Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) said that his Government had two reasons for making its request for relocation. First, a decision had been taken at the twelfth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries that members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and other developing countries should be classified no higher than group (c) in the scale of assessments for United Nations peacekeeping operations. Second, South Africa was in fact a developing country with an average yearly per capita gross national product of $3,400. South Africa’s current location in category (b) was a historical anomaly which could be attributed to the misguided policy of the apartheid Government, which had sought to project South Africa as economically developed. However, the size of its economy, taken against the burdens of its social realities, made it impossible for South Africa to live beyond its means. 10. The Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that the sub-item should be included in the agenda under item 151, and that it should be allocated to the Fifth Committee. 11. Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) withdrew. Letter from the Chairman of the Second Committee addressed to the President of the General Assembly (A/54/438) 12. The Chairman invited the Committee to consider a letter from the Chairman of the Second Committee concerning agenda item 101, “Operational activities for development of the United Nations system”, proposing that sub-item (a) of that agenda item should be considered directly in plenary meeting, on the understanding that only the topic “Follow-up of the World Summit for Children” would be considered in plenary meeting. 13. The Committee decided to recommend to the General Assembly that agenda item 101 (a) should be considered directly in plenary meeting, on the understanding that only the topic “Follow-up of the World Summit for Children” would be considered in plenary meeting. The meeting rose at 9.40 a.m. 