%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|DISPUTE SETTLEMENT|STAND-BY ARRANGEMENTS|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|HUMANITARIAN INTERVENTION|SPECIAL MISSIONS|KOSOVO (SERBIA)|TIMOR-LESTE|AFRICA|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|TRAINING PROGRAMMES|FINANCING|

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned within one week of the date of publication to the Chief of the Official Records Editing Section, room DC2-750, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of the record. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session, in a separate corrigendum for each Committee. United Nations A/C.4/54/SR.13 General Assembly Distr.: General Fifty-fourth session 14 December 1999 English Official Records Original: French Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) Summary record of the 13th meeting Held at Headquarters, New York, on Thursday, 21 October 1999, at 3 p.m. Chairman: Mr. Zackheos (Cyprus) Contents Agenda item 90: Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (continued) A/C.4/54/SR.13 The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m. Agenda item 90: Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects (continued) (A/54/87 and A/54/63-S/1999/171; A/C.4/54/L.2*) 1. Mr. Bozay (Turkey) said that his country, which was aware of the crucial importance of peacekeeping operations for international peace and security, believed that it was its duty to participate in such operations; it was determined to continue to do so and to enhance and diversify its presence. His country was actively participating in several United Nations missions and in a number of European operations. It was also participating in training activities and had, inter alia, hosted the Seventh United Nations Training Assistance Team Seminar, as well as a meeting on the control of refugees in peacekeeping operations. Moreover, the International Training Centre of the Turkish Armed Forces also trained both local and international staff. 2. It had been at Turkey’s initiative that an agreement on the establishment of a multinational peace force in South-eastern Europe had been signed. At the international level, he reaffirmed Turkey’s support for the initiatives taken by the United Nations to enhance African peacekeeping capacity and pointed out that it had offered to work with other Member States in exploring ways and means of enhancing that capacity. 3. The threats to international peace and security had become more complex and fraught with tragic consequences, requiring rapid and multidimensional responses. The establishment of the Rapidly Deployable Mission Headquarters, supplemented by an enhanced United Nations standby arrangements system, would make it possible to meet the need for a rapid reaction. In view of the specific nature of each crisis, his delegation hoped that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations would be given all the resources it needed to determine the most appropriate response so that the United Nations, which combined the essential characteristics of universality, credibility and legitimacy, could retain its leading role in the promotion of international peace and security. 4. Bearing in mind all the challenges, his delegation, which was, for obvious reasons, convinced that preventive diplomacy was the best way of resolving conflicts, supported all initiatives aimed at the enhancement of early warning and preventive action capabilities. In conclusion, he paid a tribute to all those who had lost their lives in the service of the United Nations. 5. Mr. Nega (Ethiopia) said that his delegation associated itself with the statement made by the representative of Jordan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Conflicts continued to rage in many parts of the world. In order to find lasting solutions and discharge the increased responsibilities it had been asked to assume, the United Nations was embarking on the task of strengthening its capacity to carry out peacekeeping operations successfully. Such operations must be based on the following principles: respect for national sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States, non-interference in internal affairs, the consent of States parties to a conflict, impartiality and non-use of force except in self-defence. Peacekeeping operations must also have clearly defined mandates and objectives, as well as adequate resources. The consent of States parties to a conflict required consultations at all stages of an operation. His delegation deplored the fact that, in a recent case, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations had not respected that fundamental principle. 6. His delegation shared the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General in his annual report on the work of the Organization on the question of humanitarian intervention. It believed, however, that, in view of the sensitive nature of that concept and the use that could be made of it to legitimize intervention in other areas, it was essential that it should be discussed in greater depth by the appropriate mechanisms of the General Assembly. 7. His delegation welcomed the issuance of the Secretary-General’s bulletin on the observance by United Nations forces of international humanitarian law (ST/SGB/1999/13) since experience in the field had shown that guidelines in that area met a real need. It was unfortunate that, in preparing the bulletin, the Secretary-General had consulted only with troop-contributing countries. 8. His delegation recognized that the primary responsibility for international peace and security lay with the United Nations. However, regional organizations such as the Organization of African Unity (OAU) had a role to play, as provided for in the Charter of the United Nations. 9. With regard to the enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity, his delegation advocated the establishment of a coordination mechanism in which the United Nations, OAU and all African countries, as well as other Member States involved in efforts to enhance African capacity, would participate. It attached great importance to cooperation between the United Nations and OAU. The Organization of African Unity needed the support of Member States, particularly in the form of contributions to its Peace Fund and to the United Nations Trust Fund for Improving Preparedness for Conflict Prevention and Peacekeeping in Africa. 10. Mr. Aponte (Ecuador) said that his delegation supported the statement made by the representative of Jordan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Peacekeeping operations provided the clearest evidence of international cooperation in the service of international peace and security. That cooperation was, however, threatened since the United Nations was experiencing budgetary difficulties and found itself obliged to reduce expenditure on peacekeeping operations, particularly the deployment of peace forces. His delegation was concerned about the possible impact of this measure on the participation of developing countries in peacekeeping operations and feared that a reduction in the number of countries participating might lead to an imbalance in geographical representation in that crucial area. 11. Since it attached great importance to peacekeeping operations, Ecuador had taken part in them virtually from the outset and had offered to participate in the United Nations standby arrangements system. The offer still stood, and it counted on the Secretariat to ensure that decisions on its participation were taken with full transparency. 12. Peacekeeping operations were precious tools in the peaceful settlement of disputes when they were conducted in strict observance of the principles of the Charter, but they were essentially temporary and could not be used as a substitute for other peaceful means of settling disputes, such as the dialogue and negotiation that were indispensable to any permanent settlement. 13. Furthermore, the emphasis on peacekeeping operations should not obscure the importance of international cooperation for economic and social development. Indeed, all its aspects of development were at the heart of the quest for international peace and security. The pursuit of development goals even constituted preventive action in conflict settlement because it allowed the containment of hotbeds of tension. 14. Many countries lacked the means and capabilities needed to participate in peacekeeping operations. His delegation therefore supported the Secretariat’s training efforts and endorsed the recommendation made by the Special Committee in paragraph 94 of its report. Thanks to support from the Canadian Government and the United Nations, Ecuador’s armed forces had been able to participate in training courses in Canada and in Turin, enabling it subsequently to set up a school specifically geared to training for peacekeeping operations. 15. Mr. Fils-Aimé (Haiti) recalled that the collapse of the Soviet bloc in 1989 had, by putting an end to the tensions of a bipolar world and favouring a spirit of openness, awakened the hope that a new era of cooperation and peace was dawning. Unfortunately, that hope had been dashed. At the moment, one could point to some 30 conflicts throughout the world, and to deal with them the United Nations had to multiply its peacekeeping operations. 16. The safety of the personnel in the field posed serious difficulties, to the point that it had become the highest priority of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. He paid tribute to those who had lost their lives in the service of peace and welcomed the entry into force of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel. While taking note with satisfaction that the number of women among the personnel had increased, his delegation was concerned about the reduction of Department staff at a time when it had to assume a range of complex and multidimensional tasks. After the 1991 coup d’état in Haiti, it had been the successive United Nations peace and security missions that had allowed the country to become once again a State under the rule of law. Knowing whereof it spoke, his Government was therefore troubled by the possible impact on the Department’s functioning if its funds were cut back and there were delays in reimbursing troop-contributing countries. 17. Although peacekeeping operations could not definitively settle conflicts whose causes often went far back, they nevertheless helped to create a climate of détente and conditions that were favourable to lasting peace and security. The Charter provisions on the settlement of disputes and the fundamental principles on which peacekeeping operations must be based should be borne in mind. Those principles, together with clearly defined mission mandates and objectives would guarantee the success of an operation. One could not overemphasize the importance of a dialogue between the beneficiaries of the operations, at both government and local levels, and the peacekeeping personnel, if only in the interests of the latter’s safety. 18. While recognizing the sacredness of national sovereignty, it was cause for celebration that at the moment no more atrocities were being perpetrated in the name of an ideology nor genocides committed out of view of the media. The extermination of part of a State’s population not only endangered its territorial integrity but also shocked the conscience of the world, and made it necessary to set aside respect for national sovereignty. Haiti counted on the Security Council to guarantee international peace and security. 19. Since the causes of conflicts could be social and economic, any peace plan must likewise contain provisions promoting the socio-economic growth and development needed to put the achievements of peacekeeping operations on a firm footing. 20. In conclusion, he thanked all the nations that had participated in the peacekeeping operations in Haiti and all those which had contributed in one way or another to improving the situation in his country. 21. Mr. Singh (Nepal) said that his delegation supported the statement of the representative of Jordan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. Peacekeeping operations, no matter how useful, were not a permanent solution to conflicts. However, they could create a conducive atmosphere for the pursuit, through other peaceful means, of a lasting settlement and thus a peaceful reconstruction. Although over the years peacekeeping operations had changed considerably, their cornerstone remained the same principles of respect for sovereignty, non-interference and neutrality. Given the complexity and diversity of the tasks that peacekeeping operations were now expected to fulfil, participation in them should be as geographically broad-based as possible. 22. Such ambitious mandates required extensive resources, as could be seen from the revised budget estimates. Delay in the payment of assessed contributions by certain rich Member States created absurd situations: for example, the reimbursement owed to some developing and least developed countries could be as high as 125 times their annual assessed contributions. The lack of funds, especially for logistics and communications, was also affecting the deployment of new missions and the liquidation of old ones. His delegation appealed to the sense of responsibility of the legislative bodies. 23. Since the credibility and effectiveness of any new operation depended on the swiftness with which it was deployed, the Rapidly Deployable Mission Headquarters should be fully staffed without delay, as recommended by the Special Committee. He deplored the violence committed against United Nations personnel and humanitarian personnel, and pointed out that 39 of his countrymen had fallen victim since Nepal had been participating in peacekeeping operations. He therefore welcomed the entry into force of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel. In conclusion, he reiterated Nepal’s firm policy of maintaining and increasing its participation in peacekeeping operations, and said that in January 2000 a seminar on peacekeeping activities would be held in Nepal’s Peacekeeping Training Centre. 24. Mr. Chkheidze (Georgia) recalled the recent kidnapping in Abkhazia of members of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). Thanks to the efforts of the Government of Georgia, it had been possible to secure their release. The incident, which raised once again the question of the safety of United Nations personnel, had occurred in a conflict zone in which anarchy prevailed. That alarming situation was prompting the Georgian authorities to consider integrating self-defence units and a civilian police component into UNOMIG. Furthermore, the issue of the protection of displaced persons and returnees in Abkhazia should be considered in the context of the peacekeeping operation, in particular by taking into account the recommendations of the Secretary-General in his report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/1999/957). 25. The operations in Kosovo and East Timor had illustrated the multidimensional nature of peacekeeping operations. That development was basically related to the spill-over of intra-State conflicts whose complex nature called for an integrated approach to address security, human rights, population displacement and arms smuggling concerns. That degree of complexity required the United Nations to be equipped with corresponding tools and capabilities, by further developing the standby arrangements system and establishing the Rapidly Deployable Mission Headquarters. 26. The Georgian delegation welcomed the publication of the Secretary-General’s bulletin on observance by United Nations forces of international humanitarian law (ST/SGB/1999/13). It would also welcome a definitive version of the draft rules of engagement for peacekeeping personnel which, together with the guiding rules and principles as set out in the aforementioned bulletin, would establish a precise legal framework for the conduct of peacekeeping personnel. 27. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations continued to play an indispensable role in the management of multidimensional operations. The Georgian delegation fully endorsed the process of rationalizing its activities and expressed its appreciation for the tireless efforts of UNOMIG to promote a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia. 28. The Department’s programme for training trainers was of particular relevance for developing the capacities of Member States in the area of peacekeeping. The Georgian delegation proposed to organize training courses for trainers in Tbilisi (Georgia). Peacekeeping was a common responsibility of the international community; that had prompted Georgia for the first time to deploy a battalion in Kosovo. That battalion could be made available to the United Nations at short notice. 29. Mr. Tekaya (Tunisia), associating himself with the statement made by the representative of Jordan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that the international community should give greater prominence to preventive diplomacy, collective security, the peaceful settlement of conflicts and respect for international law in the maintenance of international peace and security. The United Nations had certainly done much for peace but there were still many areas of tension and conflict, particularly in Africa, which called for stronger international action and better coordination of activities. 30. The initiatives on behalf of peace were ongoing, as demonstrated in the past 12 months by the launching of new peacekeeping operations of unprecedented complexity and scale, so that the international community and the Organization were now playing for new stakes. He reiterated the principles that should guide peacekeeping operations: respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of States, non-interference in the internal affairs of countries, consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use of force except in self-defence. 31. He welcomed the fact that Africa, specifically through the Organization of African Unity and its Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, had established conflict resolution as one of its priorities and wished to make preventive diplomacy its favoured tool. However, the cooperation that existed between the Organization of African Unity, the United Nations and the international community must be strengthened and the institutional capacity of the Organization of African Unity must be enhanced. Nevertheless, that did not exonerate the international community from the obligations laid down in the Charter of the United Nations, which conferred on the Security Council the principal responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, as recalled by the Secretary-General in document A/54/63-S/1999/171. To keep the peace it was sometimes essential for the international community to intervene directly through a peacekeeping operation. 32. Tunisia hoped that, once it was approved by the General Assembly, the procedure for adopting the recommendations made by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations would facilitate consideration of issues related to those operations. As proof of its commitment to the principles and objectives of the United Nations, in particular international peace and security, Tunisia had been participating in various peacekeeping operations since the 1960s and in June 1999 had signed a memorandum of understanding with the United Nations to associate itself to the extent of its means with the United Nations standby arrangements system. 33. Mr. Kuindwa (Kenya), associating himself with the statement made by the representative of Jordan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, said that, as a token of its commitment to the promotion of international peace and security, Kenya had for many years been participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations and currently had military observers and civilian police monitors in six missions in Africa and elsewhere. In addition, Kenya would be contributing troops to the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET). 34. As a member of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), Kenya had also taken diplomatic initiatives alongside other countries to find peaceful solutions to conflicts in the region. Nevertheless, while commendable initiatives had been taken by African leaders, the Security Council must continue to assume its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations in the area of international peace and security by strictly observing the principles and objectives enshrined in the Charter. Kenya therefore urged the Security Council to establish clear criteria for authorizing peacekeeping and enforcement action which would be applicable under the same conditions and with the same commitment everywhere in the world. It was regrettable that the Security Council, through its inertia in the face of certain conflicts in Africa, had cast doubt on the international community’s commitment to that continent. Whatever the region of the world, it was unacceptable for the Security Council to offload its responsibilities onto other bodies. 35. Kenya of course attached great importance to the principle of cooperation between the United Nations and regional bodies, as enshrined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, and welcomed the fact that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations was engaged in enhancing the capacities of African countries. Kenya urged the international community to focus more on the continent’s material needs and to contribute generously. 36. Kenya was deeply concerned about the financial crisis facing the United Nations which forced the Organization to borrow from peacekeeping funds to finance regular budget activities, leading to delays in the reimbursement of sums due to countries providing troops and equipment and adversely affecting the capacity and will of countries, particularly the developing countries, to participate in new missions. Kenya therefore invited all Member States to pay their assessed contributions in full, on time and without conditions. 37. With regard to procurement, the Kenyan delegation recalled General Assembly resolution 51/231 and underlined the importance of transparency and the fact that it would be desirable when procuring goods and services of equivalent prices and standards for preference to be given to the developing countries, and particularly those which contributed troops. 38. With regard to strengthening the Civilian Police Unit in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the role of the Civilian Police Adviser referred to in document A/54/87, Kenya urged the Secretariat to fill posts that had remained vacant, as authorized by the General Assembly in mid-1998. 39. In conclusion, he emphasized that it was imperative to ensure the protection of personnel and paid a tribute to those who had lost their lives in the service of the United Nations. 40. Mr. Ovia (Papua New Guinea) supported the statement made by the representative of Jordan on behalf of the Movement of Non-aligned Countries. The guidelines for peace-keeping operations should be clearly defined, particularly with regard to humanitarian law, and greater transparency was needed in consultations between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and Member States. 41. The maintenance of peace and security was one of the core missions of the United Nations. Although it had been suggested that all peacekeeping operations should be financed by assessed contributions, abolition of voluntary contributions could damage the Organization’s rapid response capability in the event of a conflict or humanitarian crisis. It would be preferable to maintain the current system and to ensure that all Member States paid their assessed contributions in full, on time and without conditions. When awarding procurement contracts, low priority should be given to Member States with the capacity to pay which did not fulfill their financial obligations. Priority should be given to developing countries, particularly troop contributors, as long as the prices were competitive. 42. The Security Council should approach all conflicts, irrespective of location, in a timely manner and with equal commitment. United Nations interventions in the interest of preserving international peace and security could not be treated as interference. The principle of non-interference did not apply when States acted against the territorial integrity of another State, and, in accordance with Chapters VII and VIII of the Charter, that principle was subject to the collective interests of the United Nations. Unfortunately, in some recent conflicts, for instance East Timor, indecision and procrastination by the United Nations had produced tragic results. His delegation welcomed, however, the deployment of INTERFET, led by Australia, and the United Nations plans to rebuild the island and resettle its displaced people. 43. His delegation once again thanked the members of the South Pacific Forum as well as the current and former members of the Security Council for their support to the Bougainville peace process. Normalcy had not yet been fully re-established , and therefore his Government was requesting the Security Council to extend the mandate of the peace monitors there. The United Nations presence in Bougainville, in particular through the Peace Process Consultative Committee, was helping to build trust between the Government and the parties, to ensure compliance with agreements, and to guarantee impartiality. The efforts of all parties should lead to free and democratic elections during 2000. Much remained to be done, however, to ensure a lasting peace. 44. His delegation hoped that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations as a whole would continue to carry out those tasks. 45. Mr. Hughes (New Zealand) said that the adoption of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) on a political solution to the question of Kosovo was proof, if any was needed, that the United Nations remained an indispensable organization. While his delegation welcomed Indonesia’s recent acceptance of the results of the popular consultation held in East Timor under United Nations auspices, it deplored the tragic events that had followed. It denounced the disinformation campaign recently directed against Member States contributing troops to INTERFET and the United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) and was concerned about the security of their personnel. The deployment of INTERFET, to which New Zealand had made a significant contribution, had taken place at the request of the Indonesian Government and had been unanimously approved by the members of the Security Council. 46. His delegation supported the request of Papua New Guinea that the United Nations should maintain its presence at Bougainville. The Department of Peace-keeping Operations, including the Mine Action Service, must have adequate staffing and funding in order to remain effective. His delegation supported the statement by the representative of Japan and regretted the growing reliance on voluntary contributions. Only assessed contributions would guarantee the collective responsibility of Member States, the financial security of peacekeeping operations and equal treatment for all regions. It was imperative for Member States to pay their assessed contributions in full, on time and without conditions. 47. New Zealand fully supported the recommended changes in the working methods of the Special Committee. It was a committed supporter of the United Nations role in the maintenance of international peace and security. The challenges faced by the Organization were made all the more difficult by the complexity of contemporary conflicts, especially those inside national boundaries where civilians were often the targets of opposing factions, but they were also aggravated by budgetary issues, a problem that Member States could act on. In conclusion, his delegation paid a tribute to the members of United Nations peacekeeping forces and those who had given their lives in the service of the United Nations. 48. Mr. Yel’Chenko (Ukraine) said that his delegation was pleased that the United Nations had been able to meet the challenges of the past 12 months. By organizing two multinational operations and other activities in Kosovo and East Timor, the United Nations and the Security Council had reaffirmed their primary role in the maintenance of international peace and security. Despite their limitations, United Nations peacekeeping operations remained an indispensable instrument. 49. The African continent required urgent assistance. Ukraine hoped that the Security Council, which was about to authorize the deployment of a new operation in Sierra Leone, would soon be able to do so in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well. Ukraine would make every effort to see that the Security Council gave equal attention to conflicts wherever they arose. 50. Since 1994, Ukraine had advocated the establishment of a preventive mechanism that would allow the United Nations to monitor potential sources of global conflict and carry out large-scale military interventions. It agreed with the Secretary-General on the need for a transition from a culture of reaction to one of prevention. 51. His delegation agreed that the issue of humanitarian intervention and its political and legal implications should be considered in greater detail in other forums. However, he drew attention to the need to adapt the existing mechanisms for international security. No violations of human rights, whatever their motivation, scale and origin, could be tolerated. However, without clear and universally accepted international norms for humanitarian intervention, no enforcement action could be taken on the grounds of humanitarian law by regional arrangements or organizations without authorization from the Security Council (Article 53 of the Charter). Ukraine stood ready to participate in further discussion of that subject in practical terms. 52. Cooperation between the United Nations and regional arrangements should be intensified in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, while maintaining the key role of the Security Council. 53. His delegation strongly condemned the acts of violence perpetrated against United Nations personnel, in particular in Kosovo, Burundi and Abkhazia and called on all countries which had not yet done so to accede to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel. The safety of personnel must be guaranteed at all stages of operations: planning, deployment, management and withdrawal. The responsibility of host Governments with regard to United Nations personnel should be reinforced and the model status-of-forces agreement should make reference to the Convention. Ukraine fully endorsed the proposals put forward by the Deputy Secretary-General on 14 October 1999 and supported the comprehensive review of security requirements by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. 54. Ukraine welcomed the publication of the final text of the guidelines for observance by United Nations forces of international humanitarian law (ST/SGB/1999/13). Like other Member States, however, it deeply regretted that the document had been issued without being approved by all the members of the Special Committee. It would have been preferable to have detailed consultations with the Secretariat as well as at the next session of the Special Committee, reissuing the document if necessary once consensus had been reached. 55. The ability of the United Nations to react rapidly to crises anywhere in the world must be reinforced. Ukraine had joined the standby arrangements system in 1994, had signed a memorandum of understanding to that effect in 1997 and continued to increase its participation in peacekeeping operations and civilian police actions. It welcomed the completion of a draft set of standard operating procedures for civilian police operations and hoped that the Secretariat would soon develop draft guidelines on general principles regarding the role of civilian police. In April 1999, the Ukrainian Parliament had adopted a law giving Ukraine full discretion to participate in peacekeeping operations. It was ready to share its experience with the institutions of any countries which might be interested. 56. Mr. Bandora (United Republic of Tanzania) said that his delegation associated itself fully with those delegations which had stressed that it was imperative to conduct peacekeeping operations in strict observance of the principles and purposes enshrined in the Charter. Clearly, therefore, the concept of humanitarian intervention merited careful consideration in future in order to ensure that it was not used to violate those fundamental principles. At the same time, the United Nations must study how to react swiftly and decisively when faced with situations requiring humanitarian action. 57. Notwithstanding the structural changes undertaken within the Secretariat to enhance capacity for peacekeeping operations, that improvement had benefited only a few missions. For the most part, planning and financing remained uncertain, in particular for peacekeeping operations in Africa. His delegation feared that the missions planned for Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere in Africa would suffer the same fate as the operations undertaken in Rwanda, Liberia and more recently in Congo, which had been compromised by logistical problems and a lack of financial resources. 58. Those difficulties were the result of excessive reliance on ad hoc financing arrangements such as the Trust Funds to finance such operations. Although that system had functioned adequately elsewhere, that was not the case in Africa where nothing could replace the commitment of direct resources by the United Nations if peacekeeping operations were to be undertaken in an effective and sustainable manner. 59. His delegation welcomed the continued cooperation between the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United Nations aimed at strengthening African capacity for peacekeeping. He thanked those countries which had contributed to African capacity-building with training and logistical support as well as those which had contributed to the Organization of African Unity Peace Fund. 60. The maintenance of international peace and security remained the primary task of the Security Council. Regional arrangements could certainly play a supporting role but the functions of the Security Council should not be totally devolved to the regions or to groups of countries even if some of the regions had the capacity to assume them fully. His delegation feared therefore that the new concept of “Lead States” to spearhead regional peacekeeping operations could be used in the future to bypass the United Nations. 61. His delegation commended the efforts under way to provide training to individuals participating in peacekeeping missions. He hoped that such training would be extended to as many countries as possible, so that developing countries could participate in missions, and that recruitment procedures would be more transparent and take into account the principle of balanced geographical representation. 62. He paid a tribute to the peacekeepers who were working in dangerous conditions and honoured the memory of all those who had lost their lives in the line of duty. He also thanked those delegations which had offered their condolences on the occasion of the death of President Julius Nyerere. 63. Mr. Larraín (Chile) paid a tribute to the humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel who had lost their lives in the service of peace, in particular the Chilean national assassinated in Burundi. He associated himself with the statements made by the representatives of Uruguay and Jordan on behalf of the countries of the Common Market of the Southern Cone (MERCOSUR) and the Non-Aligned Movement respectively. 64. The changing nature of conflicts required a multidimensional approach, as evidenced by the operations undertaken recently in Kosovo and East Timor. That meant that the mandates of such operations must be clearly defined, and have sufficient financial resources. The principles of consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use of force except in self-defence must also be respected, thereby conferring legitimacy on peacekeeping operations. 65. While welcoming the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, he felt that its capacities should be reinforced to enable it to plan interventions and act rapidly. 66. Chile, which had always participated in United Nations peacekeeping operations, intended to organize in May 2000 an international seminar on the changing conditions of deployment for operations and was about to sign a memorandum of full accession to the standby arrangements system. 67. Mr. Petrella (Argentina) was of the view that, despite its failings, the United Nations was still the only legitimate instrument to guarantee the maintenance of international peace and security. Given the emergence of new types of conflict, it was necessary to strengthen early-warning mechanisms and preventive diplomacy, and the reconstruction of countries must be a priority in order to bring about lasting peace. 68. Actions to rebuild peace would be more effective when accompanied by sufficient resources to enable the affected countries to recover their stability and resume their place in the international community, and by improved coordination between the competent bodies. 69. Personnel should receive better training to enable them to undertake multidimensional tasks in the areas of peace-building, humanitarian assistance, the establishment of impartial police forces, disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration of combatants, the organization of elections, demining and long-term development. 70. Peacekeeping operations were not an end in themselves, but rather a tool of the international community. United Nations peacekeeping operations had many advantages over multinational forces. The deployment of the latter could only be justified on an exceptional basis and in accordance with the principles of the Charter and the decisions of the Security Council. 71. His delegation endorsed the comments made by the delegations of New Zealand and Japan. It wished to pay tribute to the personnel who had lost their lives in the service of the United Nations, and urged those States which had not yet done so to ratify the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel. United Nations personnel should not be exposed more than necessary and peacekeeping operations should receive adequate resources to ensure their protection in the field. His delegation, which had drawn the Security Council’s attention to that point, welcomed the fact that the Council’s resolutions now contained a specific reference to the provisions of the Convention. His delegation was considering the possibility of introducing proposals to widen the area of applicability of the Convention to cover all individuals and organizations in conflict areas. Specific action should also be taken to improve the security of personnel and to carry out investigations in order to prosecute those responsible for the killings. 72. The capacity of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should be strengthened and the members of military and civilian police forces should receive better training to enable them to be more effective in the multiple areas in which they were required to operate. The United Nations could not be asked to undertake large-scale peacekeeping operations without being provided with the necessary resources. His delegation endorsed the provisions of resolution 51/243, which defined the requirements for the acceptance of gratis personnel and the phasing-out of those who did not meet those requirements. 73. Innovative solutions that respected the principle of geographical distribution should be devised to ensure that the reduction in the staff of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations would not affect the full functioning of the Department. He reiterated his delegation’s support for peacekeeping operations and said that the Special Committee was the legitimate forum in which to address the different aspects of those operations. 74. Ms. Chassoul (Costa Rica) said that her country had always maintained that social justice was impossible without peace and democracy and that, conversely, peace and democracy could not be achieved without social justice in the context of development. The peace and security required for a nation’s social development could be achieved and consolidated only on the basis of comprehensive work that went well beyond the supervision of ceasefire agreements and included other elements that were crucial to the transition from a conflict situation to peace, and from peace to democracy. 75. Costa Rica’s experience had led her delegation to express its dissatisfaction with the manner in which humanitarian questions were handled in conflict situations and to propose a new way of addressing the issue. Costa Rica had always believed that the traditional concept of peacekeeping operations should be expanded beyond the purely military aspects to political, humanitarian, economic and social issues. Costa Rica’s position stemmed from its own experience, which had also taught it that a policy that was designed to strengthen democratically elected civilian governments and was accompanied by clear decisions on the reduction of military spending could only present advantages and free up resources that could be devoted to education, health, housing and social justice in the context of development, which were the best factors for promoting peace and security. 76. In its 1997 report (A/52/209), the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations had recommended that the United Nations should give particular attention to strengthening the institutional capacity of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and to measures to enhance the peacekeeping capacity of the African countries. In a presidential statement (S/PRST/1998/29) the Security Council had urged all States and relevant bodies to provide financial and technical support to strengthen African regional and subregional mechanisms. Her delegation had supported those initiatives because they made provision for the inclusion of humanitarian aspects of conflicts in peacekeeping operations. That meant changing the structure, composition and mandate of such operations, as well as coordination in order to ensure that humanitarian and human rights agencies would be present in the field. 77. She recalled the importance that the Secretary-General attached to strengthening Africa’s capacity to participate in peacekeeping operations and endorsed his statement that the international community should not use measures aimed at helping Africa as a justification for reduced engagement in the continent (A/54/63). Recent conflicts in Africa should not discourage the United Nations from undertaking peacekeeping missions on that continent; rather, they should constitute for the Organization a source of experience and a basis for the reorientation of its objectives and resources. Her delegation stood ready to support any United Nations operations designed to promote peaceful solutions with the ultimate objective of bringing about human development, not only the cessation of military activities. 78. Mr. Osang (Nigeria) said that, in view of the increasingly complex nature of conflicts, new strategies for peacekeeping should be developed. His delegation associated itself with the concepts of “preventive diplomacy”, “preventive deployment” and “preventive disarmament” advocated by the Secretary-General as a peace-building strategy that addressed the root causes of armed conflicts. 79. More than ever before, the United Nations must work in partnership with other regional organizations in peacekeeping operations. In that regard, it had not given enough support to OAU in the latter’s efforts to guarantee peace, security and stability on the African continent. The United Nations needed to pay as much attention to the plight of Africans in conflict as it had done to the plight of those in other regions. The success of the Military Observer Group of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOMOG) in West Africa, especially in Liberia and Sierra Leone, bore testimony to the value of and need for regional initiatives in peacekeeping. His delegation welcomed the decision to establish the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), which would take over the functions of ECOMOG and thus relieve the troop-contributing countries. 80. His delegation supported any efforts aimed at improving the financial position of the United Nations so that it could meet its peacekeeping obligations, and reiterated its call for the establishment of a special fund for peacekeeping operations that would not be subject to United Nations budgetary constraints. His delegation joined other delegations in calling on Member States to pay their assessed contributions in full, on time and without conditions. As a result of delays in the payment of contributions, the United Nations owed substantial amounts of money to many troop- contributing countries, including Nigeria. 81. His delegation viewed with great concern the frequency of attacks against United Nations peacekeeping personnel, three of whom had been killed during the past month in Kosovo and Burundi. Nigeria was committed to the goals and ideals of the United Nations in the maintenance of international peace and security. It was convinced that the Organization remained the most important guarantor of the future of mankind. 82. Mr. Lamdan (Israel) said that it was regrettable that the Secretariat had not placed sufficient emphasis on the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Committee. His delegation looked forward to receiving the progress report requested in paragraph 125 of the report of the Special Committee (A/54/87). Based on his country’s long experience with peacekeeping operations, he wished to comment on certain points in the report. 83. The smooth functioning of a peacekeeping operation depended on the clarity of its mandate, with well-defined objectives and a clear and unified command structure under United Nations authority. In the case of a cross-border conflict, it was also important to obtain the agreement of both countries concerned in establishing such a force. 84. The Security Council was the only body with the authority to establish a peacekeeping operation. He cited the example of a mission set up by the General Assembly which would perhaps not have failed if it had been established by the Security Council. 85. One of the prime functions of the Security Council should be to consider possible changes in the mandate of a force during a mission, as stated in paragraph 52 of the report. With regard to “sunset clauses”, his delegation agreed that peacekeeping missions should not be extended indefinitely once they had completed their assigned tasks. Military forces should not undertake civilian operations, which could lead to a loss of neutrality, and in any event, there were other agencies within and outside the United Nations system responsible for dealing with the civilian aspects of conflict at all stages. As indicated in the report (paras. 74 and 83), better coordination was needed between the military and civilian components of peacekeeping missions, along with greater participation by non-governmental organizations. 86. Like Israel, many countries were unable to contribute troops to peacekeeping operations but would be able to contribute police forces. That form of participation should be encouraged and the Secretariat should in its next progress report, provide the draft guidelines on the general principles regarding the role of civilian police, in accordance with paragraph 98 of the report of the Special Committee. 87. He regretted that the international course on military liaison, a valuable course offered each year in Israel, had not been mentioned in annex III of the report. In any case, it would be offered in the coming year. 88. No one would challenge the predominant role of the United Nations in peacekeeping, but events of recent years had shown that its role was not exclusive, especially in the sphere of peacemaking. If it wished to maintain its predominance, it must continue to prove that it was equal to the task and that it could continue to retain the confidence of the parties to a conflict. 89. Mr. Mtewa (Malawi) said that it was urgent to conduct a comprehensive review of peacekeeping operations in order to restore meaning to those noble missions. The killing of 13 United Nations staff members since the beginning of the year was a reminder of the need for all Member States to ratify the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel and to ensure its implementation. It was also important to distinguish between humanitarian operations and peacekeeping and to consider carefully the composition of personnel to ensure the missions’ acceptability in the region concerned. 90. Malawi had been participating since 1995 in the peaceful settlement of conflicts and in peacekeeping operations. It was ready to provide troops in the service of peace in Africa and elsewhere and had expressed its desire to join the standby arrangements system. It was deeply concerned at the delays in reimbursements to troop-contributing countries, particularly to developing countries, which might not be able to continue their participation if the problem was not solved. Malawi welcomed the $100 million contribution by the Government of Japan to the Trust Fund. It also expressed appreciation to the European Union for the assistance provided through the Southern African Development Community to facilitate its participation in peacekeeping operations. It had also enjoyed technical support from the United States in that area. 91. As a country particularly affected by the proliferation of small arms, Malawi supported the view that the issue should be an integral part of peacekeeping operations. The presence of those weapons represented a source of criminal activity, social disturbances and threats to the peace. Smugglers took advantage of the climate of instability to pursue their criminal activities. 92. The importance of enhancing the early warning system for conflict prevention needed no emphasis. The humanitarian catastrophes in Africa and the recent events in East Timor were reminders of the need to focus on that matter without delay. 93. Mr. Lucas (Angola), after recalling the basic principles of peacekeeping, said that peacekeeping operations were not a substitute for a permanent solution or for addressing the underlying causes of conflict. Angola shared the position expressed by the Movement of Non-aligned Countries, that the Security Council should approach all conflicts, wherever they were located, with the same commitment. The partnership between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and African sub-regional organizations had already produced positive results and should be strengthened for the prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, bearing in mind the responsibilities of the international community, especially the Security Council, for the maintenance of international peace and security. 94. In his report on the enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity, the Secretary-General had stated that such activities made sense only if the parties to the conflict had “a genuine desire ... to implement peace agreements and move towards reconciliation”, which unfortunately had not happened in Angola. The peace agreements were simply ignored by the party which had lost the election, which had never had any intention of accepting the results, even if they had been favourable to it. That situation had led to a new war of catastrophic proportions, after 18 months of ceasefire. Thanks to the efforts of the United Nations and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, a new peace agreement had been concluded after a year of intense negotiations, but the absence of the leader of UNITA at the signing ceremony had indicated that his party had no intention of implementing it. 95. UNITA had fooled everyone, in particular the United Nations, whose mission had been to quarter, disarm and demobilize UNITA’s army. Rather than demobilizing its troops, however, UNITA had mobilized new troops, reinforced its military capacity and attempted to spread the conflict to neighbouring countries, in particular the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo and Namibia. After the death of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in a suspicious plane crash, the Angolan Government had seen the military option as the only remaining alternative for solving a problem that the United Nations had been unable to settle despite a large-scale peacekeeping operation. 96. Despite the resolutions adopted by the Security Council since 1992 condemning Jonas Savimbi and UNITA and imposing sanctions on the latter, the Angolan Government believed that the international community could and should do more to make Mr. Savimbi accept the consequences of his criminal behaviour, which had caused indescribable suffering to the Angolan people. The international community should no longer humour Jonas Savimbi but should inscribe him on the list of war criminals to be captured and brought before the criminal courts. That would be an honourable conclusion to the failed peacekeeping operation that had been such a disappointment to the Angolan people and the international community. 97. Ms. Zografska-Krsteska (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) said that at the dawn of the new millennium, there were continued threats to peace and stability throughout the world. Because the costs of conflict resolution were far greater than those of conflict prevention, it was important to strengthen the early warning mechanism in order to resolve disputes before they erupted into violent confrontation. From 1992 to February 1999, her country had hosted the first preventive mission, the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP). Her Government, the United Nations and other international stakeholders considered that mission to have been a great success for both the Organization and her country. 98. Her Government was providing logistical support to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which had set up a liaison office in Skopje. Although her Government supported full implementation of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), which had established the mandate of UNMIK, it was also in favour of the comprehensive implementation of the Stability Pact for South/Eastern Europe. In that regard, her delegation agreed with the many delegations which had expressed the view that social and economic problems were among the root causes of many conflicts and should therefore be addressed properly. For that reason, the countries of South-Eastern Europe viewed the Stability Pact not only as a document expressing their political commitment to integration into the Euro-Atlantic structures, but also as a basis for the comprehensive reconstruction and development of the region. 99. The Secretary-General attached great importance to peacekeeping, which was a vital instrument in assisting African States to resolve conflicts and to create the conditions for peaceful development (A/54/63-S/1999/171). In order to prevent further conflicts and to resolve current conflicts, partial solutions to African problems should be avoided as much as possible. The international community should endeavour to promote the economic development of the continent and its integration into the global economy. 100. Her delegation joined other countries in calling on all Member States to meet their obligations under the Charter by paying their assessments in full, on time and without conditions so that peacekeeping missions could be properly financed. Despite its limited resources, her country was contributing to the resolution of the Kosovo crisis by making its national capacities available to the international community, inter alia by providing shelter for over 350,000 refugees, a figure which was equivalent to 18 per cent of its population. One way to strengthen her country’s economy and that of other countries affected by conflicts along their borders would be to make the procurement process more transparent. 101. Her Government believed that the mandates of peacekeeping operations should not be restricted to military tasks but should also include other activities such as disarmament, demobilization, civilian police activities, humanitarian assistance and measures to combat the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In that regard, her delegation stressed the need to strengthen the partnership between the United Nations and the regional and subregional organizations and to define a clear mandate for peacekeeping operations. Her country was ready to contribute to that process. 102. Mr. Sattar (Secretary of the Committee), speaking on the programme budget implications of draft resolution A/C.4/54/L.2, said that in paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, the General Assembly would endorse the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, contained in paragraphs 43 to 130 of its report. In paragraph 126 (a) of that report, the Special Committee requested that its report should be circulated in official form no later than four weeks after the completion of its substantive session. In that connection, he drew attention to the six-week rule for the distribution of documents in the six official languages (A/RES/53/208 B, para. 3) and the need for documentation to be submitted to the Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services at least 10 weeks prior to the beginning of the session. The report of the Special Committee had indeed been issued four weeks after its submission to the Department. 103. With regard to the resumed session of the Committee, it was scheduled to hold one meeting, in New York, which would be added to the calendar of conferences. The only pre-session documentation would be the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. The meeting would be serviced, and summary records provided, in all six official languages pursuant to General Assembly resolution 49/221. 104. Should the General Assembly adopt the draft resolution, the conference-servicing cost of the meeting was estimated at US$ 21,500. The necessary resources were provided for under section 2 of the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001. No additional appropriation would therefore be required under the programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001. Draft resolution A/C.4/54/L.2 105. The Chairman introduced draft resolution A/C.4/54/L.2 entitled “Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”. If he heard no objection, he would take it that the Committee wished to adopt the draft resolution without a vote in accordance with the sponsors’ wishes. 106. Draft resolution A/C.4/54/L.2 was adopted. 107. The Chairman said that the Committee had thus completed its consideration of agenda item 90. The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m. 