%%%CONTRACTUAL SERVICES|CONSULTANTS|STATISTICAL DATA|

99-24561 (E) 210999 United Nations A/C.5/54/4 General Assembly Distr.: General 25 August 1999 Original: English Fifty-fourth session Fifth Committee Agenda item 165 Human resources management Consultants and individual contractors Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 53/221 of 7 April 1999, by which the Secretary-General was requested to report on consultants hired by the United Nations during the preceding year, with an indication of their functions. The report covers the year 1998. A/C.5/54/4 1. The General Assembly, by section VIII, paragraph 4, of its resolution 53/221 of 7 April 1999, requested the Secretary-General to submit an annual report to the General Assembly on consultants hired by the United Nations during the preceding year, with an indication of their functions. 2. The present report, which covers consultants and individual contractors hired by the United Nations in 1998, expands on the format of previous reports, in accordance with requests made by the General Assembly (resolution 51/226, sect. VI, para. 7) and by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/51/533, para. 44 and A/53/691, sect. III, para. 15). 3. In its report on the use of consultants in the United Nations during the biennium 1996/97, the Advisory Committee noted a number of deficiencies in the report of the Secretary-General (A/53/548), notably, that it had not been presented in the format of previous reports (see A/51/533). The Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services1 had also identified a number of weaknesses, including poor record-keeping. The Committee noted that, while Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) data was available for Headquarters, it was not possible to present information on the type and nature of contracts of consultants and individual contractors which was comparable on a worldwide basis: such data would not be available until IMIS was fully deployed in 2000 at all duty stations. That being the case, the Committee was not in a position to evaluate for 1996/97 the statistics contained in the report of the Secretary-General. 4. The installation of Release III of IMIS at all duty stations away from Headquarters is scheduled for completion by December 2000. This will assist the process of global compilation and management of consultant data in the future. The current Paradox database has been expanded to allow for the worldwide exchange of information on the use of consultants by occupation. 5. The Secretary-General’s comprehensive guidelines for the use of consultants and individual contractors (see A/53/385, annex), which were endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution 53/221, have been promulgated in administrative instruction ST/AI/1999/7. The Secretary-General’s report on the hiring and use of consultants in the Secretariat, submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, through the Board of Auditors (see A/54/164), outlined the status of implementation of the recommendations of the Board. The comments of the Board on the report of the Secretary-General are contained in document A/54/165. As recommended by the Board, a detailed performance evaluation form will be introduced Secretariat-wide in September 1999 (see annex II). 6. The present report records all engagements with a starting date in 1998; the duration of contracts and the fees paid to consultants and individual contractors are presented for the entire contractual period, even in those cases where the work involved extended beyond 1998. In the same manner, contracts which began before 1998 are not included, even if they continued into that year. 7. The statistical tables presented in annex I to the present report provide an overview of the use of consultants and individual contractors in 1998. Table 1 summarizes the number of persons engaged and the number of contracts, by type, during the year: it indicates the number of women engaged, as well as work performed by former staff; it shows the educational levels and evaluations of performance for consultants and individual contractors. A total of 2,775 persons were engaged as consultants in 1998. Of that number, over one quarter were women, 74 were retirees, 298 were non-retired former staff aged 60 or over and 64 were non-retired former staff under the age of 60. A total of 3,786 separate contracts were issued during the year. There were 922 persons engaged as individual contractors in 1998 (1,823 contracts). Of that total, one half were women, 35 were retirees, 47 were non-retired former staff members aged 60 or over and 60 were non-retired former staff under the age of 60. The number of persons engaged in 1998, either as consultants or individual contractors, was 3,624. A total of 73 persons were engaged in both capacities during 1998. Consultancies totalled 6,400 person-months (70 days per person on average) and individual contractors accounted for just under 2,800 person-months (91 days per contractor on average) during the year. 8. With regard to data on the level of educational qualifications of persons contracted, the database shows a relatively even distribution between persons with first, second and higher university degrees or their equivalent. 9. In 1998, fees for contracts with consultants totalled $25.1 million: fees for individual contractors totalled $6.5 million. 10. Table 2 of annex I summarizes the number of persons engaged, the number of contracts awarded, the total number of days worked and total fees, by nationality and contract type, for 1998. Consultants from 158 different countries were engaged in 1998, although five countries accounted for one third of all consultants engaged (Canada, Chile, France, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America). For individual contractors, engagements were from 91 different countries: in that category, six countries accounted for more than one half of all engagements (Chile, Ethiopia, France, Lebanon, United Kingdom and United States). In terms of fees for consultants, nationals of five countries accounted for 38 per cent of the total (Canada, Chile, France, United Kingdom and United States). For individual contractors, engagements from five countries accounted for 52 per cent of fees (Chile, Ethiopia, France, Lebanon and United States): the higher figure for Lebanon is anomalous, reflecting contracting associated with the move of the secretariat of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) from Amman to Beirut. 11. Table 3 shows a breakdown of the purpose of engagement of consultants and individual contractors. The main purposes of engagement, worldwide, were programme implementation; preparation of meetings, administrative services, advisory services and special analytical studies. 12. Table 4 shows the engagement of consultants and individual contractors in terms of the occupational groups which are codified in the Common Classification of Occupational Groups at the job family level. The largest occupational group by far (31 per cent) is for economists, who are mainly brought on board as consultants. The other occupational groups which are strongly represented include administrative specialists, social scientists and writers/ translators/interpreters. 13. Table 5 summarizes the duration of contracts for consultants and individual contractors which began in 1998. Thirty-eight per cent of contracts were for less than one month, another 37 per cent were of a duration of between one and three months, and 25 per cent lasted beyond three months. Table 6 summarizes the time actually worked for contracts which began in 1998. Just over half of all engagements were for less than one month, 35 per cent for between one and three months and 14 per cent extended beyond three months. 14. Table 7 of the annex sets out the use of consultants and individual contractors by department, by gender, level of education, duration of contract and evaluation of performance. The departments or offices which made the most use of consultants and individual contractors in 1998 were the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991. These five entities were more dominant with regard to consultants alone, where they accounted for two thirds of all persons engaged. There was a noticeable difference in terms of gender between the use of consultants and that of individual contractors. Among consultants, women represented 26 per cent of persons engaged, whereas among individual contractors, they represented almost 50 per cent. In terms of the educational level of consultants and individual contractors, engagements were divided relatively evenly among those with doctorates, master’s degrees and bachelor’s degrees. The majority of evaluations were either excellent or good, with less than 2 per cent reflecting only an acceptable or unsatisfactory performance. 15. Table 8 shows fees paid to consultants and individual contractors by source of funding in 1998. Data on expenditures are derived from IMIS for Headquarters departments and offices and from individual updates submitted by offices away from Headquarters to the Paradox database of the Office of Human Resources Management. In 1998, a total of $31.5 million was paid in fees to consultants and individual contractors from all sources of funds, with $25.1 million paid to consultants, (27 per cent from the regular budget and 73 per cent from extrabudgetary sources); and $6.5 million paid to individual contractors (distributed equally between sources of funding). Fees paid to consultants engaged by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and UNCTAD, mainly under technical cooperation projects, accounted for just over 40 per cent of the total expenditure. The corresponding figure for the regional commissions, (the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), ECLAC, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) and ESCWA) was 22 per cent. ECLAC, the United Nations Office at Nairobi and the Department of Public Information accounted for nearly 45 per cent of the total fees paid to individual contractors in 1998. 16. Table 9 presents aggregate data for each duty station on institutional contractors engaged in 1998. Institutional or corporate contractors are institutions which provide goods or services to the United Nations on a contractual basis (see ST/AI/327). The total expenditure was 20.6 million in 1998. Notes 1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/51/5), vol. I, sect. II, paras. 155–189 and A/52/814. List of abbreviations DDA Department for Disarmament Affairs DESA Department of Economic and Social Affairs DGAACS Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services DM Department of Management DPA Department of Political Affairs DPI Department of Public Information DPKO Department of Peacekeeping Operations DPKO/FALD DPKO/Field Administration and Logistics Division ECA Economic Commission for Africa ECE Economic Commission for Europe ECLAC Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean ESCAP Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific ESCWA Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia ITFY International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 ICTR International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda OCHA Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OHCHR Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights OIOS Office of Internal Oversight Services OLA Office of Legal Affairs OSG Office of the Secretary-General UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNFIP United Nations Fund for International Partnerships UNOG United Nations Office at Geneva UNON United Nations Office at Nairobi UNOV United Nations Office at Vienna CCOG Common Classification of Occupational Groups Annex I Use of consultants and individual contractors: statistical data for 1998 Tables 1. Summary data on contracts with consultants and individual contractors, 1998 2. Consultants and individual contractors by nationality, 1998 3. Purpose of engagement of consultants and individual contractors, 1998 4. Engagement of consultants and individual contractors by CCOG job family, 1998 5. Duration of contracts for consultants and individual contractors, 1998 6. Time actually worked for consultants and individual contractors, 1998 7. Consultants and individual contractors, by department, gender, level of education, duration of contract and evaluation of performance, 1998 8. Expenditure on consultants and individual contractors, by source of funding, 1998 9. Institutional contractors, 1998 PP 6-19 prepared for offset. 