%%%ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION|SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT|TREATIES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|

UNITED A NATIONS General Assembly Distr. GENERAL A/RES/53/186 2 February 1999 Fifty-third session Agenda item 94 RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY [on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/609/Add.6)] 53/186. International institutional arrangements related to environment and development The General Assembly, Recalling the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21Resolution S-19/2, annex. adopted at its nineteenth special session, in particular part IV thereof, entitled “International institutional arrangements”, Recalling also its decision 52/445 of 18 December 1997 on progress in the implementation of conventions relating to sustainable development, Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on ways and means of undertaking the review of progress made in implementing conventions related to sustainable development,A/53/477. Emphasizing that policy decisions under the conventions are taken by their respective Conferences of the Parties, which are autonomous governing bodies, Noting that various conventions related to environment and sustainable development are at different stages of implementation, and recognizing the role of the General Assembly in fostering progress in the implementation of those conventions and of the commitments contained therein, Reaffirming the need, as stipulated in part IV of the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, for greater coherence in various intergovernmental organizations and processes through better policy coordination at the intergovernmental level, as well as for continued and more concerted efforts to enhance collaboration among the secretariats of relevant decision-making bodies, 1. Encourages the Conferences of the Parties to, and the permanent secretariats of, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,A/AC.237/18 (Part II)/Add.1 and Corr.1, annex I. the Convention on Biological DiversitySee United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity (Environmental Law and Institution Programme Activity Centre), June 1992. and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in AfricaA/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II. to examine appropriate opportunities and measures to strengthen their complementarities and improve scientific assessments of ecological linkages between the three conventions; 2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report, for submission to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session, identifying actions undertaken to implement part IV.A, in particular paragraph 119, of the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,1 as well as the areas requiring further consideration and work, taking into account the roles of relevant organizations and institutions of the United Nations system, as stated in part IV of the Programme. 91st plenary meeting 15 December 1998 