%%%STATE IMMUNITIES|STATE PROPERTY|TREATIES|WORKING GROUPS|

UNITED A NATIONS General Assembly Distr. GENERAL A/RES/53/98 20 January 1999 Fifty-third session Agenda item 148 RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY [on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/53/629)] 53/98. Convention on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property The General Assembly, Taking note of the set of draft articles on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property adopted by the International Law Commission at its forty-third session, Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/46/10), para. 28. as well as the recommendation of the Commission that an international conference of plenipotentiaries be convened to examine the draft articles and to conclude a convention on the subject, Ibid., para. 25. Recalling that, in its resolution 49/61 of 9 December 1994, it accepted the recommendation of the International Law Commission, Recalling also that, in its resolution 52/151 of 15 December 1997, it decided to consider the subject again at its fifty-third session with a view to the establishment of a working group at its fifty-fourth session, Reaffirming that the codification and progressive development of international law contributes to the implementation of the purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, Page Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, A/53/274 and Add.1. 1. Decides to establish at its fifty-fourth session an open-ended working group of the Sixth Committee, open also to participation by States members of the specialized agencies, to consider outstanding substantive issues related to the draft articles on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property adopted by the International Law Commission,1 taking into account the recent developments of State practice and legislation and any other factors related to this issue since the adoption of the draft articles, as well as the comments submitted by States in accordance with paragraph 2 of resolution 49/61 and paragraph 2 of resolution 52/151, and to consider whether there are any issues identified by the working group upon which it would be useful to seek further comments and recommendations of the Commission; 2. Invites the International Law Commission to present any preliminary comments it may have regarding outstanding substantive issues related to the draft articles by 31 August 1999, in the light of the results of the informal consultations held pursuant to General Assembly decision 48/413 of 9 December 1993 and taking into account the recent developments of State practice and other factors related to this issue since the adoption of the draft articles, in order to facilitate the task of the working group; 3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the item entitled “Convention on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property”. 83rd plenary meeting 8 December 1998 