%%%COUNTRY PROGRAMMES|EMERGENCY RELIEF|HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE|CAPACITY BUILDING|TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE|REHABILITATION|SOMALIA|SOCIAL INTEGRATION|PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT|COORDINATION WITHIN UN SYSTEM|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL DP/1999/11 26 February 1999 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH Second regular session 1999 12-16 April 1999, New York Item 12 of the provisional agenda UNDP UNDP: COUNTRY COOPERATION FRAMEWORKS AND RELATED MATTERS Assistance to Somalia Report by the Administrator SUMMARY Submitted on the initiative of the Administrator, the present report provides an overview of the situation in Somalia and of United Nations coordination in the country. It then describes UNDP activities undertaken since 1994, when the last progress report was submitted to the Executive Board, and those currently under way, including the financial situation. The Administrator seeks the approval of the Executive Board to continue to approve projects on a case-by-case basis. English Page I. PURPOSE 1. In its decision 93/4 of 8 February 1993, the Governing Council took note of the Administrator's intention to continue to approve projects on a case-by-case basis for Somalia. In accordance with that decision, the Administrator submitted a progress report to the Executive Board at its annual session in 1994. The present report is submitted to the Board on the initiative of the Administrator. It covers UNDP activities in Somalia during the period 1994-1996 and its ongoing 1997-2000 programme. The approval of the Board is sought to authorize the Administrator to continue to approve projects on a case-by-case basis. II. OVERALL SITUATION 2. Somalia is a least developed country and, in 1996, ranked 172 out of 174 countries on the UNDP human development index (HDI). Owing to the lack of relevant statistical data, it has not been possible to include information on Somalia in the Human Development Report for the past four years. However, an analysis of the development situation in Somalia contained in the National Human Development Report is in line with the country's past rankings. Somalia's economy is crippled by widespread destruction of the physical infrastructure, lack of investment and rampant unemployment. The striking feature of the complex emergency situation in Somalia remains the absence of peace and a national government for the past seven years. 3. Large parts of the country are in transition, somewhere between crisis and recovery. Armed conflict and - to an increasing extent - acts of lawlessness continue to disrupt the relief and development operations of the international aid community. From the development perspective, two important trends have emerged in Somalia in recent years that provide hope for the future and present a challenge to the international community: (a) the renaissance of private initiative and civil society and (b) nascent structures of governance, which require substantial support in capacity-building for them to be able to discharge their functions effectively and sustainably. 4. Unfortunately, Somalia continues to be plagued by a series of chronic emergencies, both natural (floods, drought, cholera) and man-made, derived from the conflict that still afflicts large parts of the country. The international community needs to be in a continual state of readiness to respond quickly and impartially to humanitarian needs and to strengthen indigenous coping and preparedness mechanisms to mitigate the impact of recurrent crises. III. UNITED NATIONS COORDINATION 5. In the absence of a national government, the United Nations specialized agencies, as a major source of external assistance, are called upon to assume fundamental and very special responsibilities for relief and development in Somalia. In addition to its purely developmental role, UNDP has also undertaken management and technical responsibilities in the areas of air transport and seaport facilities. 6. In 1996, in preparing for the United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Somalia, a common assessment of the country situation and of the roles of the United Nations specialized agencies in the post-United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM) era was undertaken. Consultations were also undertaken during the preparation for the 1998 Appeal and for the 1999 update with Somali leaders and the international aid community. The Consolidated Appeal framework provides the only comprehensive reference document for interventions of the international aid community in Somalia. It outlines elements of strategy and identifies five areas for programme intervention by the international aid community: emergencies, food security, reintegration, rehabilitation and governance. UNDP has been designated as the lead United Nations agency for rehabilitation and governance. The 1999 Consolidated Appeal was launched in Geneva in mid-December 1998. 7. Building on the significant experience gained during and since UNOSOM, the United Nations specialized agencies have adopted an area-based approach that allows programmes to respond to the varied needs of each area as they move from crisis to recovery. Since 1996, the United Nations has maintained focal points in Somalia for area-based aid coordination, joint strategic programme development and enhanced Somali dialogue. Through this approach, the United Nations is able to focus on the specific needs of a given area in Somalia. At the central level, the Resident Coordinator leads the United Nations Country Team, a forum for intra-United Nations dialogue on the harmonization of priorities and programmes. The Resident Coordinator also represents the United Nations in the Somalia Aid Coordination Body, in which bilateral donors and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) participate. IV. UNDP PROGRAMME 8. During the period 1994-1996, Somalia was in crisis, with conflict prevalent in large parts of the country. Efforts at reconciliation had been initiated but had yet to take root in any meaningful way. Local administrative structures, where they existed, were fledgling, had not in many cases established their legitimacy, and had not yet reached a level where they could be viable counterparts for programme activities. At the same time, the country was faced with a physical infrastructure that had been destroyed and an almost complete lack of basic social services (e.g., health, education, water, transport). 9. Given the above situation, UNDP activities from 1994 to 1996 focused on: (a) emergency response to humanitarian crises: UNDP was active in the coordination of United Nations system responses to humanitarian crises as well as in the provision of direct support and physical inputs to humanitarian relief programmes; (b) operational assistance: UNDP provided direct support to the management of transport infrastructure and services. In particular, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)-executed project SOM/93/003 - Ports Management - ensured efficient operations initially of the seaports of Mogadiscio and Kisimayo, and later of Berbera and Bosaso; pursuant to a request of the Secretary-General, a caretaker role for air traffic control services and rehabilitation of selected airports was accredited to SOM/93/002 - Rehabilitation of Civil Aviation; (c) community-based rehabilitation: recognizing both the acute need for the restoration of basic social infrastructure as well as the absence of partners and interlocutors at district or regional levels, UNDP approved the Somalia Rural Rehabilitation Programme (SOM/92/001). The programme used participatory, community-based approaches to respond to priority needs for the rehabilitation of social and economic infrastructure; (d) institutional capacity-building: in the move from emergency to rehabilitation and eventually to longer-term development, elements of capacity-building were intrinsic to all the programmes. SOM/94/002 - United Nations Development Office for Somalia - was created to prepare the statistical and analytical foundation for development planning for Somalia and to build the human resource capacity for an eventual Somali Ministry of Planning. SOM/94/003 - Urban Management - assisted the municipal authorities of Hargeisa to reinstate urban planning functions and restore basic municipal services to the destroyed town. 10. Following a United Nations system-wide assessment in 1996, UNDP determined the projects it would fund during 1997-2000 within the new resource planning framework. The results of the global conferences, in particular the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World Conference on Women, have been used to set important parameters for UNDP activities. Efforts to apply the common country assessment and strategic framework methodologies to Somalia were launched. The release of the 1998 National Human Development Report has been an important input in this respect. 11. Owing to the fluid situation in Somalia, UNDP projects are limited in duration and have an inherent element of flexibility, allowing UNDP to react to emerging opportunities and take into account disruptions due to political and security developments inside Somalia. For the planning and implementation of development activities, UNDP consults on a regular basis with Somali leaders and authorities. Also, ongoing consultation among interested external actors allows for continuing adaptations and refinements. 12. UNDP is building on the neutrality the United Nations specialized agencies have reacquired since UNOSOM left Somalia and is developing its involvement in peace-building. In many situations, reconciliation and peace are prerequisites for the establishment of governance and government. UNDP is also seeking to increase the geographic coverage of its programmes. To this extent, efforts are under way to expand the United Nations focal points system inside Somalia. 13. Past interventions of UNDP have followed a primarily sectoral approach aimed at rehabilitation, averting a relapse into renewed emergencies through direct support. Building on lessons learned, UNDP interventions are aimed at capacity-building, broader replication of successful pilot projects, enhanced community participation and ownership, and long-term sustainability. Emphasis is being placed on maximizing synergies with other United Nations and externally funded programmes with a view to increasing programme impact as well as cost-efficient implementation modalities. 14. In the absence of a national government, and aware that UNDP will be making some important choices for the future development of the country, programmes and interventions are based on intensive assessments involving Somali partners and United Nations specialized agencies to assure ownership, commitment and contribution at all levels of activities, and by all levels of Somali society. Interventions focus particularly on addressing the differences between urban and rural, and settled and non-settled populations. The programme is continuing with the collection, compilation and analysis of relevant data on social and economic life in Somalia in order to develop and refine programme approaches. 15. The 1997-2000 programme builds on resource mobilization at three levels: the level of the Consolidated Appeal, the level of the UNDP programme and the level of individual projects. Early, sustained dialogue with donors during programme and project formulation and implementation has already led to increased donor interest, collaboration and support. UNDP funds will be utilized primarily to launch priority catalytic interventions aimed at leveraging donor funding for full programme implementation. A resource-mobilization project has been developed that will integrate all UNDP initiatives into one resource-mobilization plan. Inputs, cost-recovery and contributions from Somali partners will play a growing role in this plan. 16. Monitoring, review and evaluation systems for the provision of quarterly feedback and reporting have been put in place for all programmes and projects. Emphasis will shift increasingly from the monitoring of inputs and activities to the assessment of outputs and impact. This is the first step towards establishing a results-based evaluation framework for the UNDP programme based on objective and measurable impact indicators. Substantive programme revisions will take regular account of impact and, where necessary, reorient programme activities. Building on the common services approach, greater cost-effectiveness in programme implementation is being sought and efforts made to consolidate the provision of services in the Nairobi-based UNOPS implementation facility. 17. In line with its responsibilities under the United Nations Consolidated Appeals and its corporate objective on sustainable human development, the UNDP programme for Somalia focuses on rehabilitation and governance. UNDP has developed three programme focus areas: (a) empowerment of civil society and administrative structures; (b) promotion of an enabling environment for economic recovery; and (c) capacity-building for rehabilitation and reintegration. The target beneficiaries for these programmes are civil society, economic actors and public institutions. The integrated nature of the programme outlines has resulted in individual projects having activities in more than one of the programme areas. UNDP work in rehabilitation and governance ultimately seeks a positive impact on peace-building and the future establishment of a broad-based national government. A. Empowerment of civil society and administrative structures 18. This programme is centred on the peaceful resolution of conflict, the creation of opportunities for Somalis to disengage from the current culture of violence, the consolidation of peace and security where they exist, and good governance. 19. The Somalia Civil Protection Programme (SOM/97/002) aims to consolidate peace and enhance social and economic recovery through the re-establishment of a safe and secure environment for the people of Somalia. It will do this through a holistic approach involving activities in mine action, reintegration of ex-militia into their communities of origin and the establishment of well-trained police forces operating within a context of concern for judicial procedures and the protection of human rights. The programme has so far provided crucial advice and training for personnel from the National Demining Agency and Somalia Mine Action Centre in north-west Somalia. Apart from capacity-building of 87 demining counterparts at various levels, the mine-action component has cleared 166,000 square metres of mined land for resettlement in the town of Burao. The Somaliland Police Training Centre has, with the support of the project, undertaken a thorough revitalization programme, including the training of staff, development of curricula and course materials and physical refurbishment. The first batch of law enforcement officers to come out of the centre will graduate in mid-February 1999. 20. The programme Civic Education for Peace and Good Governance (SOM/97/004) seeks to encourage a culture of peace within a war-torn fragmented society by stimulating discussion and passing messages of civic values and good governance through the mass media. Given that many of Somali cultural values are transmitted orally, the development and broadcast of radio programmes is a major vehicle, in addition to the wide dissemination of a pictorial magazine. In 1998, the programme produced 46 radio programmes and six monthly magazines, which have been widely disseminated in the country. Peace Resource Centres have been established in five regions where Somalis can together discuss civic issues and themselves guide programme activities. The centres have organized training workshops from which 640 trainees benefited in 1998. 21. In a focused effort to encourage local and regional efforts at peace-building, UNDP has approved the project Conferences for Reconciliation and Good Governance (SOM/97/006), through which support will be provided, using local NGOs, to facilitate dialogue between antagonistic parties for conflict resolution. The aim is to encourage rival factions to cooperate in solving practical problems as a step towards building trust and shared goals. 22. Within the overall UNDP focus on sustainable human development and poverty alleviation, the Partners in Development Programme (SOM/98/003) addresses the larger issue of the development of civil society as a means to reinvigorate social capital in Somalia. The programme is being launched in early 1999. B. Promotion of an enabling environment for economic recovery 23. UNDP has identified this area as a major programme area in recognition of the central role economic recovery plays in good governance and poverty alleviation as well as the foundation it provides for peace. UNDP cooperation seeks to enhance local or regional conditions and institutions to a level that enables the facilitation of a sustainable self-capacity for economic recovery and growth in Somalia. Micro-credit, vocational training, data collection and analysis, capacity-building of planning and administrative structure, support to private sector/civil society organization groups, strengthening of sea and air ports management and trade diversification are the major activity areas. 24. Started in 1994, the United Nations Development Office for Somalia (UNDOS) (SOM/94/002), anticipated the conclusion of the national political reconciliation process within two years; its initial purpose was to lay the foundation for a future Ministry of Planning for Somalia. This multi-donor project has been reoriented to support: (a) data collection and analysis in UNDP and donor priority sectors; (b) capacity-building for local administrative structures in Somali "islands of peace"; (c) development of an institutional memory through the maintenance of a documentation centre and geographical information system databases; and (d) the secretariat for the Somalia Aid Coordination Body. Technical assessments of the capacities and needs of local administrative structures have been completed in 12 of the 18 regions of Somalia. Baseline data on socio-economic indicators, vital for area planning, have been collected for about half the country. All information has been centralized and made available in user-friendly electronic formats in the UNDOS Documentation Centre. The centre contains over 4,000 pre-war and post-war documents on Somalia, the only such collection on the country. More than 15 training workshops have been completed for local administrations in the areas of taxation, budgeting, planning and management. UNDOS was instrumental in the preparation of the first National Human Development Report for Somalia, released in late 1998. 25. As noted earlier, pursuant to a request by the Secretary-General to the International Civil Aviation Organization to assume a caretaker role for the management of the Somali airspace and civil aviation services, the project SOM/96/002 - Civil Aviation Caretaker Authority for Somalia - continues to provide air traffic control for aircraft flying through Somali airspace, rehabilitation of selected airports and capacity-building. The project has established a Flight Information Centre in Nairobi, from where flight movements over Somalia are controlled 24 hours a day. Five designated airports in Somalia have been rehabilitated by the project, and now receive technical and operational assistance for the safe and efficient operation of air traffic. The nucleus of a future civil aviation for Somalia is simultaneously being built - the project engages 87 national staff on its payroll, and has provided training for over 100 Somalis in different specialized areas of civil aviation. 26. Revenue derived from customs duties and tariffs from the Somali seaports of Berbera and Bosaso represents a major part of the budgetary income of the administrations in north-west and north-east Somalia. The seaports are also the primary outlet for the import and export trade for not only the Somali coastal areas but also a large hinterland stretching well into Ethiopia. The UNDP project for Ports and Trade Efficiency for Somalia (SOM/98/001), the first phase of which started in 1993, focuses on improving the efficiency of Somali ports and creating the conditions for increased diversification of trade and economic opportunities. The project has been involved in a wide variety of activities ranging from establishment of port management bodies, capacity-building of port personnel, provision of vocational training facilities to the physical rehabilitation of port infrastructure. The project is now diversifying with the addition of a component for institution and capacity-building in the area of external trade. 27. Initiatives to support the private sector are currently under way in follow-up to a UNDP-hosted workshop on trade and private sector development in Somalia, held in Dubai in May 1998, at which more than 160 Somali entrepreneurs and traders, officials, representatives from regional chambers of commerce and experts discussed strategies to revitalize the private sector in Somalia. 28. The Somali coastline is the longest in Africa (3,300 km) and has the greatest variety of marine/coastal ecosystems and resources of all the Western Indian Ocean States. In early 1998, UNDP provided funding to assess the situation and make recommendations as to what could be done in the areas of: protection of biodiversity; marine pollution; sustainable management of fisheries resources; maritime trade issues; and fulfilment of the obligations of Somalia under existing international legal instruments relating to maritime issues. The assessment report is now being studied and donors will be approached to fund priority interventions. C. Capacity-building for rehabilitation and reintegration 29. Recent developments in Somalia in the areas experiencing social and economic recovery have clearly demonstrated the interdependence of rehabilitation and the return of refugees from neighbouring countries, resettlement of internally displaced populations, rejected asylum-seekers from the industrialized countries and the integration of ex-militia. UNDP is providing support to emerging governance and administrative structures at the highest possible level (community, district, or regional) for economic and social rehabilitation and reintegration in both rural and urban settings. 30. Since 1993, UNDP has been implementing the $30.6 million Somalia Rural Rehabilitation Programme in five different areas of the country. The programme uses participatory approaches at the community level to prioritize local needs and funds small-scale sub-projects primarily for the rehabilitation of the social and economic infrastructure and micro-credit and income-generation activities. Currently present in five separate regions of the country, the programme has implemented 738 sub-projects in the economic, environment, and social sectors with a total value to date of about $11 million. In a major shift in emphasis, the project plans from 1999 onwards to move to an area-based approach within which selected districts will be targeted for integrated assistance. Capacity-building of district administrations to implement district planning frameworks will be a key objective. 31. Begun in 1994, the second phase of the Urban Settlements, Governance and Management Programme (SOM/96/003) aims at the restoration of urban municipal services destroyed by the civil war through institutional capacity-building as well as limited physical rehabilitation. At present, five municipalities in north-west and north-east Somalia are being assisted in the areas of urban planning and mapping, water supply, sanitation, roads, and finance and administration. An in-depth evaluation carried out in 1998 concluded that the programme has contributed significantly to the revitalization of municipal functions by strengthening local capacities, improving service delivery and improving the long-term revenue base of municipalities. 32. In cooperation with Somali counterparts, United Nations specialized agencies (particularly the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (UNCHS)), NGOs and donors, UNDP is developing a comprehensive reintegration framework that will provide support for the rehabilitation needs of returnees in the host communities to which they will return. The effects of reintegration on wider communities will be studied and shared with key regional institutions. V. FINANCIAL SITUATION 33. UNDP has assigned target for resource assignment from the core lines 1.1 and 1.2 (TRAC 1 and 2) funding of $27.50 million for the Somalia programme for the period 1997-2000. Combined with carry-over from the fifth cycle ($8.83 million), the programme is funded by $36.33 million of core resources. 34. In view of the fact that funding needs are far greater than available core resources, the country office is making concerted efforts to mobilize additional funds from three sources: TRAC 3 resources, the United Nations Consolidated Appeals process, and donor funding. The needs and opportunities are such in Somalia that with supplementary funding from these sources, UNDP could expand planned programme activities significantly. VI. EXECUTIVE BOARD ACTION 35. The Executive Board may wish to: 1. Take note of the present report; 2. Authorize the Administrator to continue to approve projects on a case-by-case basis. 