%%%FOREST MANAGEMENT|FOREST CONSERVATION|SUSTAINABLE FORESTRY|

99-06517 (E) 230399 United Nations E/CN.17/IFF/1999/16 Economic and Social Council Distr.: General 9 March 1999 Original: English Commission on Sustainable Development Intergovernmental Forum on Forests Third session Geneva, 3–14 May 1999 Programme element III International arrangements and mechanisms to promote the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present reports aims to address the first part of programme element III of the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests, namely to identify possible elements of international arrangements and mechanisms, such as a legally binding instrument on all types of forests. The report first provides background information relevant to this task. It continues by summarizing the results of a survey conducted by the Forum secretariat in response to the request by the Forum to consider the role, effectiveness and relevance of and compliance with existing arrangements and mechanisms. The report recalls some of the issues relevant to this programme element that have also been addressed in documents by the secretariat prepared for previous sessions on this topic. The report concludes by proposing a set of elements which collectively appear to constitute an international priority agenda for action on forests. The proposed list of elements aims to integrate the emerging consensus in the areas of priority concern identified at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development and the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests/Intergovernmental Forum on Forests processes. The report also includes a brief overview of the first meeting of the Costa Rica-Canada initiative, held at San José, Costa Rica from 22 to 27 February 1999 in support of programme element III. Suggestions for preparations for the fourth session of the Forum are also included in the report. E/CN.17/IFF/1999/16 Contents Paragraphs Page I. Introduction II. Context III. Background IV. Current situation V. Towards the identification of possible elements of international arrangements and mechanisms, for example a legally binding instrument, on all types of forests VI. Costa Rica-Canada initiative VII. Preliminary conclusions, proposals for action and preparations for the fourth session of the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests 1. International arrangements and mechanisms to promote the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests were discussed towards the end of the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF) process. This issue, treated under programme element III of the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF), also received background discussion at the Forum’s second session, and is scheduled for substantive discussion during its third session. It is proposed that the Forum’s approach to consensus-building for this particular topic be pursued in two steps: first, at its third session, the Forum would develop a consensus on the principal components or elements, of the international priority agenda for action on forests; second, at its fourth session, the Forum would develop a consensus on future international arrangements and mechanisms, such as a legally binding instrument, that would facilitate the implementation of the priority agenda for action on all types of forests, identified at the third session. 2. At its first session, IFF defined programme element III as follows: “Identify elements, build a global consensus and engage in further action. The Forum should also identify the possible elements of and work towards a consensus on international arrangements and mechanisms, for example, a legally binding instrument on all types of forests. The Forum will report on its work to the Commission on Sustainable Development in 1999. Based on that report and depending on the decision taken by the Commission at its eighth session, the Forum will engage in further action on establishing an intergovernmental negotiation process on new arrangements and mechanisms or a legally binding instrument on all types of forests” (see E/CN.17/IFF/1997/4, para. 7, category III). 3. The background discussion of programme element III at the second session of IFF resulted in a Co-Chairmen’s summary as part of the report of the second session (see E/CN.17/IFF/1998/14, sect. III), which reiterated the importance of the Forest Principles, as well as other processes, instruments and initiatives, in guiding IFF work under this programme element. At its second session, IFF requested its secretariat to undertake an analysis with a view to clarifying the role, effectiveness and relevance of existing arrangements and mechanisms, both legally binding and others, in achieving the objectives of the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests. The analysis was to include progress in and impediments to their implementation and compliance, and was to be undertaken in conjunction with the analysis requested under programme element II.e (Forest-related work of international and regional organizations and under existing instruments). The full details of that analysis by the IFF secretariat are contained in the note by the secretariat on programme element II.e (E/CN.17/IFF/1999/15); a brief summary of some of the results is included under section IV below. 4. Realizing the multiple benefits of the sustainable management of forests and other wooded lands will require cross-sectoral policy harmonization within a country, taking into account transboundary, regional and global dimensions, as well as the productive, environmental and social functions of forests. It has been argued that many complex and cross-sectoral aspects of productive, economic and social development, as well as environmental protection, intersect in forests, so that how forests are managed, conserved and developed can be seen as a reality check for sustainable development. 5. The forest issue has been deliberated actively in a large number of intergovernmental forums, particularly during the past decade. Those deliberations have followed two distinct tracks; one in which the deliberations focused primarily on forests; and a second in which the primary focus has been on other issues of international significance, to which forests make an important contribution. 6. The main outcomes of the first track of international policy dialogue, which focused primarily on forests, include the Forest Principles, chapter 11 of Agenda 21 and the IPF conclusions and proposals for action. Collectively, these outcomes represent the most holistic international consensus on priority areas of concern and proposed action towards the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests. This consensus recognizes the wide diversity of social, economic, environmental, cultural and political conditions around the world and accordingly the need to develop appropriate diverse approaches towards sustainable forest management. This track has focused on the productive, social and environmental functions of forests in a balanced manner. It is suggested that the elements for future international action on forests beyond the year 2000 be built on this existing consensus, and on the emerging consensus in areas of priority concern addressed by IFF. 7. The second track mainly follows the intergovernmental negotiations that are primarily focused on other issues of global concern, such as climate change, biological diversity, trade in endangered species, combating desertification, sustainable development of mountains, and the quantity and quality of freshwater. Forests in this track provide services and benefits that help to address some aspects of these issues. For example, forests as a reservoir of carbon and as rich habitats for plants and animals serve to address questions associated with climate change and biological diversity. Accordingly, forests are recognized in several chapters of Agenda 21 apart from chapter 11, and are also included as an important element in a number of legally binding instruments. Role, effectiveness, relevance and compliance of existing arrangements and mechanisms 8. At its second session, the Forum requested its secretariat to undertake an analysis with a view to clarifying the role, effectiveness and relevance of different types of arrangements and mechanisms, including organizations, instruments, non-governmental organizations, private sector and voluntary initiatives in achieving the objectives of management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests. The IFF secretariat, in a survey of organizations and instruments, solicited information relevant to this request by the Forum. Detailed information on the results of that inquiry is presented in the note by the secretariat on programme element II.e (E/CN.17/IFF/1999/15). The present report provides only a brief overview of the responses particularly relevant to programme element III. In view of the rather small number of respondents, conclusions should be considered with caution. 9. The Forum also called for creating synergies among the work of different organizations and institutions so as to capitalize more effectively on their work being currently carried out. Many of the institutions that responded to the survey felt that in order to accomplish increased efficiencies, synergies and coordination in a meaningful way, the first priority would be to undertake concerted and concrete joint action. Depending on the nature of the organization, there was considerable variation in the proposals on the mechanisms and arrangements that would be most useful to achieve their specific objectives. Organizations primarily involved in monitoring and assessment as well as research and information dissemination felt that further development and increased funding of initiatives supporting harmonization and standardization of terminology, concepts and monitoring approaches would be extremely useful to advance a common understanding and promote effective action. The secretariats of legally binding instruments that responded to the survey felt that joint forest-related programmes and/or liaison groups that deal with forest issues could be a useful mechanism for forest-related issues. 10. Some respondents to the survey expressed the need to make a clearer distinction between actions taken at the local, national, regional and international levels. It was also suggested that international mechanisms should be focused more on areas where value added could be truly achieved at that level. Some respondents stressed that common definitions and common long-term goals would be needed to implement the objectives of management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forest. From the point of view of policy development and operations, as well as in deliberations at the international level, partnerships with industry and other major groups, such as environmental groups, were mentioned as useful mechanisms. 11. The Forum also requested information on compliance of forest-related commitments in existing instruments. Responses were received from secretariats of four legally binding instruments, namely the International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA), the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa and the Treaty for Amazon Cooperation. The secretariats of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Convention to Combat Desertification felt that it was premature for them to assess compliance with forest-related commitments within their instruments. The secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertification is in the process of developing implementation and evaluation indicators, and their testing will start with some parties. The forest biological diversity programme of the Convention on Biological Diversity is still in its early stages, and its compliance status at the national level is not yet fully known. The secretariat of the Treaty for Amazon Cooperation responded that commitments related to information have high compliance among its parties, and those dealing with policy advice and research medium to high compliance. The secretariat of ITTA felt that compliance related to ITTA (1994) and objective 2000 were medium to high, as was also the case for commitments dealing with criteria and indicators, management of natural and planted forests, biological diversity and fire protection. Multiple constituencies of forests, and the need for a cohesive and comprehensive approach 12. Multiple benefits of forests have resulted in multiple constituencies of forests with both complimentary and conflicting interests. A range of special interest groups, institutions and instruments interface with forests at the national, regional and global levels. It is notable that most of these constituencies focus on specific functions and outputs (i.e., “demands”) from forests, such as biological diversity, carbon sequestration, wood and non-wood forest products, fibre and fuelwood, in a piecemeal manner; thus, they do not adequately address cohesively the fundamental aspects of maintaining health and productive capacity of forests as a whole, which would ensure that the conditions are met for forests to sustainably “supply” a wide range of functions and outputs to meet diverse demands. Consequently, the forest agenda lacks a cohesive and comprehensive implementation framework, and is pursued in a fragmented manner. One of the conclusions of IPF noted that there is no global instrument that deals in a comprehensive and holistic way with all types of forests. 13. IFF faces the challenge to formulate a cohesive and comprehensive agenda for priority action towards the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests. In undertaking this task, it not only needs to consider the consensus reached so far specifically on forests, but would have to also consider forest-related aspects embodied in instruments addressing other issues of global significance. The ultimate objective is to develop an international agenda for action on forests which is holistic, integrated and comprehensive, in accordance with United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) objectives, so as to maintain forests and other wooded lands in a healthy and productive state to meet the diverse needs of current and future generations and address other issues of global significance. 14. The Forest Principles and chapter 11 of Agenda 21 are the first concrete examples of the international community’s commitment towards formulating forest policy at the global level. The concepts contained therein are now widely accepted, reflecting a holistic, comprehensive and cohesive approach towards the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests. The IPF process provided further value added in operationalizing the Forest Principles for national-level action as well as for providing a basis for international cooperation. The IFF process is testimony to the international community’s continued commitment to the holistic and cross-sectoral approach to addressing some of the more pressing problems faced by many countries worldwide, such as how to achieve development without degrading the environment and the basic life support systems to such an extent that it causes irreversible changes. 15. As already noted above, the challenge for IFF under this programme element during its third session is to identify possible elements as a first step in working towards consensus on international arrangements and mechanisms, such as a legally binding instrument on all types of forests. The Forest Principles — the first global consensus on forests — chapter 11 of Agenda 21, and the IPF and IFF processes contain the fundamental components for action identified to date by Governments in negotiations related to the international sustainable development agenda. These three successive forest policy deliberations have notably sharpened the scope of the most important forest-related issues constituting the international priority agenda for action on forests. The following elements reflect the issues in the Forest Principles and the IFF and IPF processes for international cooperation and action on forests: (a) National forest programmes; (b) Forest conservation, unique types of forests and protected areas; (c) Combating deforestation and forest degradation; (d) Rehabilitation and restoration of degraded forest lands, and the role of planted forests; (e) Monitoring, assessment and reporting; (f) International cooperation in capacity-building, and access to and transfer of environmentally sound technologies to support sustainable forest management; (g) Financial resources; (h) International trade and sustainable forest management; (i) Forest-related scientific research; (j) Traditional forest-related knowledge; (k) Forest-related work of institutions and instruments. 16. In addition, there are examples of elements that were touched upon in the IPF and IFF processes but were not included as a specific programme element in the two processes, which could be considered: (a) Vital role of all types of forests and transboundary dimensions; (b) Concepts, terminology and definitions; (c) International policy development and priority setting for action. 17. Thus, based on the current international forest policy dialogue, the term “element” may be defined as follows: “Elements are the principal components of the international agenda for action on forests, derived primarily from the Forest Principles, Agenda 21, the IPF’s proposals for action and the IFF programme of work”. 18. In view of the ongoing discussions and emerging consensus in other programme elements, the descriptions set out below should only be viewed as a preliminary introduction. The descriptions are not intended to be a basis for negotiations but only to provide a sense of what the nature of the proposed elements are. National forest programmes 19. IPF, in its final report, encouraged countries, in accordance with their national sovereignty, specific country conditions and national legislation, to develop, implement, monitor and evaluate national forest programmes which include a wide range of approaches towards sustainable forest management. National forest programmes can provide the basis for action at the national level as well as for international cooperation. 20. The IPF consensus on the basic principles of national forest programmes applicable to all countries and all types of forests constitutes one of its most significant achievements. The concept of national forest programmes, as defined by IPF, has subsequently been endorsed by the Commission on Sustainable Development and the General Assembly at its nineteenth special session, as well as by professional forums, including the Eleventh World Forestry Congress. Forest conservation, unique types of forests and protected areas 21. Protected areas of representative and unique forests can provide valuable baselines to assess the impact of human interventions on forest ecosystems. National, regional and global networks of protected forest areas have been recognized as an integral part of the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests. All regional processes engaged in developing criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management include the protection of representative and unique forests as a criterion. A national strategy to establish a network of protected forest areas need to be addressed in national forest policies and programmes. Combating deforestation and forest degradation 22. There is worldwide concern at the continuing alarming rates of deforestation as well as the continued degradation of forests. Negative consequences of deforestation and forest degradation include loss of environmental, economic, social and cultural benefits from forests. IPF and IFF deliberations have recognized that the underlying causes of deforestation and forest degradation are complex and frequently associated with human activities outside the forest sector. International cooperation is essential to reverse current trends. Rehabilitation and restoration of degraded forest land, and the role of planted forests 23. Historical as well as more recent overexploitation of forest and wooded lands and lack of adequate protection and management have resulted in the degradation of several hundred million hectares of fragile forest lands. There is a need to undertake action and international cooperation to restore the productive capacity and biological diversity of these lands, as well as to expand the forest cover to meet diverse needs now and in the future. This element is particularly critical to meet the subsistence needs of rural populations and alleviate poverty in developing countries with low forest cover. It has been recognized that planted forests can play an important role in addressing the problems of degraded lands, as well as alleviating some of the pressures on natural forests for supplying forest products and services. Monitoring, assessment and reporting 24. It is widely recognized that there is a need to improve periodic and systematic collection of data on forests and on the forest sector; facilitate access to information at all geographical levels; and coordinate the information flow by strengthening the linkage between information providers and information users. In particular, there is a need to encourage access to and generate timely and reliable information for the formulation, implementation and assessment of forest policy, as well as to provide accurate data on the supply and demand of forest products and services. 25. In its final report, IPF emphasized that national inventories are an important basis for effective formulation of national forest programmes, and that assessment of the actual and potential conditions of all types of forests is central to sustainable forest management and a wide range of other considerations related to forests and forest ecosystems at the local, national, regional and global levels. 26. Periodic reporting on the state of forests and of experiences with and on progress in achieving sustainable forest management, would be an extremely important activity to promote sustainable forest management. There are, in some cases, reporting mechanisms at the national, regional and global levels which already request data on a range of specific parameters. The main activities of these mechanisms are outlined in the report of the Secretary-General on programme element I.b (E/CN.17/IFF/1999/3). Streamlining of existing reporting requirements and coordination among organizations and instruments that request information could considerably ease some of the burdens on national institutions. International cooperation in capacity-building and access to and transfer of environmentally sound technologies to support sustainable forest management. 27. International cooperation for capacity-building is considered to be a critical activity to assist developing countries in the implementation of sustainable forest management, and includes such activities as education and training, and institutional capacity, including management training. Key constraints include inadequate availability of financial resources, retention of trained staff, as well as lack of access to technologies and equipment. 28. The IPF and IFF deliberations on technology transfer have focused on the economic, social and environmental appropriateness of transferred technologies, and how to enhance North-South and South-South cooperation. Improved access to and use as well as dissemination of technologies can greatly enhance progress towards sustainable forest management through more efficient resource use in harvesting and forest product manufacturing. The establishment of partnerships, networks and cooperation mechanisms among interested parties has also been stressed in the IPF and IFF processes. Financial resources 29. The financing of forest-related activities involves complex arrangements. In countries with commercially attractive forests and/or a forest industry, well targeted capacity-building may be enough to achieve progress towards sustainable forest management. Other countries, unable to attract private financing, such as countries with low forest cover, would need financial assistance that goes beyond mere building of capacity, for example for rehabilitation, afforestation and reforestation, as well as building up of capacity, such as, infrastructures. The discussions in IPF and IFF have been focused on the possibilities of raising new and additional funds and to identify an appropriate mix of financing mechanisms to support sustainable forest management. Discussions around financial resources in IPF and IFF have also included such issues as effective private sector involvement; integration with national policies and priorities and effective coordination; the application of economic instruments and tax policies; the mobilization of national financial resources; and the possibility of finding a mechanism to raise funds to establish a “forest fund” dedicated to support activities aimed at sustainable forest management. International trade and sustainable forest management 30. The IPF and IFF deliberations have emphasized the mutually supportive roles of international trade and sustainable forest management. While IPF and IFF were not designed as forums for trade negotiations, some very important issues concerning the interface between trade in forest products and sustainable forest management have been analysed and clarified. In this context, important issues deliberated by IPF and IFF include non-discriminatory international trade in forest products from all types of forests; the role of tariff and non-tariff barriers in relation to the promotion of sustainable forest management; improved market access and market transparency; promotion of the use of and trade in lesser-known species; the relative competitiveness and environmental impact of wood versus substitutes in international trade; and illegal international trade in both wood and non-wood forest products. Related issues include the characterization of sustainable forest management in relation with certification and its effect on international trade in forest products and services. Other related issues which have not been exclusive to the discussions under international trade and sustainable forest management are valuation of forest products and services, and supply and demand of forest products and services. Forest-related scientific research 31. The management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests to meet a wide range of demands must be based on a good understanding of the structure and function of forest ecosystems, and the impact of human activities on forests. Strengthening of human and institutional capacity to develop and apply science and technology, through research and development, would be a crucial component of the international priority agenda for action on forests. Other priority areas under consideration by IFF include an international priority-setting mechanism for research, and increased funding to enhance the effectiveness of available research capacity. Traditional forest-related knowledge 32. Indigenous people and local communities in many parts of the world depend on forests for their subsistence and economic and social survival. These forest-dependent people have long-term experience and knowledge of the utilization of the forests they live in or close by. IPF recognized the potential contribution of such knowledge to meet the objectives of sustainable forest management. This rich source of knowledge, considered valuable in terms of numerous wood and non-wood products as well as management approaches is associated with concerns of protection, benefit-sharing and intellectual property rights. Forest-related work of institutions and instruments 33. IPF and IFF have undertaken in-depth analyses of forest-related work of various organizations and instruments. In order to implement an effective, integrated and holistic approach to the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests, there is a need to coordinate policy deliberations on forest-related issues in various multilateral organizations as well as various instruments. There is also a need to coordinate forest-related policy advice and analysis, as well as the operational activities of various multilateral institutions, international organizations and instruments. Vital role of all types of forests, and transboundary dimensions 34. The role of forests in providing a wide range of benefits and services, some of which extend far beyond the countries where the forests are located, has received increased attention, particularly during the past three decades. Some of these benefits may extend to the transboundary level (e.g., forests as habitats for migratory species; watershed forests of international rivers and lakes) and to the regional and global levels (carbon sequestration; biological diversity; hydrological and other ecological cycles). Recognition of this broader role of forests has been one of the most significant developments in forest policy deliberations at the national, regional and global levels. There is a need to strengthen the mutually supportive roles of national forest policy with regional and global forest policy considerations, as well as with a number of other forums. There is also a need to address transboundary and regional issues, such as forest fires, insects and diseases, and to manage airborne pollutants and other emissions that are associated with forest decline in many regions in the world. Concepts, terminology and definitions 35. The IPF process has noted the significance of the coordination and comparability of concepts, terminology and definitions to enhance inter-agency cooperation and the synergy between various instruments that contain forest-related elements, as well as for the effective use of limited resources for forest assessment and international cooperation. Problems associated with lack of coordination and comparability of concepts, terminology and definitions have been identified in such areas as forest assessment; low forest cover; supply and demand; financial resources data; carbon sequestration; criteria and indicators etc. The Panel requested the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, inter alia, in consultation with countries and relevant international organizations and in an open and transparent manner, to formulate an internationally acceptable set of definitions of key terms used in the assessment of all types of forests and their resources, and to promote their adoption. International policy development and priority setting for action 36. Policy development and priority-setting for action, as well as periodic review and assessment of progress towards the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forest, could have the following functions at the international level: (a) Develop, guide, promote and formulate policy action on the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests, at the national, regional and global levels, as appropriate; (b) Develop and set priorities for action, and address emerging issues; (c) Set priorities and coordinate forest-related work of international organizations and instruments; (d) Support and identify needs for international cooperation towards the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests; (e) Review, assess and report on progress towards sustainable forest management and on the state of the world’s forests; (f) Provide a forum for interested parties to exchange experiences, discuss concerns, and provide solutions for achieving sustainable forest management; (g) Facilitate efficient coordination and comparability of concepts, terminology and definitions. 37. The first meeting of experts of the Costa Rica-Canada initiative (see E/CN.17/IFF/1999/18), convened in support of IFF programme element III, was held at San José, Costa Rica, from 22–26 February 1999. This meeting was attended by 87 experts from different countries, intergovernmental institutions, non-governmental organizations, indigenous people, women’s groups and invited speakers, reflecting a wide range of interests and views. The meeting was the first stage of the initiative. The subsequent stage will be the holding of a series of regional and subregional meetings, in which the elements and possible benefits of international arrangements and mechanisms, such as a legally binding instrument for all types of forests, will be analysed from the regional perspective. The initiative will culminate in a final meeting to be held in Canada at the end of 1999 to consolidate the results of both the first meeting in Costa Rica and the regional and subregional meetings. 38. The meeting was given the task of making suggestions for the regional and subregional meetings, through applying the first steps of a proposed approach to identify a set of international forest issues, analyse the level of treatment of these issues in existing legally binding and non-legally binding instruments, and identify those issues that could potentially be advanced as elements through international arrangements and mechanisms, whether legally binding or non-legally binding. The regional and subregional meetings would, in addition, consider what range of options would be available for addressing the issues that could be advanced at the international level, and assess the pros and cons of those options. 39. The first meeting provided valuable guidance to the regional and subregional meetings in the form of several suggestions for improving the effectiveness of the proposed approach, mainly suggesting that certain clarifications of terms and criteria for the assessment would be needed in order for participants to have a common understanding and to make the results of the meetings comparable to the largest extent possible. The experts identified a set of approximately 70 issues. There was an understanding among the participants that the exercise, at this stage, aimed to capture the range of views rather than reach a consensus. The full details of the first meeting of the Costa Rica-Canada initiative are contained in a report to be made available at the third session of IFF. Preliminary conclusions 40. The international priority agenda on forests should be holistic, comprehensive and inclusive of the areas of priority concerns of both countries with rich and countries with scarce forest resources, and should contain at least the basic elements agreed at the Forum’s third session. International arrangements and mechanisms after the year 2000 must be based on the Forest Principles and Agenda 21, integrate the consensus reached by IPF and IFF, and take into consideration deliberations on forest-related elements in other intergovernmental forums. Preliminary proposals for action 41. The Forum may wish to consider the following proposed list of possible elements as a basis for its discussions, and to identify a set of elements that collectively would constitute an international priority agenda to promote the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests: (f) International cooperation in capacity-building and access to and transfer of environmentally sound technologies to support sustainable forest management; (k) Forest-related work of institutions and instruments; (l) Vital role of all types of forests and transboundary dimensions; (m) Concepts, terminology and definitions; (n) International policy development and priority- setting for action. Preparations for the fourth session 42. Based on the results and guidance received from the third session of the Forum, the IFF secretariat will prepare a report on programme element III which could contain: (a) A brief description of the results of the discussion at the third session of the Forum, including a list of possible elements of international arrangements and mechanisms; (b) The relevant results of substantive discussions on other categories of the IFF programme of work, as well as results of government-led initiatives held in support of IFF; (c) Options for further action on new arrangements and mechanisms or a legally binding instrument on all types of forests. 