%%%HUMAN RIGHTS|GOLAN HEIGHTS|TERRITORIES OCCUPIED BY ISRAEL|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|PUBLIC INFORMATI﻿ON|

UNITED NATIONS E Economic and Social Council Distr. GENERAL E/CN.4/2000/23 11 November 1999 Original: ENGLISH COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS Fifty—sixth session Item 8 of the provisional agenda QUESTION OF THE VIOLATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE OCCUPIED ARAB TERRITORIES, INCLUDING PALESTINE Report of the Secretary—General 1. At its fifty—fifth session, the Commission on Human Rights adopted resolution 1999/6, entitled “Human rights in the occupied Syrian Golan”. In paragraph 6 of resolution 1999/6, the Commission requested the Secretary—General to bring that resolution to the attention of all Governments, the competent United Nations organs, the specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and international humanitarian organizations and to give it the widest possible publicity, and to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty—sixth session. 2. In accordance with the requests of the Commission, the Secretariat brought resolution 1999/6 to the attention of all Governments, by a note verbale dated 28 June 1999. It was also communicated to the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories and to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. 3. Furthermore, the resolution was transmitted to all the specialized agencies and to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. In addition, the resolution was brought to the attention of competent regional intergovernmental organizations and international humanitarian organizations. GE.99—16009 (E) page 4. The Department of Public Information submitted information that it had undertaken the following activities: (a) The Department of Public Information continued to provide press coverage of the meetings of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories. Extensive press and audio—visual coverage was also provided for the meetings of the Commission on Human Rights. The methods used by the Department to provide this coverage included production of press releases, publications, television news packages and radio programmes, and organizing press briefings and briefings for the public. (b) The Department continued to disseminate United Nations information materials, documents and press releases on the activities of the Special Committee and the Commission on Human Rights through the global network of United Nations Information Centres and Services in 67 countries, the 357 depository libraries in 142 countries and electronically through the Internet. The Department also continued to make information materials available to NGOs through its Resource Centres in New York, Geneva and Vienna. (c) The Department, through its Information Centres, provided support to the Special Committee's field mission to Egypt, Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic from 18 to 29 May 1999. 