%%%REPORTING PROCEDURES|PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION|DRUG CONTROL|GUIDELINES|PROGRAMMES OF ACTION|

V.99-88677 (E) United Nations E/CN.7/1999/21 Economic and Social Council Distr.: General 11 October 1999 Original: English Commission on Narcotic Drugs Reconvened forty-second session Vienna, 30 November-1 December 1999 Agenda item 11 Other business Report of the inter-sessional working group to elaborate guidelines to facilitate reporting on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action adopted by the General Assembly at its seventeenth special session and on progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008 (Vienna, 1-3 June 1999 and 28-30 September 1999) Contents Paragraphs Page I. Introduction 1 2 II. Guidelines for reporting by Governments on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action and on the progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session 2-14 2 III. Suggested working methodology of the Commission 15-17 3 IV. Follow-up action 18-19 3 Annexes I. Draft resolution for consideration by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs 4 II. Draft questionnaire for reporting on the action plans and measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session on the world drug problem 7 I. Introduction 1. In response to Commission on Narcotic Drugs resolution 42/4, two meetings of the inter-sessional working group to elaborate guidelines to facilitate reporting by Governments on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action adopted by the General Assembly at its seventeenth special session (resolution S-17/2, annex), and on the progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session (resolution S-20/2, annex), were held in Vienna from 1 to 3 June 1999 and from 28 to 30 September 1999. The inter-sessional working group was chaired by Mohammad S. Amirkhizi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Chairman of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs at its forty-second session. The meetings were opened by the Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP). II. Guidelines for reporting by Governments on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action and on the progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session 2. Reporting on the follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly and on the relevant provisions of the Global Programme of Action should be as concise, simple and streamlined as possible, so as to make it easy for Governments to provide the information required and to ensure a high response rate. It should avoid duplicating information currently being provided by Governments, in particular through the annual reports questionnaire submitted by Governments to the Secretary-General in accordance with their obligations under the international drug control treaties. 3. The questionnaire on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action should be discontinued. 4. Member States should transmit their replies to the first biennial questionnaire to the Executive Director of UNDCP by 30 June 2000. On the basis of the questionnaires submitted by Member States, a single biennial report would be prepared by the Executive Director of UNDCP, to be submitted to the Commission not later than three months prior to its review by the Commission. 5. The biennial report should also cover the difficulties encountered in meeting the objectives and targets agreed upon at the twentieth special session. 6. The report of the Executive Director of UNDCP should cover the efforts by Governments to meet the objectives and target dates established by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, on the basis of a comprehensive, confidential and balanced treatment of information covering all aspects of the drug problem. Each Government must have the opportunity to comment on any information relating to its territory that was included in the report and that it had not provided. The report of the Executive Director of UNDCP should contain information on global trends, organized by region and covering the action plans and sets of measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session. UNDCP should also draw on its expertise and experience gained from its global technical assistance programmes and information collected under various relevant questionnaires. 7. The biennial report of the Executive Director should be submitted no later than three months prior to its review by the Commission. The Commission should consider holding informal inter-sessional meetings to consider the biennial report of the Executive Director during the above-mentioned three-month period and to initiate the follow-up process. 8. The gathering and presentation of information on the follow-up to the action plans and measures adopted by the General Assembly at is twentieth special session must be done by States. UNDCP has a central role to play in supporting Governments in their efforts to perform that task. 9. The Commission should consider inviting regional and subregional bodies to make available to it information on their activities relating to the illicit drug problem. 10. The first biennial report should be examined by the Commission (at a special session in the year 2000) (at its regular session in the year 2001). To be decided by the Commission. Subsequently, the biennial reports would be examined by the Commission during its regular session (in even-numbered years) (in odd-numbered years).* 11. The Commission would submit a report to the General Assembly in the years 2003 and 2008 on the progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets set out in the Political Declaration. The Commission should consider establishing, at its forty-third session or before, a set of common indicators, criteria and parameters for the preparation of its report. 12. The Commission should assess the reporting guidelines and questionnaires at regular intervals, in order to ensure that they continued to meet the needs of Member States. The Commission should also consider streamlining the annual reports questionnaire. 13. The Executive Director of UNDCP should also inform the Commission on the action of UNDCP and the United Nations system in assisting Member States in meeting the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration, and in meeting the mandates addressed to UNDCP and the United Nations system. 14. The Secretariat is invited to transmit the recommendations and resolutions adopted by the Commission to the relevant regional mechanisms and organizations for implementation in accordance with their mandates. III. Suggested working methodology of the Commission 15. At its forty-second session, the Commission had expressed general support for a working method whereby it would regard each action plan or set of measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session as a comprehensive, self-contained set of recommendations. That approach would be facilitated by the fact that each action plan or set of measures corresponded to a separate item that featured regularly on the agenda of the Commission. The Commission is accordingly invited to adjust its agenda to enable it to review the relevant part of the report of Governments on progress made in the implementation of each action plan. The provisional agenda for the forty-third session of the Commission might be modified to enable the Commission to initiate the examination of the follow-up to the twentieth special session of the Assembly. 16. The follow-up to the twentieth special session should be a permanent item on the agenda of the Commission, to make it possible to maintain the political momentum and the balanced and comprehensive approach adopted by the Assembly at that special session. Under that agenda item, the Commission could consider the report of the Executive Director of UNDCP based on information provided by Governments, as well as the views of Governments on the implementation of the action plans and measures adopted at the twentieth special session. 17. During the regular session of the Commission, the Committee of the Whole could review the report of the Executive Director of UNDCP. Any conclusions and possible recommendations of the Committee could be considered by the Commission, meeting in plenary under the relevant agenda items. IV. Follow-up action 18. The inter-sessional working group decided to submit to the Commission, at its reconvened session, a draft resolution encapsulating its recommendations regarding the guidelines for reporting by Governments on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action and on the progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration. The draft resolution would, in the view of the inter-sessional working group, assist the Commission in its consideration of the relevant agenda item. The draft resolution is contained in annex I to the present report. 19. The working group decided to bring to the attention of the Commission, for its consideration, the draft questionnaire covering the action plans and measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, including the questionnaire on the Action Plan for the Implementation of the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction (Economic and Social Council resolution 1999/29, annex). The draft questionnaire is contained in annex II to the present report. Annex I Draft resolution for consideration by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs The inter-sessional working group to elaborate guidelines to facilitate reporting by Governments on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action adopted by the General Assembly at its seventeenth special session and on progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, brings to the attention of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs the following draft resolution for its consideration. Guidelines for reporting on the follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly The Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Reaffirming the importance of following up the commitments of Member States set out in the Political Declaration General Assembly resolution S-20/2, annex. adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session on the world drug problem, Underlining the need to establish a follow-up mechanism for evaluating and sustaining progress by Member States in meeting the objectives for the years 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, Recalling its resolution 42/4 of 24 March 1999, in which it decided to establish an inter-sessional working group to elaborate guidelines for reporting by Governments on, inter alia, progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008, as set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, Stressing the need to facilitate its analysis of the biennial reports to be prepared by States, through the adoption of a concise, simple and streamlined method of reporting that would enable Governments to provide clear, objective and concise information on the progress made in implementing the action plans and measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, with a view to intensifying national, regional and international cooperation in addressing the world drug problem, Recalling the important role of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and the United Nations system in supporting the follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly, 1. Adopts the unified, single questionnaire that includes the information required on all action plans and measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session; 2. Requests Member States to transmit their replies to the first biennial questionnaire to the Executive Director of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme by 30 June 2000; 3. Requests the Executive Director to prepare a single biennial report, which should also cover the difficulties encountered in meeting the objectives and targets agreed upon at the twentieth special session, on the basis of questionnaires provided by Member States, to be submitted to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs not later than three months prior to its review by the Commission; 4. Requests the Executive Director to cover in his report the efforts of Governments to meet the objectives and target dates established by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, on the basis of a comprehensive, confidential and balanced treatment of information covering all aspects of the drug problem. Each Government must have the opportunity to comment on any information relating to its territory that is included in the report and that it has not provided. The report of the Executive Director of UNDCP should contain information on global trends, organized by region and covering the action plans and sets of measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session. UNDCP should also draw on its expertise and experience gained from its global technical assistance programmes and information collected under various relevant questionnaires; 5. Calls on the Executive Director to submit his biennial report no later than three months prior to its review by the Commission. The Commission should consider holding informal inter-sessional meetings to consider the biennial report of the Executive Director during the above-mentioned three-month period and to initiate the follow-up process; 6. Considers that the gathering and presentation of information on the follow-up to the action plans and measures adopted by the General Assembly at is twentieth special session must be done by States. UNDCP has a central role to play in supporting Governments in their efforts to perform that task; 7. Requests the Executive Director to inform the Commission on the action of the Programme and the United Nations system in assisting Member States in meeting the objectives and target dates set out in the Political Declaration adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session, and in meeting the mandates addressed to the Programme and to the United Nations system; 8. Decides to submit a report to the General Assembly in the years 2003 and 2008 on the progress achieved in meeting the goals and targets set out in the Political Declaration. The Commission should consider establishing, at its forty-third session or before, a set of common indicators, criteria and parameters for the preparation of its report; 9. Decides to assess the reporting guidelines and questionnaires at regular intervals, in order to ensure that they continue to meet the needs of Member States. The Commission should also consider streamlining the annual reports questionnaire submitted by Member States; 10. Requests the Programme to discontinue the questionnaire on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action adopted by the General Assembly at its seventeenth special session; Resolution S-17/2, annex). 11. Decides to evaluate the biennial report of the Executive Director and to present recommendations on, inter alia, national, regional and international action and cooperation, under a new agenda item entitled “Follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly”, and under separate agenda items related to action plans and measures adopted by the Assembly at its twentieth special session; 12. Decides also that, during the regular session of the Commission, the Committee of the Whole will assess the biennial report of the Executive Director, and that the conclusions and recommendations of the Committee will be considered by the Commission in plenary, under the agenda item entitled “Follow-up to the twentieth special session of the General Assembly”, and under separate agenda items relating to the action plans and measures adopted by the Assembly at its twentieth special session, allocating adequate time for the discussion of the biennial report of the Executive Director; 13. Invites the Secretariat to transmit the recommendations and resolutions adopted by the Commission to the regional mechanisms and organizations for implementation in accordance with their mandates. Annex II Draft questionnaire for reporting on the action plans and measures adopted by the General Assembly at its twentieth special session on the world drug problem The draft questionnaire has been reproduced without formal editing. 1. It is understood that the first time States reply to this unified questionnaire they will provide answers that are as full as possible, particularly bearing in mind paragraph 1 (c) of the measures to promote judicial cooperation. In subsequent responses they will provide information on any changes. States should also provide, as appropriate, information on any difficulties they have encountered in answering the questionnaire and/or explanations of any negative answers. Additional information/explanations should be provided, as deemed necessary, to complement the answers provided in the questionnaire. II. General 1. Does your country have a national drug strategy/action plan? □ Yes □ No 2. If yes, does it incorporate the Guiding Principles on Drug Demand Reduction? 3. Does your country have a central coordinating entity for the implementation of the national drug strategy/action plan? If yes, please specify: 4. Is the national strategy/action plan multisectoral? E/CN.7/1999/21 5. Which are the main sectors represented in the national strategy/action plan? Health Social Education Law enforcement Justice Employment Other (please specify) III. Control of precursors 6. Has your Government adopted any revised/new laws and regulations related to precursor control; for example, is there a system of prior import/export authorization? 7. Has your Government established working procedures for monitoring and identifying suspicious transactions involving precursors? If so, please give details. 8. Has a code of conduct been established with the chemical industry or have measures been taken to introduce the “know-your-client principle”, such as an obligation to provide or request end-user certificates? 9. Has your Government introduced specific measures and/or related sanctions in connection with any revised or new laws, regulations or working procedures to prevent the diversion of precursors, for example, by identifying (including by sending some form of pre-export notification), stopping, suspending or seizing suspicious shipments of precursors or arranging controlled deliveries? 10. Has your Government invoked article 12, paragraph 10 (a), of the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, requesting prior notice of exports for substances in Table I and, in addition to those requirements, also for acetic anhydride, potassium permanganate or other substances in Table II? If so, how many times? 11. Have the law enforcement authorities of your country put in place procedures to investigate diversions of chemicals and clandestine laboratories, including procedures for sharing information on findings of investigations and for liaison with industry? 12. Has your Government put in place procedures to identify and report the use of substitute chemicals in, and new methods of, illicit drug manufacture? 13. Have there been any seizures as a result of your Government cooperating with Governments of third countries in the control of precursors? If so, please give details of such cooperation. 14. Are resources for technical assistance in precursor control provided by your Government to Governments of third countries? IV. Measures to promote judicial cooperation 15. Does your country have legislation permitting and facilitating judicial cooperation with other countries in connection with: (a) Extradition? Yes/No Do the laws in your country preclude or seriously limit the extradition of nationals? Yes/No Have there been any developments in your national legislation since your last report? Yes/No If so, please provide details of the steps taken. (b) Mutual legal assistance? Yes/No (c) Transfer of proceedings? Yes/No (d) Countering illicit drug trafficking by sea? Yes/No (e) Controlled delivery? Yes/No 16. Does your country have a competent authority or authorities designated to receive, respond to and process requests for cooperation in connection with: Have there been any changes since your last report? Yes/No If so, give the new contact address. (c) Criminal investigation techniques and strategies? Yes/No 17. Has your country reviewed, simplified and/or otherwise strengthened procedures in connection with: (c) Protection of judges? Yes/No (d) Protection of prosecutors? Yes/No (e) Protection of members of surveillance and law enforcement officers? Yes/No (f) Protection of witnesses? Yes/No (g) Controlled delivery? Yes/No 18. Does your country have with other countries, in respect of judicial cooperation against illicit drug trafficking, agreements on: Transfer of proceedings? Yes/No Illicit traffic by sea? Yes/No If so, how many such agreements are there and what subject areas do they cover? 19. Has your country based its agreements on the model treaties of the United Nations? Yes/No 20. Has your country taken any of the following measures on information exchange and other forms of cooperation, including training (if so, please give details): (a) Shared information with other countries on contact details and procedures of competent authorities, domestic laws and practices in connection with extradition, mutual legal assistance, transfer of proceedings and criminal investigation techniques and strategies or instituted exchange programmes for law enforcement personnel? Yes/No In this connection, does your country use modern communication technology to facilitate the exchange of information with other countries? (b) Established specialized units for investigating drug trafficking cases? (c) Enhanced technical cooperation, training and human resource development for law enforcement personnel? 21. Has your country taken any other measures to strengthen cooperation with law enforcement agencies and judicial authorities of other countries? Yes/No 22. Does your domestic legal system permit the use of the technique of control delivery? Yes/No 23. How many controlled deliveries were undertaken during the reporting period? 24. Has your country developed model forms, guides or manuals on how to make requests to assist other countries in preparing appropriate requests for judicial cooperation? Yes/No V. Countering money-laundering Legislative measures 25. Has laundering of the proceeds derived from: (a) drug trafficking Yes ( ) No ( ) (b) other serious crimes Yes ( ) No ( ) been made a criminal offence in your country? If so, state the title of the legislation and the date of its entry into force. If so, have there been any money laundering investigations, prosecutions or convictions since your last report? Yes ( ) No ( ) 26. Does your authority have statistical data on (i) investigations; Yes ( ) No ( ) (ii) prosecutions; Yes ( ) No ( ) (iii) convictions; Yes ( ) No ( ) for money laundering? If so, please provide the data. 27. Is money laundering considered a serious offence in your country? Yes ( ) No ( ) 28. Does your legislation provide for the freezing, seizure and confiscation of the proceeds of: (a) illicit drug trafficking in line with the provisions of the 1988 Convention? Yes ( ) No ( ) 29. Is the seizure of assets resulting from money laundering permitted in your country? Yes ( ) No ( ) 30. If so, have proceeds of drug trafficking been frozen, seized or confiscated? Yes ( ) No ( ) 31. Does your authority have statistical data on (a) seized proceeds; Yes ( ) No ( ) (b) confiscated proceeds; Yes ( ) No ( ) for money laundering offences? 32. Is money laundering considered an extraditable offence 33. Does your legislation stipulate any requirements to declare the cross-border transport above a specified value of: (a) cash Yes ( ) No ( ) (b) negotiable bearer instruments Yes ( ) No ( ) If so, state the penalty for failure to declare the cross-border transport of cash or negotiable instruments. Measures to prevent and detect money laundering activities in financial entities 34. Have measures been adopted in the financial system in your country that would: (a) Enable the reporting of suspicious and/or unusual transactions? Yes ( ) No ( ) If so, how many suspicious and/or unusual transactions have been reported? (b) Put into practice the principle of “know your customer”? Yes ( ) No ( ) If so, please provide details. (c) Remove impediments to criminal investigation that are related to banking secrecy? Yes ( ) No ( ) (d) Enable the identification of the benefiting owners of accounts, corporate bodies and other financial assets? Yes ( ) No ( ) (e) Establish a central unit (financial intelligence unit) to collect and analyze reports and intelligence on suspected cases involving money-laundering? Yes ( ) No ( ) 35. Has your country implemented measures to provide for the effective investigation and prosecution of those involved in money-laundering? Yes ( ) No ( ) International cooperation 36. In the area of international cooperation, has your country sent to and received from other countries any mutual legal assistance requests concerning cases of money-laundering or the freezing, seizure or confiscation of criminal assets? Yes ( ) No ( ) If so, how many? What action was taken? 37. Have any treaties, agreements, memorandums, or letters of understanding been concluded with other countries with a view to the exchange of financial information and/or mutual legal assistance concerning money laundering? Yes ( ) No ( ) VI. Action Plan on International Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on Alternative Development 38. Does your country have a national plan or programmes, including alternative development, to reduce and eventually eliminate the cultivation of illicit drug crops? 39. Which ministries, agencies, or private entities, manage or are involved in alternative development programmes in your country? 40. Does the plan or programme include eradication or other enforcement measures that would be applied to ensure the reduction and eventual elimination of the cultivation of illicit drug crops? 41. Does your country apply programmes of alternative development or actions of forced eradication in areas of agricultural production of low profitability? 42. What fund-raising mechanisms are institutionalized or planned regularly for alternative development and/or other ways of eradicating illicit drug crops? 43. How is your country financing programmes for the eradication of illicit narcotic crops and/or alternative development? What is the percentage and amount of financial resources, allocated to programmes to eradicate illicit narcotic crops and/or alternative development, are derived from (i) national, (ii) bilateral, and (iii) multilateral sources, including the United Nations system agencies, international financial institutions and regional banks? 44. Has your country received technical assistance for alternative development or programmes for the eradication of illicit narcotic crops? What is the percentage and amount of financial resources received for programmes to eradicate illicit narcotic crops and/or alternative development, are derived from (i) bilateral, and (ii) multilateral sources, including the United Nations system agencies, international financial institutions and regional banks? 45. Does your country assist on a bilateral, regional or multilateral basis countries with alternative development programmes to eradicate illicit narcotic crops? If so, what is the extent of your assistance? 46. Has your country negotiated agreements for financial assistance for alternative development with international financial institutions and/or regional development banks? Has it received positive support from these institutions and banks? 47. What support to institution-building at the local and regional levels and what support to community activities are being extended by the alternative develoment and/or illicit drug crop eradication programmes? 48. In alternative development programmes in your country, are the following taken into consideration: (a) Participatory approaches? (b) Incorporation of a gender dimension? (c) The poorest and most vulnerable population groups? (d) Environmental concerns? (e) Measures for reducing illicit drug demand? (f) Traditional medical practices? 49. What monitoring of illicit cultivation activities—including the displacement or relocation of illicit cultivation—are taking place in your country and is the information shared with national, regional and international organizations? 50. Does your Government have systems of monitoring and evaluation of the qualitative and quantitative impact of alternative development programmes and programmes for eradication of illicit crops? If so, what indicators are used to measure the impact of the programmes? 51. What law enforcement measures are being taken to control illicit crop cultivation and to accompany alternative development programmes and which organizations are involved? 52. What are the current or planned activities to improve the economic framework for alternative development, e.g. in the field of marketing? VII. Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture, Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and their Precursors A. Implementing the global framework 53. Have treaties, resolutions and decisions of the Economic and Social Council, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the International Narcotics Control Board (INCB) been implemented? If not, please explain. B. Raising awareness of the problem of amphetamine-type stimulants 54. What measures have been taken by your government to raise awareness of the problem of amphetamine-type stimulants and to give it higher priority? If so, please describe. C. Reducing demand for illicit amphetamine-type stimulants 55. Have measures been taken by your government to reduce the illicit demand for amphetamine-type stimulants? 56. What measures have been been put in place by your government to continuously monitor the illicit demand for and abuse patterns of amphetamine-type stimulants and are research results being integrated into prevention campaigns and treatment efforts? 57. Does your country have any specific programmes to prevent youth from experimenting with amphetamine-type stimulants? D. Providing accurate information on amphetamine-type stimulants 58. What measures have been taken by your government to prevent information related to illicit drugs from being disseminated on the Internet? 59. Is modern information technology used to disseminate information on the adverse health, social and economic consequences of the abuse of amphetamine-type stimulants? E. Limiting the supply of amphetamine-type stimulants 60. What measures been taken by your government to reduce supply of illicit amphetamine-type stimulants, including by strengthening the control of precursors and laboratory equipment? 61. Have measures been taken: (a) To enhance cooperation with industry? (b) To introduce mechanisms to deal with non-scheduled substances? (c) To establish monitoring systems to identify the clandestine manufacture and prevent the diversion of amphetamine-type stimulants? (d) To carry out drug signature analysis and profiling? (e) To prevent the diversion, irresponsible marketing and prescribing of amphetamine-type stimulants? F. Strengthening the control system for amphetamine-type stimulants and their precursors 62. Have measures been taken at the national or international level: (a) To rapidly identify and assess new amphetamine-type stimulants found on the illicit markets? (b) To speed up the scheduling process? (c) To introduce appropriate sanctions and penalties for amphetamine-type stimulants while strengthening law enforcement efforts? (d) To improve data collection (on clandestine laboratories, manufacturing methods, precursors used, purity levels, prices, sources, epidemiology)? (e) To improve regional cooperation? (f) To introduce the “know-your-client principle”? (g) To assist other countries in dealing with the problem of amphetamine-type stimulants? VIII. Drug demand reduction The commitment (objectives 1, 2 and 3) 63. Does your country have a national drug demand reduction strategy? (This question refers to objectives 1 and 3) 64. If yes, does it incorporate the Guiding Principles on Drug Demand Reduction Paragraph 8 of the Declaration states that: (a) There shall be a balanced approach between demand reduction and supply reduction, each reinforcing the other, in an integrated approach to solving the drug problem. (b) Demand reduction policies shall: (i) (ii) provide for and encourage active and coordinated participation of individuals at the community level, both generally and in situations of particular risk, by virtue, for example, of their geographical location, economic conditions, or relatively large addict populations; (iii) be sensitive to both culture and gender; (iv) contribute towards developing and sustaining supportive environments. 65. Has an assessment of the nature of the problem been conducted before developing the National Drug Demand Reduction Strategy ? 66. Does your country have a Central Coordinating Entity for the implementation of the National Drug Demand Reduction Strategy? (This question refers to objective 2) If yes, please specify 67. Does the National Drug Demand Reduction Strategy have a multisectoral approach? (This question refers to objectives 2 and 3) 68. Which sectors are involved in developing and implementing the National Drug Demand Reduction Strategy? Government, public and other official agencies at national level Government, public and other official agencies at regional level Government, public and other official agencies at local level Civil society (e.g. NGOs, trade unions) participating in ... Religious Business community Others (please specify) 69. Do you have a dedicated budget to implement the National Drug Demand Reduction Strategy ? 70. Is there a framework for assessing and reporting on results? Assessing the problem (objectives 4 and 5; objective 4 is currently covered by the annual reports questionnaire) 71. Does your country have a national or regional programme for research on drugs, drug dependence and drug demand reduction? (This question refers to objective 5) Yes No 72. Please indicate in which areas research has been published or carried out in the reporting period or is being carried out at the time of reporting. Biochemical Pharmacology Sociology Epidemiology Prevention Treatment General drug policy Cost analysis 73. Please indicate in which of the above areas most of the research is undertaken. Tackling the problem (objective 6): prevention interventions 74. Indicate which types of prevention programmes are implemented and the settings in which they are implemented. Also indicate whether the specific programmes are gender sensitive and whether they have been evaluated. (Format to be developed by the Secretariat). Information and education about drugs/drug use School □ 0 = Not known □ 1 = Isolated/sporadic □ 2 = Relatively extensive □ Gender sensitive □ Evaluated Community based Workplace Correctional system Health centers Life skills development The Secretariat is to provide examples of what is understood under life skills development. Providing alternatives to drug use The Secretariat is to provide examples of what is understood under providing alternatives to drug use. Others (pls. specify) If relatively extensive interventions are reported, please provide a short description below. Treatment and rehabilitation interventions 75. Indicate which of the following treatment and rehabilitation programmes are implemented and the settings in which they take place. Also indicate whether the specific programmes are gender sensitive and whether they have been evaluated. (Format to be developed by the Secretariat). Detoxification General and psychiatric hospitals Primary care and other health facilities Correctional institutions Specialized addiction treatment—residential Specialized addiction treatment—Non-residential Social services Substitution treatment (therapy), excluding short-term detoxification Specialized addiction treatment - residential Specialized addiction treatment - Non-residential Drug-free treatment Social reintegration Other approaches (please specify) Reducing the negative health and social consequences of drug abuse 76. Please indicate whether the following interventions have been implemented or are ongoing. Also indicate whether the interventions are gender sensitive and whether they have been evaluated. (Format to be developed by the Secretariat). (This question refers to objective 6) Low-threshold Outreach Emergency shelters Overdose prevention programmes Safer use information dissemination Needle and syringe exchange programme Provision of cleaning agents Testing programme for infectious diseases Vaccination Condom distribution Testing programme in the workplace Forging partnerships (objective 7) 77. Which collaboration/networking mechanisms have been active in your country in drug demand reduction during the period of reporting? (This question refers to objective 7) Multi-sectoral committee(s) at the national level Multi-sectoral committee(s) at the regional level Multi-sectoral committee(s) at the local level Umbrella NGO(s) 78. Do these mechanisms have provisions for identifying and including new partners? yes no Focusing on special needs (objectives 8, 9, 10) 79. Has your country established guidelines for the provision of: (This question refers to objective 8) Prevention services Treatment services Rehabilitation services. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80. Do these guidelines take into account cultural diversity and specific needs, such as those relating to gender, age, and socially, culturally and geographically marginalised groups in the population? 81. Do you have any special programmes for specific at risk population groups? (This question refers to objective 9) If yes, please identify which population groups: 82. Are these programmes based on efforts to identify risk and protective factors? 83. Do you have any mechanisms to involve the target groups in programme development and implementation? Young people Risk groups 84. Do you have demand reduction programmes for offenders ... (This question refers to objective 10) ... in the community? ... in prisons? 85. Do you have programmes for offenders as an alternative to punishment and conviction? Sending the right message (objectives 11, 12, 13) 86. Does your National Drug Demand Reduction Strategy include public information campaigns? (This question refers to objectives 11 and 12) If yes, ... ... are they based on needs assessment? ... do they take into account the social and cultural characteristics? ... are they evaluated? 87. Is training provided for social mediators (e.g. peer educators, teachers, parents, journalists, and political, educational, cultural, trade union, business or religious leaders) in conveying appropriate and accurate demand reduction messages? (This question refers to objective 13) Building on experience (objectives 14, 15, 16) 88. Is training provided for planners and practitioners involved with service delivery? (This question refers to objective 14) Drug-specialized services □ no training □ initial training □ on-going training Non drug-specialized services 89. Are strategies and activities monitored and evaluated to inform and improve National Drug Demand Reduction Strategies? (This question refers to objective 15) 90. Does your country participate in international coordinating mechanisms for the exchange of information ... ... at bilateral level? ... at regional level? ... at other multilateral or other levels? 91. Do you maintain a national database with information on drug demand reduction? (This question refers to objective 16) 92. Is it linked to regional or other multilateral or global networks? 