%%%FAMILY PLANNING|POPULATION PROJECTIONS|INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION|POPULATION POLICY|POPULATION TRENDS|INFORMATION DISSEMINATION|PUBLICATIONS|TECHNICAL COOPERATION|

United Nations E/CN.9/1999/6 Economic and Social Council Distr.: General 13 January 1999 Original: English Commission on Population and Development Thirty-second session 22–24 March 1999 * E/CN.9/1999/1. Item 6 of the provisional agenda* Programme implementation and future programme of work of the Secretariat in the field of population Programme implementation and progress of work in the field of population in 1998: Population Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs Report of the Secretary-General Summary The present report reviews the progress achieved by the Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat in implementing its programme of work in the field of population in 1998. It covers the activities of the Population Division dealing with the analysis of demographic variables at the world level; world population projections; population policy and socio-economic development; monitoring, review and appraisal, coordination and dissemination of population information; and technical cooperation in population. Other continuing activities of the Population Division are also described. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction I. Analysis of demographic variables at world level A. Fertility and family planning B. Mortality C. International migration II. World population projections A. World population estimates and projections: the 1998 and 2000 Revisions B. Urban, rural and city population estimates and projections: the 1998 and 2000 Revisions C. Technical Meeting on the Demographic Impact of HIV/AIDS D. Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) Subcommittee on Demographic Estimates and Projections III. Population policy and socio-economic development A. Population policies B. Population and development IV. Monitoring, review and appraisal, coordination and dissemination of population information A. Monitoring of population trends and policies B. Review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development C. Population information and publication and dissemination of research studies V. Technical cooperation Annex Publications, expert group meetings and other materials prepared or organized by the Population Division, 1998 E/CN.9/1999/6 1. Population activities in the United Nations Secretariat are centred in the Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs. As described in the Secretary-General’s bulletin on the organization of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs (ST/SGB/1997/9), the core functions of the Division are as follows: (a) Providing accurate and timely data, information and analyses of population trends and policies; and identifying new and emerging issues, and initiating studies thereof, in support of the Commission on Population and Development, the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, other intergovernmental bodies and the international community; (b) Serving as substantive secretariat to the Commission on Population and Development, including the monitoring and review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development;1 (c) Promoting coordination among United Nations entities in the field of population; (d) Preparing the official United Nations population estimates and projections, which serve as the standard figures on population for use throughout the United Nations system; (e) Taking the lead in the development and maintenance of population information systems and networks; (f) Providing advisory services to assist Governments in improving their institutional and technical capabilities for the analysis of population data and related information, the formulation of national policies and the implementation and evaluation of programmes; (g) Preparing reports of the Secretary-General to the Commission on Population and Development, the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly; (h) Preparing analytical reports, in-depth studies, background papers, briefing notes and talking points on population-related issues before the international community for the Secretary-General and his senior officials; (i) Maintaining contacts with non-governmental organizations and academic institutions throughout the world; organizing working groups, meetings of experts, and symposia on population issues; and participating in seminars and professional meetings relating to the mandate of the Division. 2. The present report deals with the research and technical cooperation work and information activities carried out by the Population Division during 1998. The work programme for the biennium 1998–1999 was formulated and implemented within the basic framework set forth in the medium-term plan for the period 1998–2001, taking into account the recommendations of the International Conference on Population and Development 1994 and other relevant international conferences. 3. The Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs continued to collaborate closely with agencies, programmes and other bodies of the United Nations system in the implementation of the work programme and in connection with the follow-up activities to the International Conference on Population and Development. In addition, the Division maintained close collaboration with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in carrying out technical assistance activities within the technical support services/country support team (TSS/CST) system. 4. A wall chart entitled World Contraceptive Use, 1998,2 which shows the most recent data on levels of contraceptive use among currently married couples, has been issued. The wall chart presents data separately for all countries and by regions, more and less developed areas and for the world as a whole. Where data for more than one point in time are available for a country, trend information is included. The chart also includes a classification by type of contraceptive method used. 5. The wall chart highlights results from the report entitled Levels and Trends of Contraceptive Use as Assessed in 1998.3 The information on contraceptive use presented in that report is based primarily on data obtained from national sample surveys. Over the past few years, data coverage on contraceptive prevalence has improved remarkably in the developing world, especially in Africa. As a result, the number of countries covered in this study has increased to 142, covering up to 92 per cent of the population of the world. 6. The report shows that the level of current use of contraception in countries of the developed regions is 70 per cent of currently married women compared with 55 per cent in the less developed regions. Among the less developed regions, the average level of current use of contraception is 60 per cent in Asia, 66 per cent in Latin America and the Caribbean and about 20 per cent in Africa. Eastern Asia has the highest regional level of contraceptive use in the world — 83 per cent; that level is strongly influenced by prevalence in China, estimated at 83.4 per cent in 1992. In the more developed regions, current use of contraception varies within a narrow range, from 69 to 78 per cent. 7. Among the countries in the less developed regions, contraceptive prevalence ranged from 1–2 per cent to over 80 per cent of currently married couples. Among the most populous developing countries, prevalence is above 75 per cent in Brazil and China, between 40 and 55 per cent in Bangladesh, India and Indonesia, and below 20 per cent in Nigeria and Pakistan. In most developed countries, however, contraceptive prevalence ranges between 70 and 80 per cent of currently married women. 8. Contraceptive prevalence has increased substantially over the past 10–15 years — by at least 10–20 percentage points in a large number of developing countries. Between 1988 and 1998, prevalence rose from 27 to 39 per cent in Kenya, from 32 to 49 per cent in Bangladesh and from 36 to 46 per cent in the Philippines. Even in some of the least developed countries, the level of use has recently doubled or tripled. For example, since 1988–1991, contraceptive prevalence has increased from 12 to 24 per cent in Togo, from 2 to 15 per cent in Uganda and from 4 to 8 per cent in the Niger. 9. Sterilization, especially female sterilization, is the most prevalent method of family planning in the world. With 19 per cent of currently married women and 4 per cent of currently married men sterilized, this method accounts for two fifths of world contraceptive use. Sterilization is widely used as a method of contraception in much of Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, Northern Europe, Northern America, and Australia and New Zealand. The next most prevalent method is the intrauterine device (IUD), which is used by 13 per cent of currently married women, followed by the pill, used by 8 per cent. While the pill is more common in more developed regions, the IUD is more frequently used in developing countries. Condoms, rhythm and withdrawal are used by 3–4 per cent of currently married women. Those three methods are more widely used in the developed countries than in developing countries. In a majority of countries, the rise in overall contraceptive prevalence has been mainly due to an increase in modern methods. 10. A manual on the estimation of adult mortality is in preparation. The manual describes the theoretical underpinnings of each of the methods available to estimate adult mortality on the basis of indirect information or deficient data. Detailed examples are provided of the application of each method together with a discussion of the strengths and limitations of its use. Given the paucity of adequate data for the estimation of adult mortality in developing countries, the manual is expected to fill an important gap by making accessible to analysts information on methodological developments discussions of which have hitherto been scattered in the literature and on methodologies that have only recently been developed. 11. The Population Division played an active role in the organization of the Technical Symposium on International Migration and Development which was held in The Hague, the Netherlands, from 29 June to 3 July 1998. A paper entitled “International migration levels and trends: what existing data can tell us” was prepared for presentation at the Symposium and will be published in a special issue of the journal International Migration that will be devoted to the Symposium. A revised version of the paper has been published in the journal Population and Development Review. Preparation of the Symposium involved close collaboration with the international organizations, agencies and United Nations bodies that are members of the Working Group on International Migration of the Administrative Committee on Coordination (ACC) Task Force on Basic Social Services for All. The report of the Symposium’s deliberations (E/CN.9/1999/3) was issued in February 1999. 12. Another important development in the area of international migration was the publication of Recommendations on Statistics of International Migration: Revision 1.4 The Population Division collaborated with the United Nations Statistics Division, in the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and the Statistical Office of the European Communities (Eurostat) in the preparation of those recommendations. 13. Lastly, the database on South-to-North migration has been updated to cover the period 1965–1995. In addition, a database on East-to-West migration is in preparation. 14. Work has been completed on the 1998 Revision of the world population estimates and projections. The results were officially announced in October 1998. There is one series of demographic estimates for the period 1950–1995, and four projection variants for the period 1995–2050. For the first time, the sex and age distribution of the population is provided up to age 100. The number of countries for which the demographic impact of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is explicitly incorporated was increased from 28 in the 1996 Revision to 34 in the 1998 Revision. 15. The results of the 1998 Revision will be published during 1999 as a three-volume set entitled World Population Prospects: The 1998 Revision, comprising Volume I, Comprehensive Tables; Volume II, The Sex and Age Distribution of the World Populations; and Volume III, Analysis. The results are also made available in a wall chart and in a series of databases. The findings were announced through press releases and a media briefing packet. 16. At mid-1998, world population stood at 5.9 billion persons, with 80 per cent residing in the less developed regions. The world population is growing at a rate of 1.3 per cent per year, which is significantly less than the peak growth rate of 2.0 per cent in 1965–1970, and less than the rate of 1.5 per cent in 1990–1995. The annual population increment also declined from its peak of 86 million in 1985–1990 to the current 78 million. In the mid-twenty-first century, world population will be in the range of 7.3 billion to 10.7 billion, depending on the assumed future fertility trends. In the medium-fertility variant, the world population reaches 8.9 billion in 2050. 17. The 1998 Revision shows a devastating toll from AIDS with respect to mortality and population loss. In the 29 African countries in which the impact of AIDS was studied, life expectancy at birth is projected to decrease to 47 years in 1995–2000, whereas it would have been expected to reach 54 years in the absence of the AIDS epidemic. There is thus a loss of seven years. In the nine hardest-hit countries, with an adult human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) prevalence of 10 per cent or more, the average life expectancy at birth is projected to be 10 years less than it would have been in the absence of AIDS. 18. In all countries of the more developed regions, fertility is significantly below the level necessary for the replacement of generations (total fertility rate (TFR) of approximately 2.1). In 20 of the more developed countries, the TFR has stayed at below-replacement level for at least two decades. In the 1980s and 1990s, fertility has decreased to levels below replacement in several countries from the less developed regions, including all countries in the populous region of Eastern Asia (except Mongolia). The rapid fertility transition in South-eastern Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean brings an increasing number of developing countries close to that threshold: currently the TFR is below 3 (but higher than 2.1) and decreasing in 34 countries with a combined population of 930 million people. 19. As a result of the combined effects of the decrease in fertility and the increase in life expectancy, the population of the world is becoming older, with a diminishing proportion of children (those under age 15) and an increase of older persons (those aged 60 years or over). Overall in the world, there are still three times as many children (30 per cent of the world population) as older persons (10 per cent of the world population). However, in the more developed regions, in 1998, the number of older persons exceeded that of children for the first time. The population aged 80 years or over is projected to increase almost sixfold to reach 370 million in 2050. 20. Work is in progress on the 1998 Revision of urban, rural and city population estimates and projections. The wall charts Urban and Rural Areas, 1998, and Urban Agglomerations, 1998 are expected to be issued in 1999. The results of the 1998 Revision will also be made available on diskettes for IBM-compatible computers. The report entitled World Urbanization Prospect: The 1998 Revision will also be available in 1999. 21. The Population Division, in cooperation with the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), convened a Technical Meeting on the Demographic Impact of HIV/AIDS on 10 November 1998 at United Nations Headquarters, New York. AIDS has become one of the biggest challenges to development for the coming decades. In many countries, AIDS has erased decades of progress in reducing child mortality and increasing life expectancy. Participating in the Meeting were representatives of United Nations organizations and prominent international experts from around the world. The report of the Meeting, which includes the background paper entitled “AIDS, mortality and population change” prepared by the Population Division, is available as a printed document and on the Internet. 22. The Technical Meeting had two main purposes. One purpose was to review the results, methodology, data and assumptions concerning the levels and trends of HIV infections and their demographic impact. The second purpose was to review existing knowledge on factors related to the epidemiology and demography of HIV/AIDS and to make recommendations on methodological issues, approaches to sharing information and future research needs in order to improve future estimates and projections. 23. The participants agreed on a number of recommendations for future action. For example, the experts agreed that, even though the data are uncertain, it is important to continue the effort to make national estimates of HIV/AIDS and its demographic impact, since such information is vital in helping decision makers to understand the magnitude of the AIDS problem and in supporting efforts to improve prevention and care programmes. 24. The twentieth session of the ACC Subcommittee on Demographic Estimates and Projections was held at United Nations Headquarters in New York from 23 to 25 June 1998 (see ACC/1998/16). At that session, the Subcommittee successfully arranged a schedule for coordination and dissemination of the 1998 rounds of consistent demographic and sectoral estimates and projections, which had been undertaken by the Population Division in collaboration with the regional commissions (for demographic estimates and projections), the International Labour Organization (ILO) (for labour-force estimates and projections), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (for agriculture population estimates and projections) the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) (for literacy estimates and projections) and the World Health Organization (WHO) (for mortality parameters for demographic estimates and projections). The Subcommittee also discussed arrangements for the coordination of the 2000 rounds of estimates and projections. 25. One of the major activities of the work programme in 1998 was data processing and analysis of the United Nations Eighth Population Inquiry Among Governments on Population and Development. In addition to the core questions, the Eighth Inquiry contains a number of questions to assess the extent to which the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development1 has been translated into population policies. While a preliminary report has been completed, additional completed questionnaires from countries are being sought. 26. In the area of abortion policies, a wall chart entitled World Abortion Policies, 1999, and the corresponding publication entitled Abortion Policies: An International Overview have been prepared. The publication contains a review of recent changes in the abortion laws and policies of the developed and developing countries. The wall chart and publication update an earlier study carried out in 1994. 27. The report finds that nearly all countries (97 per cent) have policies that permit legal abortions to be performed to save the woman’s life. The proportions of countries with policies that permit legal abortion for other reasons vary: 63 per cent permit legal abortion to preserve the woman’s physical health; 51 per cent to preserve the woman’s mental health; 43 per cent for rape or incest; 42 per cent when there is a possibility of foetal impairment; 31 per cent for economic or social reasons; and 25 per cent upon request. 28. During 1998, a volume entitled National Population Policies was revised and completed. The volume consists of a consolidated overview of trends in population policies for 190 countries. The volume includes data sheets showing trends in national population policies from 1976 to 1996 for each of the 190 countries, as well as an overview chapter describing and analysing trends in population policy at the regional and global levels. 29. The study shows that in the past two decades, the number of countries that consider both their rate of population growth and their fertility rates to be too high has increased significantly. A large majority of these countries have established policies aimed at lowering their fertility rates. A particular concern has been expressed by Governments regarding the level of fertility among adolescents and many Governments have adopted policies to address this issue. Despite the considerable progress that has been made in combating morbidity and mortality, the percentage of countries that consider their level of mortality to be unacceptable has decreased very little. In the developing countries, infant and child survival and maternal mortality are the principal concerns. Government concerns over the level and consequences of immigration have greatly increased, particularly in the developed world. Also, population distribution has consistently been the area of most concern to Governments, especially in the developing countries. 30. The sixth edition of the population policy database Global Population Policy Database, 1997 (GRIPP:1998),5 was completed in 1998, along with an accompanying diskette and diskette documentation. In addition, a computerized database on population policies is currently being designed and programmed to enable user interfaces for data entry, information search and tabulation. 31. In the area of population ageing and its consequences, a wall chart on world population ageing has been prepared for release in 1999, to coincide with the International Year of Older Persons. The chart features new statistical data on ageing and older persons from the 1998 Revision of population estimates and projections, including previously unpublished estimates of life expectancy at age 60. The chart also includes selected information from other United Nations and outside sources regarding marital status, labour force participation of older persons and statutory retirement ages. Many of the statistics are provided separately for women and men. 32. Based on estimated mortality rates for the period 1995–2000, those who survive to age 60 can expect to live 18 more years — 20 years for women and 17 years for men. For both sexes combined, there is a three-year gap in life expectancy at age 60 between the more developed and the less developed regions. In absolute terms, this three-year difference is considerably smaller than the corresponding difference in life expectancy at birth between more and less developed regions, which amounts to nearly 12 years. 33. There is a very large difference in marital status between older men and women. On average, 21 per cent of men aged 60 years or over are not married (including those who are widowed, separated or never married), while 57 per cent of older women have no spouse. This difference is attributable mainly to the combined effects of the fact that women live longer than men, and of the circumstance that wives are typically younger than their husbands. Both factors contribute to women’s greater likelihood of outliving their spouses. 34. A report entitled Charting the Progress of Populations has been issued as a working paper and will be revised for publication. The report grew out of the participation of the Population Division in activities aimed at ensuring a coordinated and system-wide implementation of the goals and commitments adopted by the recent global conferences, including the International Conference on Population and Development. In 1997, the Population Division issued a wall chart entitled Basic Social Services for All (ST/ESA/SER.A/160) as a contribution to the work of the system-wide ACC Task Force on Basic Social Services for All. The chart brought together key quantitative indicators relevant to the goals adopted at the recent conferences. Recognizing the desirability of an accessible and concise analytic summary of these key indicators, the Population Division prepared the new report featuring graphical and tabular summaries for 12 key socio-economic indicators related to the goals of the conferences. The Population Division received active assistance from other United Nations offices and specialized agencies in preparing the report. 35. In most areas covered by the indicators, significant progress has been made in many regions in recent decades. The growth rate of the world’s population is estimated to have peaked in the 1960s, and has declined significantly since then. Important advances have been made in making accessible the means to combat the most common diseases of childhood, and an increasing number of children are routinely immunized against major disease. Improvements in life expectancy at birth in the past half century, for both developing and developed countries, represent a remarkable social and demographic achievement. In the area of education, the absolute number of illiterate adults in the world has, since the early 1990s, begun to decline. Access to safe water and sanitation facilities significantly increased during the 1980s. 36. At the same time, progress has been quite uneven across the world’s region. The indicators show substantial variations between regions and countries in respect of their past achievements. Some countries have already surpassed most of the conference goals, while others have yet to make significant progress. Some countries or regions perform very well in one area but poorly in others. In general, most African countries are currently far from reaching goals identified at the recent United Nations conferences. Asian and Oceanic countries fare better, but tend to have larger intraregional variations than other major regions. Also in Asia and Oceania, progress is not consistent across different indicators. In these countries, progress in some areas such as access to health services has been substantial but is lagging for others including access to sanitation and child malnutrition. Among the less developed regions, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean are the closest to achieving the conference goals for most of the 12 indicators. Their achievements in the field of education are particularly noteworthy. 37. Work is ongoing on the scheduled revision of the data bank on Population, Resources, Environment and Development (PRED Bank). The new version will have a global coverage, and will include selected indicators from the 1998 Revision of the population estimates and projections and other Population Division data, as well as economic, social and environmental indicators from other United Nations offices and other international organizations. 38. During 1998, the Population Division completed the fourth of the annual edition of the World Population Monitoring Report. The 1999 edition focuses on population growth, structure and distribution, as endorsed by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 1995/55 of 28 July 1995. Also as endorsed by the Council in that resolution, the full report (ESA/WP/147) is accompanied by a summarized concise report (E/CN.9/1999/2). 39. The report covers such topics as population growth and its components; changing population age structures; population distribution; urbanization and internal migration; and the interrelationship of population growth, economic growth, poverty, food provision and the environment. The report also reviews the population policies that Governments have adopted in response to their concerns about national aspects of population and development. In light of the comments made at the thirty-second session of the Commission on Population and Development and by scholars elsewhere, both the full report and the concise report will be revised and published. 40. The report highlights the striking demographic changes that have taken place during the quarter-century since the 1974 World Population Conference in Bucharest. World population size has increased from 4 billion persons then to nearly 6 billion today. At the same time, the world population growth rate has fallen from about 2 per cent per year in 1970–1975 to 1.3 per cent today, the average number of children has fallen from 4.5 to 2.7 and life expectancy at birth has risen from 56 to 65 years. The share of the world’s population living in urban areas has increased from 36 to 47 per cent and the number of megacities of 10 million persons or more has increased manyfold from 5 to 18. The number of persons who have moved to another country has risen to over 125 million. The report shows that, although in 1998 the demographic transition has occurred or is occurring in nearly every country, the timing and pace of the transition vary; and in some regions and countries, steps backward are occurring. For example, AIDS and other emerging diseases in some countries, and economic and political dislocations in others, have reversed past progress in improving health and reducing mortality. 41. The report concludes with a review of latest findings concerning the interrelationship of population growth and economic growth, poverty, food provision and the environment. The report finds that poverty reduction, food provision and environmental maintenance are integrally linked with demographic, economic and political change. As a result, population policies are an important element of the policy-making components needed to advance social and economic development, eliminate poverty and foster long-run environmental stewardship. 42. The Population Division was responsible for preparing the review and appraisal of the progress made in achieving the goals and objectives of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development. The results of the first quinquennial review and appraisal were presented in two documents: the full report, which is distributed as a working paper (ESA/P/WP.148), and a summary of the results, which is presented as a concise report for consideration by the Commission on Population and Development (E/CN.9/1999/PC/2). The reports provide an overall assessment of the implementation of the Programme of Action, particularly as regards population growth, structure and distribution; reproductive rights and reproductive health; health and mortality; international migration and development; and, as prepared by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), issues on population programmes and resources. The results will be discussed at the thirty-second session of the Commission acting as the preparatory committee for the special session of the General Assembly for the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development. 43. Among the outcomes of the review and appraisal is the conclusion that progress has been achieved, but has been uneven, and that a great deal remains to be done. The report emphasizes that government leadership, priorities and commitment are the critical variables for successful implementation of the Programme of Action. The concise version of this report, along with the report of the international forum on the operational review and appraisal of the implementation of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development (E/CN.9/1999/PC/3), provides input into the report of the Secretary-General for the special session of the General Assembly, containing draft measures for the further implementation of the Programme of Action (E/CN.9/1999/PC/4). 44. The Population Division continues to publish the results of its research studies in a variety of formats so as to meet the needs of different audiences. Those results are widely disseminated to Governments; national and international organizations; research and educational institutions; individuals engaged in social and economic planning, research and training; and the general public. It also continues to develop and maintain databases and software, which are made available on magnetic tape and/or diskette(s). During 1998, the Population Division prepared an updated catalogue of its publications, covering the period 1996 to 1998. In addition, a list of the Population Division’s publications and other material issued in 1998 is given in the annex to the present report. 45. The Population Division continues to receive and respond to numerous requests for population information from United Nations organizations, research institutions and individual scholars. It also provides background information to and participates regularly in international conferences and meetings of the inter-agency groups and professional societies. Information from the Population Division has appeared prominently in a number of publications and reports of other United Nations bodies and international conferences and meetings. 46. In 1998, the Population Division’s Population Information Network (POPIN) project, funded by UNFPA, continued to promote use of the Internet and compact disk read-only memory (CD-ROM) to increase the worldwide availability and accessibility of substantive population information. POPIN focuses in particular on information capacity-building and creation of developing country institution Web sites for the dissemination of local population “publications”. During the past year, Internet Web sites were created in Benin, Egypt, Kenya, Latvia, Poland, Malaysia, Bulgaria and the Czech Republic. Home pages were also created for POPIN Europe, which is hosted by the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), Population Activities Unit, and for each of the 177 family planning associations that are affiliated with the International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF). 47. Documentation is now available on the Internet Web sites of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC); the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP); and the ECE Population Activities Unit. Documentation is also expected to be made available on the Web sites of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) and the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA). 48. The Population Division through POPIN also uses the Internet as “workplace in cyberspace” interregional initiatives such as the Worldwide Directory of Population Institutions. For countries and regions where the Internet is not yet available or not readily accessible, a CD-ROM version of the POPIN Web site and the Worldwide Directory of Population Institutions was included on a CD-ROM published in March and again in December 1998. Another joint initiative, the Dictionary of Demographic and Reproductive Health Terminology, was launched in November 1998 as a cooperative venture with the regional commissions, the Population Division and various non-governmental organizations. The Dictionary consists of population terminology and definitions in English, French and Spanish from the User’s Guide to POPLINE Keywords. POPLINE is the world’s largest bibliographic database of population literature, consisting of over 200,000 documents and abstracts. 49. In the area of capacity-building, a workshop on Internet training for members of the Latin American POPIN, la Red de Información sobre Población para América Latina y el Caribe (IPALCA), was organized by the ECLAC, Centro Latinoamericano de Demografía (CELADE). The Workshop, which was co-sponsored by the Population Division, resulted in the creation of 12 new multi-page Web sites for population institutions in the ECLAC region placed on the server of the University of Costa Rica. 50. The Population Division provided technical assistance services during 1998 in the areas of population and development training; analysis and research on socio-economic and demographic data obtained from population censuses, surveys and vital registration systems; population policy; and population and development. 51. The Interregional Adviser in Population and the two TSS specialists carried out various country assistance missions during 1998, including missions to (a) Turkey, to assist the Haceteppe Institute of Population Studies review and update its population and development curriculum at all levels; (b) Belize, to assist in the preparation and discussion of a population policy draft document; (c) Honduras, to assist the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras in the preparation of a Master’s degree programme in social demography, Honduras; and (d) Honduras, to assist in the preparation of the mid-term review of the population programme of Honduras. In addition, substantive support was provided to the eight country support teams and to national projects, and two papers were produced in the areas of reproductive health and mortality. Notes 1 See Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex. 2 Population Studies, No. 175 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.99.XIII.4). 3 United Nations, forthcoming. 4 Statistical Papers, No. 58, Rev.1 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.98.XVII.14). 5 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.98.XIII.11. Research studies Adolescent reproductive behaviour: regional variations and global perspectives. ESA/P/WP.144. Charting the progress of populations. ESA/P/WP.149. Health and Mortality: A Concise Report. ST/ESA/SER.A/172. Sales No. E.99.XIII.2. Population Distribution and Migration. Proceedings of the United Nations Expert Group Meeting on Population Distribution and Migration, Santa Cruz, Bolivia, 18–22 January 1993. ST/ESA/SER.R/133. Sales No. E.98.XIII.12. Population Policy Diskette Documentation, 1997. ST/ESA/SER.R/150. Sales No. E.98.XIII.10. Review and appraisal of the progress made in achieving the goals and objectives of the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development. ESA/P/WP.148. The State matters: immigration control in developed countries. ESA/P/WP.146. Too Young to Die: Genes or Gender? ST/ESA/SER.A/155. Sales No. E.98.XIII.13. World Population Monitoring 1997: International Migration and Development. ST/ESA/SER.A/169. Sales No. E.98.XIII.4. World Population Projections to 2150. ST/ESA/SER.A/173. Sales No. E.98.XIII.14. World Population Prospects: The 1996 Revision. ST/ESA/SER.A/167. Sales No. E.98.XIII.5. World Population Prospects: The 1998 Revision, Volume I: Comprehensive Tables. ST/ESA/SER.A/177. ESA/P/WP.150. World Urbanization Prospects: The 1996 Revision. ST/ESA/SER.A/170. Sales No. E.98.XIII.6. Expert group meetings Technical meeting on the demographic impact of HIV/AIDS (New York, 10 November 1998). Wall charts World Contraceptive Use, 1998. ST/ESA/SER.A/175. Sales No. E.99.XIII.4. World Population, 1998. ST/ESA/SER.A/176. Sales No. E.99.XIII.6. World Abortion Policies, 1999. ST/ESA/SER.A/178. Sales No. E.99.XIII.5. Databases Global Population Policy Database, 1997. ST/ESA/SER.R/149. Sales No. E.98.XIII.11. World Population, 1950–2050 (The 1998 Revision). Annual Populations, 1950–2050 (The 1998 Revision). Demographic Indicators, 1950–2050 (The 1998 Revision). Sex and Age Quinquennial, 1950–2050 (The 1998 Revision). Sex and Age Annual, 1950–2050 (The 1998 Revision). Age Patterns of Fertility, 1995–2050 (The 1998 Revision). Periodicals Population Newsletter, Nos. 65 and 66. The Newsletter is issued biannually to provide, to a wide readership, information on the programme activities of the Population Division; on action taken by legislative bodies with competence in the population field; and on meetings on population and related issues organized by the Population Division and other United Nations organizations, as well as on recent and forthcoming publications of the Population Division. 