%%%PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS|FINANCING|BUDGET CONTRIBUTIONS|LOGISTICS|EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES|DEATH GRANT|DISABILITY BENEFITS|MISSION ALLOWANCE|FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT|TROOP-CONTRIBUTING STATES|REIMBURSEMENT|FUNDS|

UNITED A NATIONS General Assembly Distr. GENERAL A/RES/51/218E 16 July 1997 Fifty-first session Agenda item 140 (a) RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY [on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/51/753/Add.1)] 51/218. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations E The General Assembly, Reaffirming Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations in respect of the role of the General Assembly in the consideration and approval of budgets of the Organization, Reaffirming also the requirement of all Member States to fulfil promptly and in full their obligations as set out in the Charter, Recognizing the detrimental effect of the withholding of assessed contributions on the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations, Recognizing also that late payment of assessed contributions adversely affects the short-term financial situation of the Organization, Recognizing further the need to improve the management of peacekeeping operations, Desiring to streamline the administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of peacekeeping operations, Reiterating the importance of continuous dialogue and transparency between the Organization and Member States aimed at improving current administrative and budgetary practices and procedures, I Contingent-owned equipment Recalling its resolution 50/222 of 11 April 1996 on the reform of the procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment, and the transitional arrangement, Reaffirming the importance of proceeding with the implementation of the reformed procedures as called for in its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, Taking note of the reports of the Phase II and Phase III Working Groups on Reimbursement of Contingent-owned EquipmentA/C.5/49/66, annex and A/C.5/49/70, annex. and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,A/50/887 and A/51/646. Also taking note of the clarification given by the Secretary-General on some aspects of the implementation of the new procedures as from 1 July 1996 and the transitional arrangement,See A/50/807. Further taking note of the Contribution Agreement between the United Nations and participating States contributing resources to United Nations peacekeeping operations,A/50/995, annex. Noting that there are inconsistencies between the reports of the Working Groups1 and the Contribution Agreement,4 1. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Contribution Agreement4 fully reflects the reports of the Phase II and III Working Groups on Reimbursement of Contingent-owned Equipment1 and to issue an appropriate corrigendum to the Agreement, and to implement, in full, all the decisions of the General Assembly; 2. Also requests the Secretary-General to convene the Phase IV Working Group prior to submitting his report on the first full year of implementation of the reformed procedures; 3. Further requests the Secretary-General to include in future cost estimates and performance reports of peacekeeping operations information on the factors mentioned in paragraph 49 of the report of the Phase III Working Group;A/C.5/49/70, annex. 4. Reiterates that, for missions activated prior to 1 July 1996, countries have the option to accept reimbursement under either the new or the old reimbursement methodology; II Death and disability benefits Reaffirming the principles enunciated in section III, paragraph 1, of its resolution 49/233 A and in paragraph 1 of its resolution 50/223 of 11 April 1996, Having considered the reports of the Secretary-GeneralA/49/906 and Corr.1 and A/50/1009. and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,A/50/684 and A/51/646. 1. Decides to adopt a system of self-insurance and to establish uniform and standardized rates for the payment of awards in cases of death or disability sustained by troops in the service of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, as follows: (a) A one-time lump-sum award of 50,000 United States dollars for service-incurred death; (b) A one-time lump-sum award for service-incurred disability, calculated as a percentage of the award for death according to the degree of loss of function, based on the schedule contained in annex I to the report of the Secretary-General;A/49/906 and Corr.1. 2. Also decides that the uniform and standardized rates shall apply to cases of death and disability sustained by troops after 30 June 1997; 3. Further decides to continue the present system of budgeting and financing for death and disability compensation and to keep its functioning and use under review, taking into account actual experience in the implementation of the new uniform and standardized rates; 4. Reaffirms that the purpose of uniform and standardized rates for the payment of awards in cases of death and disability is to ensure equal treatment of all contingent troops; 5. Requests the Secretary-General to seek assurances from Member States that amounts payable to beneficiaries for incidents referred to in the present resolution shall be not less than the amounts paid or reimbursed to Member States for this purpose under paragraphs 1 (a) and (b) of the present section, so as to avoid unequal treatment of contingent troops by Member States; 6. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly no later than 31 October 1997 containing detailed implementation proposals, including administrative and payment arrangements and procedures, as well as proposals for administrative resource reductions resulting from this new, simplified system; 7. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue processing all claims for death and disability compensation as expeditiously as possible for their speedy settlement; III Management review officers and roving finance officers Recalling section X, paragraph 3, of its resolution 49/233 A, Having considered the report of the Secretary-GeneralA/50/983. and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,See A/51/646. Bearing in mind that accountability for peacekeeping programmes rests with authorities at Headquarters and in the field, 1. Calls upon the Secretary-General to establish procedures whereby the position descriptions of Secretariat personnel responsible for such financial operations in field missions as financial planning, financial management, operational support and review and control will include oversight for those specific missions, so that those personnel may perform the functions outlined in paragraph 7 of his report;9 2. Also calls upon the Secretary-General to include the function of "trouble shooter", as outlined in paragraph 10 of his report,9 in the position description of staff members at Headquarters overseeing the functional area, so as to provide this service as needed by the various field missions; 3. Endorses the comments and recommendations of the Advisory Committee with respect to the concepts of roving finance officer and management review officer;See A/51/646, paras. 9-15. 4. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the budgets of specific peacekeeping operations information on these functions, to be examined by the Advisory Committee and the General Assembly on a case-by-case basis; IV Mission subsistence allowance Recalling section VIII of its resolution 49/233 A, Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on entitlements of staff assigned to peacekeeping missions, including mission subsistence allowance,A/50/797. and the oral report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Fifth Committee, 23rd meeting (A/C.5/51/SR.23), and corrigendum, para. 26; and ibid., Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 7. 1. Requests the Secretary-General to phase out over a period of six months the supplement to the mission subsistence allowance paid to senior officials; 2. Requests the International Civil Service Commission to develop, for submission to the General Assembly at its fifty-second session, a proposal to provide a post allowance and separate maintenance allowance for those personnel who leave their families at their home duty station while they are on mission assignment; 3. Requests the Secretary-General, as an interim measure pending a review of mission allowance criteria, to administer mission subsistence allowance on the basis of a seven-day, rather than a five-day, week; V Rates of reimbursement Recalling section III, paragraph 2, of its resolution 47/218 A of 23 December 1992, Having considered the report of the Secretary-GeneralA/48/912. and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,A/50/1012. 1. Endorses paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;15 2. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out a new survey of troop-contributing States as suggested in paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee15 and to include in his report a complete analysis of all services being provided to troops, together with an indication of the rationale for the provision of each service and how those services are administered and accounted for; 3. Encourages all troop-contributing States to respond to the questionnaire sent out by the Secretary-General requesting information on military costs in effect as at 31 December 1996; 4. Requests the Secretary-General to keep this matter under review and to report thereon to the General Assembly; VI Peacekeeping Reserve Fund Taking note of the report of the Secretary-GeneralA/51/778. and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,A/51/845. Noting that its resolution 47/217 of 23 December 1992 does not include the twenty States which became Members of the United Nations after the adoption of resolution 45/247 of 21 December 1990 and before the adoption of resolution 47/217, 1. Decides to extend the application of resolution 47/217, by which it established the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund, to all States currently Members of the United Nations; 2. Notes that Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Republic of Moldova, Slovakia, Slovenia, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan can be said to have a claim to a share in the Fund, as explained in the report of the Secretary-General;16 3. Decides that, beginning on 1 January 1998 and no later than 30 June 1998, the shares in the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund of the following Member States shall be determined as follows: (a) The Democratic People's Republic of Korea, the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Korea and San Marino shall contribute their shares to the Fund in accordance with the scale of apportionment for peacekeeping operations in effect on the date of their first assessment for United Nations peacekeeping operations; (b) Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania shall contribute their shares to the Fund in accordance with the scale of apportionment for peacekeeping operations in effect on the date of their first assessment after 1 January 1998 for United Nations peacekeeping operations; 4. Also decides that interests accrued in the Fund shall not be credited to Member States holding shares in the Fund prior to the full capitalization of the Fund; VII Voluntary contributions Recalling its resolutions on the financing of peacekeeping operations, in which it invites voluntary contributions to those operations in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the established procedureSee resolution 44/192 A. and practices, Taking note of the intention of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to address in a report the question of the articulation of voluntary contributions within proposed budgets and performance reports of peacekeeping operations,See A/51/850, para. 12. 1. Welcomes the intention of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to address issues related to the administration of voluntary contributions to peacekeeping operations in a later report; 2. Requests the Advisory Committee to prepare its report on the administration of voluntary contributions to peacekeeping operations before 31 December 1997; 3. Decides to consider the report of the Advisory Committee during the first week of the first part of its resumed fifty-second session; VIII United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy Recalling its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 and pending consideration of the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy,A/50/907 and A/51/905. 1. Regrets the late submission by the Secretary-General of his report on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;A/51/905. 2. Decides to undertake a detailed review of the reports of the Secretary-General and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the United Nations Logistics Base at its fifty-second session, no later than 15 October 1997; 3. Authorizes the Secretary-General, in the interim period, from 1 July to 15 October 1997, to commit funds not exceeding the current level of expenditures for the last three months for the maintenance of the United Nations Logistics Base; 4. Requests the Secretary-General to finalize, in this context, the proposals on the management of United Nations peacekeeping assets and on the role of the United Nations Logistics Base. 102nd plenary meeting 17 June 1997 