%%%JUDICIAL ASSISTANCE|

99-24528 (E) PCNICC/1999/WGRPE(9)/DP.1 23 August 1999 English Original: French Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court Working Group on Rules of Procedure and Evidence New York 16–26 February 1999 26 July–13 August 1999 29 November–17 December 1999 Proposal submitted by Italy concerning Part 9 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal, on international cooperation and judicial assistance Section 1. General provisions Rule 9.1 Channels of communication with States and intergovernmental organizations (a) If a State Party wishes to communicate with the Court by means of a channel other than the diplomatic channel, it must designate this channel, as stipulated in article 87, paragraph 1, upon ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. When making such a designation, a State Party must indicate all information required by the Court with regard to the national authorities which are competent to receive requests from the Court. (b) If a State Party wishes to have requests for cooperation and documents supporting the request drafted in its official language, it must so state at the time of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. (c) If a State Party has not made the designation or statement provided for in subparagraphs (a) and (b), it may do so subsequently in writing. In such cases the State Party must provide all the information required by the Court as regards the national authorities competent to receive requests from the Court. (d) When a State not party to the Statute agrees to provide assistance to the Court pursuant to article 87, paragraph 5, it may designate a channel of communication other than the diplomatic channel. In making such a designation, the State not party must indicate all information regarding the national authorities competent to receive requests from the Court. (e) When an intergovernmental organization agrees to provide assistance to the Court pursuant to article 87, paragraph 6, it must designate the channel by which it intends to communicate with the Court. (f) Any change regarding the designated channel of communication or the language chosen must be notified to the Registrar. Explanatory remarks Subparagraphs (a) and (b) govern, respectively, the cases of the designation, in the context of cooperation with States Parties, of a channel other than the diplomatic channel (the use of which is optional for the Court) or of a statement regarding the use of the official language of the requesting State rather than the working languages of the Court (the use of the language chosen is compulsory for the Court). Subparagraph (c) governs a subsequent designation/statement. The authority competent to receive the designation is indicated in rule 9.5, concerning the competence of the Registrar. Subparagraph (d) concerns the (optional) designation of the channel of communication by a State not party which is cooperating with the Court. In this case, the modalities (contemporaneous or subsequent designation) are taken up in the agreement or ad hoc arrangement. It has therefore been deemed preferable not to include any reference to the possibility open to the State not party of using a language other than the working languages of the Court. The problems in specifying the entity that is to receive requests for cooperation addressed to intergovernmental organizations make it necessary for the latter to designate it. Moreover, the wording of subparagraph (e) is intended to create obligations not for intergovernmental organizations but for the Court to reach an understanding with them. In accordance with rule 9.5, subparagraph (f) identifies the Registrar as the entity competent to receive communications notifying subsequent changes of the channel of communication with the Court or of language. Rule 9.2 Agreements regarding judicial cooperation (a) The agreements provided for in article 87, paragraphs 5 and 6, shall be concluded by the President, acting on behalf of the Court, after deliberation in the cases and in the form stipulated in the rules of procedure. (b) The Prosecutor may conclude agreements pursuant to article 54, paragraph 3. It is understood that the President of the Court, by analogy with article 3, paragraph 2, concerning the headquarters agreement, shall be the entity acting on behalf of the Court and shall refer to the Rules of Procedure as regards any conditions for the conclusion of cooperation agreements. Subparagraph (b) recapitulates the powers vested in the Prosecutor under the Statute. Rule 9.3 Functions and powers of the Chambers and the Prosecutor in the area of judicial cooperation (a) The surrender of persons shall be requested by the Chamber issuing the warrant to be executed. In other cases cooperation shall be requested by the Chamber concerned with the accomplishment of the act. (b) The Prosecutor may request cooperation in the case of acts that relate to his/her specific areas of competence. Subparagraph (a) specifies that the Chamber issuing the warrant to be executed is the entity competent to request the surrender of persons. The wording covers both the Pre-Trial Chamber when it acts in accordance with article 58 of the Statute and the Chamber conducting the trial or making the arrest. In the latter case, the generic reference to the “warrant to be executed” makes it possible for Part 9 to include solutions that should be accepted during the discussion on “executive” competence under Parts 8 and 10 while referring also to arrests that have been appealed or reversed on appeal. In any case, it is clear that the Statute makes no provision for norms that confer executive powers on the Prosecutor. As for other forms of cooperation, the reference to the “Chamber concerned with the accomplishment of the act” is intended to cover both the Pre-Trial Chamber, acting in accordance with article 56 of the Statute (activities which cannot be repeated), and the Chamber conducting the trial. Subparagraph (b) simply recognizes the provisions of the Statute (article 54, paragraph 3 (c)). Rule 9.4 Consultations with the Court (a) In the cases provided for in article 72, paragraphs 5 and 7, article 89, paragraphs 2 and 4, article 91, paragraph 4, article 93, paragraphs 3 and 5, article 96, paragraph 3, and article 97, the consultations must be held with the Chamber that requested the cooperation. (b) When cooperation is requested by the Prosecutor, the consultations must be held with the Prosecutor. This provision is intended to specify the entity with which States must consult to address problems resulting from the execution of the request, after it has been modified or supplemented if necessary. Rule 9.5 Competence of the Registrar in the area of judicial cooperation (a) The Registrar shall receive and keep the designations of the channels of communication and languages to be used in processing requests for judicial cooperation. (b) The Registrar shall receive warrants addressed to the Court and shall be responsible for transmitting acts of the Court to States and intergovernmental organizations. (c) On the basis of instructions issued by the Court and in relations with States and intergovernmental organizations, the Registrar shall be responsible for the execution of requests for judicial cooperation. This provision identifies the administrative competence of the Registrar. As regards the transmittal of requests to States, the wording used here is that used in the Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Rule 9.6 Questions relating to the question of whether a case may go to trial (a) In order to exercise the facility provided for in article 95, the Registrar shall notify the State or intergovernmental organization whose cooperation is requested without delay of any challenge made to the Court’s jurisdiction. When the Court authorizes the adoption of the measures set out in article 19, paragraph 8, the decision shall be communicated without delay to the State or intergovernmental organization whose cooperation is requested. (b) The communications referred to in the preceding subparagraph must be made by the Prosecutor upon requesting assistance. This provision is intended to update article 95 of the Statute, which allows States whose cooperation is requested to postpone execution of a request in respect of an admissibility challenge. This facility cannot be exercised when the Court has authorized the Prosecutor to take the measures set out in article 19, paragraph 8. Even if that provision is directed at the Prosecutor, it contains a reference to arrest as provided for in article 58, which is in any case requested by the Pre-Trial Chamber. It would therefore seem correct to treat cooperation requested by the Court and cooperation requested by the Prosecutor separately. The reference to intergovernmental organizations rectifies an oversight in the text of the Statute. Section 2. Arrest and surrender Rule 9.7 Provisional arrest The State shall immediately notify the Court of any provisional arrest made pursuant to article 92. The person arrested shall be released if within days after his/her arrest the request for surrender and the documents supporting the request have not been received by the requesting State. This is a provision which the Statute has expressly referred to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence. The first sentence introduces the obligation to communicate the arrest to the Court immediately. The second sentence fixes the date from which the term runs, with reference to the arrest and not to the communication. The solution adopted here is consistent with that deriving from the European Convention on Extradition (article 16, paragraph 4). The usual period is 40 to 45 days. Rule 9.8 Agreements for execution of surrender (a) The State shall communicate to the Registrar without delay its decision to surrender the person requested as well as the place and the date as of which the surrender may be made. (b) The period within which the surrender may be made shall be days as of the date specified in subparagraph (a); subsequent to a substantiated request, it may be extended a further days. (c) The person shall be released if he/she has not been taken into custody within the period or extension thereof specified in subparagraph (b). 