%%%INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL JURISDICTION|CRIME VICTIMS|WITNESSES|GUARDIANSHIP|

99-22004 (E) PCNICC/1999/WGRPE/DP.20 28 July 1999 Original: English Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court Working Group on Rules of Procedure and Evidence New York 16–26 February 1999 26 July–13 August 1999 29 November–17 December 1999 Proposal submitted by Italy concerning the Rules of Procedure and Evidence Protection of victims’ and witnesses’ identity N.B. This proposal is a development of rule E, Workshop 3, “Protection of victims and witnesses”, contained in PCNICC/1999/WGRPE/INF/2 on victims’ access to the ICC. The proposed rules should be added to the above-mentioned rule E. Rule A. Guardian of the victims’ and witnesses’ identity 1. Where exceptional security circumstances so require, the Court may decide to withhold the identity of victims and witnesses from the accused at trial, on the request of the Prosecutor, the victims or their representatives and the witnesses or on its own motion. 2. In this case, a guardian to the victims’/witnesses’ identity will be appointed by the Court in order to ensure the protection of the rights of defence in the anonymity of the victims/witnesses. Rule B. Qualifications 1. The accused shall choose the person to be appointed as guardian from among a list of qualified persons to be kept by the Registrar. 2. The list shall include persons of high moral character, impartiality and integrity who, in the discretion of the Court: (a) Possess the qualifications required in their respective States to be a lawyer or have extensive experience in a relevant professional legal capacity; or (b) Have established competence in criminal investigation. Rule C. Nomination and appointment 1. The accused may nominate any person included in the list who is neither a national nor has whatever personal or economic relation with the State of nationality of the accused, of his legal counsel, of other persons charged with the same or related crimes nor has any relation with the mentioned persons. 2. The Court, having evaluated the conformity of the choice made by the accused with the criteria set forth in subparagraph 1, shall appoint the guardian or declare the nomination inadmissible and invite the defence to a new choice. 3. In case the accused omits or refuses to make any valid choice, the guardian shall be nominated by the Registrar. 4. The Court appoints the guardian in camera, in the presence of the parties and of the concerned victims and witnesses. 5. Before taking up his duties, the appointed guardian shall make in camera the following solemn undertaking: “I solemnly declare that I will exercise my functions impartially and conscientiously, to test the reliability of the victims/witnesses while ensuring the protection of their identity.” Rule D. Duties and powers of the guardian 1. The guardian shall exercise his or her functions in the interests of justice and of the defence: (a) To establish the reliability of the victim/witness; and (b) To protect the identity of the victim/witness. 2. The guardian may: (a) Investigate to cover all facts and evidence relevant to the ascertainment of the victims’/witnesses’ reliability; (b) Take appropriate measures to ensure the effective protection of the victims’/witnesses’ identity, while acting under (a). 3. The Victims and Witnesses Unit shall provide assistance to the guardian. 4. The guardian may request the Court to issue such orders or other measures as may be necessary to discharge his or her functions. 5. The guardian shall report the results of his or her activities directly to the defence, when the victims’/witnesses’ reliability is concerned, and to the Registrar, when the protection of the identity of the victims/witnesses is concerned. 6. The guardian shall give testimony at trial on his or her activities. Rule E. Privileges and immunities 1. In discharging his or her functions, the guardian shall enjoy the privileges, immunities and facilities necessary for the performance of his or her duties. 2. The privileges and immunities of the guardian may be waived by the Court. Rule F. Salaries and expenses 1. The Registrar, with the agreement of the Presidency and the Prosecutor, shall propose Regulations to establish terms and conditions of remuneration of the guardian. 2. The Regulations shall be approved by the Assembly of States Parties. Rule G. Disciplinary measures A guardian who has committed a misconduct shall be subject, upon decision of the Court and under request of the Prosecutor, the defence, the victims or their representatives and the witnesses, the Registrar or on the Court’s own initiative, to one or more of the following measures, given the seriousness of the misconduct: (a) A fine not exceeding threefold the annual salary (or xxx Euros); (b) Removal from office; (c) Temporary or permanent deletion of his or her name from the list under rule B; (d) Temporary or permanent interdiction from the exercise of his or her functions before the Court. 