%%%CRIME VICTIMS|EXPERTS|CONFERENCES|

99-21754 (E) 270799 270799 United Nations PCNICC/1999/WGRPE/INF/2/Add.1 Preparatory Commission for the International Criminal Court Distr.: General 26 July 1999 English Original: French Working Group on the Rules of Procedure and Evidence New York, 16–26 February 1999 26 July–13 August 1999 29 November–17 December 1999 Report on the international seminar on victims’ access to the International Criminal Court Annex II International seminar on victims’ access to the International Criminal Court, Paris, 27–29 April 1999. List of experts. Bureau Mr. Stéphane Hessel, Ambassador of France, Chair Mr. Philippe Kirsch, President of the International Criminal Court Preparatory Commission, honorary member of the Bureau Mr. Ronny Abraham, Director of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Professor Medard Rwelamira, Adviser, the Ministry of Justice, Head of the South African delegation for the International Criminal Court, Chair of workshop 1 Ms. Sylvia Fernandez de Gurmendi, Head of the Argentine delegation for the International Criminal Court, Chair of the Working Group on Procedure, Chair of workshop 2 Ms. Maymoune Diop, Director of Legal and Consular Affairs of Senegal, Chair of workshop 3 Ms. Fiona McKay (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) Secretary-General of Redress — seeking reparations for victims of torture, Chair of workshop 4 Mr. Bill Pace, President of the International Coalition of NGOs for the International Criminal Court Mr. Jean Folana, President of the French coalition of NGOs for the International Criminal Court PCNICC/1999/WGRPE/INF/2/Add.1 General Rapporteur: Mr. Roger-Vincent Calatayud, President of the Bar, President of the Commission des Libertés et Droits de l’Homme, Conseil National des Barreaux Rapporteurs Mr. Fabrizio Guariglia, Lawyer, International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (Argentina), Rapporteur, workshop 1 Mr. Peter Lewis, Crown Prosecution Service (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Rapporteur, workshop 2 Ms. Libby Arcel, Psychologist (Denmark), Rapporteur, workshop 3 Mr. Gilbert Bitti, Academic (France), Rapporteur, workshop 4 Representatives of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Mr. Vaclav Mikulka, Director of the Codification Office, United Nations Mr. Renan Villacis, Codification Office French reception group Ms. Anne Claude Advenier, Ms. Gwenaelle Bouille, Ms. Marie Chauvel, Ms. Marie-Paule De Clerck, Mr. Pierre André Lageze, Mr. Ronan Le Clerc, Ms. Béatrice le Fraper du Hellen, Ms. Sarah Moghaddassi, Ms. Joanna Scott. Workshop 1 — Victims, Referral, Admissibility Professor Medard Rwelamira, Adviser, the Ministry of Justice, Chair (South Africa) Mr. Fabrizio Guariglia, Legal Adviser, Office of the Prosecutor, International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Rapporteur (Argentina) Ms. Barbara Bedont, International Centre for Human Rights and Democratic Development (Canada) Mr. François Cantier, President, Avocats sans frontières (France) Mr. Xavier Charvet, Conseil de l’Ordre des avocats de Paris (France) Professor Roger S. Clark, Professor, Rutgers University Ms. Sara Criscitelli, Department of Justice (United States of America) Ms. Yael Danieli, International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies Mr. Isaac Fayomi, Technical Adviser, Ministry of Justice (Benin) Ms. Socorro Flores Liera, Legal Counsel, New York (Mexico) Ms. Lamia Mekhemar, Legal Counsel, New York (Egypt) Professor Mauro Politi, Legal Counsel, New York (Italy) Ms. Caroline Ravaud, Registrar, European Court of Human Rights (France) Mr. François Rubio, Legal Director, Médecins du Monde (France) Workshop 2 — Participation Ms. Sylvia Fernandez de Gurmendi, Chair (Argentina) Mr. Peter Lewis, Crown Prosecution Service, Rapporteur (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) Mr. William Bourdon, International Federation of Human Rights (France) Ms. Lea Browning, Women and Men Engaged in Advocacy, Research and Education (WEARE) for Human Rights (United States of America) Mr. Antoine Buchet, Ministry of Justice (France) Mr. Trevor Chimimba, Legal Adviser, New York (Malawi) Ms. Rhonda Copelon, Professor, City University of New York Law School, Women’s Caucus for Gender Justice (United States of America) Mr. David Donat-Catin, Society for the International Criminal Tribunal (Italy) Ms. Helen Duffy, Consultant, Human Rights Watch (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) Mr. Hakan Friman, Magistrate, member of the Swedish delegation for the International Criminal Tribunal (Sweden) Ms. Irene Gartner, Ministry of Justice (Austria) Mr. Moussa Haouna, Secretary-General, Ministry of Justice (Niger) Mr. Christopher Keith Hall, Legal Adviser, Amnesty International (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) Mr. Jurg Lindenmann, Ministry of Justice (Switzerland) Mr. Cheick Sako, President, Juristes sans Frontières (Guinea) Ms. Cate Steains, Legal Adviser, New York (Australia) Mr. Franck Terrier, Advocate General, International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (France) Workshop 3 — Protection Ms. Maymoune Diop, Director of Legal and Consular Affairs, Chair (Senegal) Ms. Libby Arcel, Psychologist, Rapporteur (Denmark) Ms. Fanny Benedetti, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (France) Ms. Sylvie Bukhari de Ponthual, International Federation of ACAT (Action of Christians for the Abolition of Torture) (France) Ms. Widney Brown, Women’s Rights Division, Human Rights Watch (United States of America) Ms. Christine Chinkin, Professor, London School of Economics (Australia) Mr. Jean-Jacques Heinz, Deputy Registrar of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (France) Ms. Li Yanduan, member of the delegation of China to the International Criminal Court (China) Mr. Paul-Henri Morard, Head of the Paris delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross (Switzerland) Ms. Betty Murungi, Women’s Human Rights Programme (Kenya) Dr. Ghassan Obeid, Legal Adviser, New York (Syrian Arab Republic) Mr. Igor Panin, member of the Russian delegation to the Rome Conference (Russian Federation) Ms. Catherine Powell, Academic, Columbia University (United States of America) Mr. Jean-Pierre Soh, Adviser, Office of the President of the Republic (Cameroon) Ms. Immy Talgreen, Office of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Finland) Ms. Patricia Viseaur Sellers, Adviser to the Prosecutor, International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (Australia) Workshop 4 — Reparations Ms. Fiona McKay, Redress (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), Chair Mr. Gilbert Bitti, Academic, Rapporteur (France) Ms. Karine Bonneau, Researcher (France) Ms. Cristina Rosello Gates, Centre for Restorative Justice in Asia (Philippines) Mr. Erik Holst, Rehabilitation Centre for Victims of Torture, Copenhagen (Denmark) Mr. Virgil-Constantin Ivan, Supreme Court (Romania) Mr. Hiroshi Kawamura, Permanent Mission of Japan to the United Nations (Japan) Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko, Legal Adviser, New York (Lesotho) Mr. Christopher Muttukumaru, Co-Chairman, Informal Working Group on Reparations, Rome Conference (United Kingdom) Ms. Françoise Ngendahawo, Registry, International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (Burundi) Ms. Dinah Shelton, Academic, Notre Dame Law School (United States of America) Mr. Francisco Soberon Garrido, President, Asociación por Derechos Humanos (APRODEH) and Latin American Coalition for the International Criminal Court (Peru) Ms. Pam Spees, International Women’s Rights Clinic (United States of America) Mr. Lyal Sunga, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (Canada) Mr. Theo Van Boven, Professor, University of Maastricht, former Special Rapporteur of the United Nations Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities (Netherlands) Annex III List of Observers Mr. Mustafa Abood, Embassy of Yemen, Paris Ms. Jane Adolphe, Real Women of Canada Ms. Irune Aguirrezabal Quijera, Coordinator, Spanish Coalition for an International Criminal Court and representative of Movimiento por la Paz, el Desarme y la Libertad to the European Union Mr. Mohamed Ibn Abdulaziz Al Mhaizeaz, Adviser, Ministry of Justice, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia Ms. Martha Jean Baker, Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom Ms. Dominique Balas, League for Human Rights (France) Ms. Frédérique Bannes, Amnesty International, French branch Ms. Michaela Beati, European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO) Mr. G. Roberto Belleli, Ministry of Justice, Italy Ms. Nicola Bellomo, European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO) Mr. Roland Beoroy, Christian Union of Deportees and Internees Mr. Antoine Bernard, Executive Director, International Federation of Human Rights Mr. Bernheim, International League Against Racism and Antisemitism Ms. Ilaria Bottigliero, Institute of International Studies, Geneva Ms. Florence Bourg, Lawyer Ms. Séverine Boursin, Director, Women’s Rights Section, International Federation of Human Rights Mr. Walter Brill, Legal Counsellor, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Mr. Cabouat, French Red Cross Ms. Dominique Caviatti, Office for international cooperation in criminal matters and conventions, Ministry of Justice, France Mr. Ian Chisholm, Home Office, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Ms. de Chambrun, People’s Assistance of France Dr. Thierry Choubrac, Secretary-General, Médecins du monde Ms. Marie Jo Cocher, International Federation of ACAT (International Federation of Christians for the Abolition of Torture) Mr. Gérard Cohen-Jonathan, Professor, University of Paris II-Assas Mr. Comte, Counsellor, Embassy of Côte d’Ivoire, Paris Mr. Sven Corthout, Deputy Counsellor, Office of Criminal Legislation and Human Rights, Ministry of Justice, Kingdom of Belgium Mr. Dago, Counsellor, Embassy of Côte d’Ivoire, Paris Ms. Dekens, International Federation of ACAT (International Federation of Christians for the Abolition of Torture) Ms. Nicole Derhy, Lawyer, Amnesty International, French branch Ms. Michelle Derhy, Amnesty International, French branch Mr. Djavadian, Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Paris Ms. Estelle Drouvin, International Federation of ACAT (International Federation of Christians for the Abolition of Torture) Ms. Michèle Dubrocard, Assistant Director for Human Rights, Office of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (France) Mr. Dye, Lawyer, Coalition for an International Criminal Court Ms. Tania Dyson, International Coalition for an International Criminal Court Mr. El Eriani, Embassy of Yemen, Paris Ms. Léna Etner, Amnesty International Mr. Yriex François, National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (France) Ms. Dorothée le Fraper du Hellen, Lawyer, Montpellier Appeals Court Ms. Emanuela Fronza, Professor, University of Teramo, Italy Mr. Tristan Gervais de Laffon, Department of Cooperation and Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, France Mr. Goeau-Brissonière, National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (France) Ms. Mariana Goetz Mr. Alain Goldmann, Chief Rabbi (France) Ms. Magali Guerder, Médecins du monde Ms. Marie Guiraud, International Federation of Human Rights Ms. Hamel Raoui Mr. Hamon, National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (France) Ms. Dominique Jacques, Juristes sans frontières Ms. Laetitia Janbon, Montpellier Human Rights Institute Mr. Franck Jarasch, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Germany) Mr. Louis Joinet, Solicitor General, Court of Cassation, Rapporteur of the Subcommittee on Human Rights on action to combat impunity Mr. Claude Katz, Secretary-General, International Federation of Human Rights Ms. Renée Keller, Christian Union of Deportees and Internees Mr. Yves Laurin, Lawyer Ms. Alexa Leblanc, Director for the Americas, International Federation of Human Rights Ms. Hélène Leblanc, Coalition for an International Criminal Court Ms. Françoise Lecour, People’s Assistance of France Mr. Fidel Lopez Alvarez, Embassy of Spain, Paris Mr. Daniel Malgras, National Education Federation, National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (France) Ms. Rashida Manjoo, Lawyer (South Africa) Mr. Thierry Massis, Lawyer Ms. Géraldine Mattioli, Amnesty International Ms. Méliné Mavian, Student Ms. Mecheri, Department of Public Information (DPI), United Nations Mr. Meese, Coalition for an International Criminal Court Mr. Frédéric Mégret, Student Mr. Yves Mignot, International Federation of ACAT (International Federation of Christians for the Abolition of Torture) Mr. Paul Nemo, Director for the Protection of Human Rights, Union internationale des avocats Ms. Pacale Norris, Coalition for an International Criminal Court Mr. François-Xavier Nsansuwera, Secretary-General, International Federation of Human Rights Mr. José del Carmen Ortega, Embassy of Colombia, Paris Mr. Alain Ottan, Juristes sans frontières Mr. Fabrice Petit, Juristes sans frontières Mr. Christophe Pettiti, Human Rights Institute, Parisian Bar Association Ms. Chantal Poiret, Deputy Director for United Nations Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, France Mr. Victor Ponta, Ministry of Justice, Romania Mr. Jean-Pierre Poulhe, National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (France) Mr. Patrick Quentin, National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (France) Ms. Muriel Quentin-Broder, National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (France) Ms. Emmanuelle Robineau Duverger, International Federation of Human Rights Mr. Cesare Romano, Professor, Center for International Cooperation, New York University Mr. François Roux, Lawyer, Montpellier Appeals Court Ms. Françoise Saulnier, Médecins sans frontières (France) Mr. Harris O. Schoenberg, Executive Director, Coordinating Board of Jewish Organizations Ms. Odile Sidem-Poulain, Secretary-General, International Federation of Human Rights Mr. Soulez-Larivière, Vice-President, International Criminal Defense Attorneys Association Ms. Jeanne Sulzer, Director, International Criminal Court Programme, International Federation of Human Rights Ms. Claudine Thomas, European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO) Ms. Sophie Thonon, Lawyer, Paris Bar Ms. Florence Trintignac, Médecins du monde Ms. Dona Turk, Embassy of Lebanon, Paris Mr. Lars Van Troost, Amnesty International, Netherlands branch Mr. Pierre Truche, President, Court of Cassation Mr. Michel Wagner, National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (France) 