%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|UNITED STATES|SUDAN|CHEMICAL PLANTS|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1999/183 22 February 1999 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH LETTER DATED 17 FEBRUARY 1999 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SUDAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL Please find, enclosed herewith, an article published in The New York Times on 9 February 1999 entitled "Experts Find No Arms Chemicals at Bombed Sudan Plant" (see annex). The article stated that American chemists, hired by the owner of the plant, examined soil, sludge and debris samples from the Al Shifa pharmaceutical factory destroyed in August by American cruise missiles, and found no traces of chemical weapon compounds. According to the paper, the findings raise new questions about the allegations by American officials that samples obtained from the soil of the factory contained traces of Empta. The paper also stated that at the heart of the new evidence are 13 carefully catalogued samples taken from the wrecked plant and its grounds late in October 1998. The sampling project was designed and supervised by Professor Thomas D. Tullius, Chairman of the chemistry department at Boston University. Professor Tullius said in an interview that "The point of what we did was to carefully and scientifically collect samples from a variety of locations and have them analysed by one of the top laboratories in the world for this kind of work. What they found was that in those samples, to the practical limits of scientific detection, there was no Empta or Empa, its breakdown product". The article also indicated that the laboratory analysis found that none of the samples contained detectable levels of Empta, nor did they find Empa, the subsidiary compound into which Empta rapidly breaks down. Empta, Professor Tullius said, breaks down within days, but Empa remains in the soil, and even in small quantities would be detectable for weeks or months after contact with the ground. In addition to the evaluation of the new soil samples, an international security company, Kroll Associates, was hired by Mr. Idris' lawyers to conduct a detailed review of the Al Shifa controversy. In their report, made available to The New York Times, Kroll Associates found no evidence of a direct link between Mr. Idris, the owner of the factory, and Osama bin Laden. In interviews with western consultants to the factory, employees and others, the American Kroll investigators said they had found no evidence that the plant had been heavily guarded or that there had been secret areas in the factory off-limits to outsiders, where chemical weapons might have been produced or stored. The report concluded that the plant produced only veterinary medicines and pharmaceuticals for human consumption. While Al Shifa did export to Iraq, Kroll found no evidence of a chemical weapons link to Baghdad. The enclosed article commenting on the findings of the American scientists who have examined the said factory last October is additional conclusive proof refuting the allegations by the American administration about a small and simple pharmaceutical factory designed to produce life-saving drugs badly needed for the population of a third world country. I would be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Elfatih ERWA Permanent Representative 