%%%PETROLEUM EXPORTS|AIRSPACE|IRAQ|MILITARY ACTIVITY|UNITED STATES|IRAQ-KUWAIT SITUATION|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1999/225 3 March 1999 ENGLISH ORIGINAL: ARABIC LETTER DATED 2 MARCH 1999 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF IRAQ TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL On instructions from my Government, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a letter dated 2 March 1999 from Mr. Mohammed Said Al-Sahaf, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq. The Minister calls attention to the brutal aggression committed by the United States against Iraqi oil installations on 1 March 1999 that brought a halt to the exportation of Iraqi oil by way of Turkey, caused a loss of resources for use under the memorandum of understanding of 20 May 1996 in the order of 1 million barrels of oil or 9 million dollars a day and resulted in other human and material losses. He calls upon the Security Council to meet its responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations, to halt the aggression to which Iraq is being subjected and to consider the question of this act of aggression by the United States against Iraq when it next meets. I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Saeed H. HASAN Ambassador Permanent Representative English Page Annex Letter dated 2 March 1999 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq addressed to the President of the Security Council Further to my letter dated 28 February 1999 addressed to you (S/1999/220, annex), I have to inform you that the United States of America is still persisting in its brutal aggression against Iraq. At 1445 and 1455 hours Iraq local time on 1 March 1999, United States warplanes carried out two raids on a residential complex for the North Oil Company's Ayn Zalah oilfield, which is located 55 kilometres north-west of Mosul. One resident was killed in this attack and nine were wounded, two of them very seriously. The United States air raids also caused serious damage to oil-related installations and equipment and especially to the pump at the operational control station for the Iraq-Turkey pipeline in the Ayn Zalah area. The acts of aggression committed by the United States on 28 February and 1 March 1999 have caused serious damage to Iraqi oil installations in the north of the country and have brought a complete halt to the flow of crude oil through the Iraq-Turkey pipeline system. It will be obvious to you that such a stoppage will mean a daily loss of resources for use under the memorandum of understanding of 20 May 1996 between Iraq and the United Nations in the order of 1 million barrels of oil a day, that is to say 9 million dollars for each day the exportation of Iraqi oil is halted, over and above the other enormous human and material losses caused. The glaring paradox created by the United States aggression is that the aggressors themselves have been insisting that more than one-half of the quantity of oil established under the oil-for-food agreement must be exported by way of the Iraq-Turkey pipeline and that it is they that are now turning their brutal military aggression towards halting the flow of oil through Turkey. The strikes by United States warplanes against Iraq's oil-related infrastructure carried out in this outlaw fashion and the practices of the representative of the United States in the Security Council Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) aimed at impeding the approval of oil-sector contracts under the memorandum of understanding constitute clear proof that the United States Administration has taken the decision to destroy Iraq's capacity to export oil as a means of promoting a dubious goal that goes beyond the immediate impact of these strikes and aims at suspending implementation of the memorandum of understanding. This flagrant aggression is to be seen as part of a series of practices in which the Government of the United States of America is engaging against Iraq and which are coordinated with a whole range of hostile and improper measures that it is taking in order to undermine Iraq's security and stability by interfering in its internal affairs. This aggression also exposes the claims made by officials in the United States Administration that it was they that endeavoured to have the Security Council adopt its resolution 986 (1995), on the oil-for-food programme, in order to mitigate the suffering of the Iraqi people. This series of United States acts of savage military aggression against Iraqi oil installations confirms the hostile intentions of the United States and its desire to inflict the most grievous possible damage on the people of Iraq. As it protests against this blatant aggression and condemns it in the strongest terms, the Republic of Iraq asserts that the United States of America bears full international responsibility for this action and for the payment of compensation for the material and human losses it has caused. It calls upon the Security Council to meet the responsibilities entrusted to it under the Charter of the United Nations, as exemplified by the maintenance of international peace and security, and to halt the aggression to which Iraq is being subjected and which poses a grave threat to peace and security in the region and in the world as a whole. I request you to bring this letter to the attention of all the members of the Security Council and to have the question of this United States aggression against Iraq considered at the Council's next meeting. (Signed) Mohammed Said AL-SAHAF Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Iraq 