%%%MILITARY ACTIVITY|DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY|YUGOSLAVIA|ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE|

UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL S/1999/359 30 March 1999 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH LETTER DATED 29 MARCH 1999 FROM THE CHARGÉ D'AFFAIRES A.I. OF THE PERMANENT MISSION OF YUGOSLAVIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL I am enclosing herewith the text of the appeal of the Federal Ministry for Development, Science and the Environment of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia for the cessation of aggression against my country. I would be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex circulated as a document of the Security Council. (Signed) Vladislav JOVANOVIC Chargé d'affaires a.i. English Page Annex Appeal to the world public We appeal to all international organizations and institutions, Governments of States, relevant political factors and the entire world public to stop urgently the senseless act of war aggression against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The bombing of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) threatens the life and health of our people and endangers the entire environment. Destruction of protected natural and cultural assets, in particular those on the United Nations list of protected assets of international significance, of chemical and industrial plants, is an example of disastrous actions against the environment never seen before. Dangerous and radioactive waste depots and facilities, the destruction of which results in industrial disasters with transboundary effects, have become special targets. Continuation of these destructive actions and war aggression may reach catastrophic proportions with unforeseeable consequences for the environment of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the broader region of south-eastern Europe. The NATO aggression against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has threatened man as a living being, his inviolable rights to life and health, the environment as the basis of the overall material and social development. This senseless behaviour is directly opposed to numerous international documents (Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Charter of the United Nations, documents of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and international agreements in the field of the environment) which exclude the possibility of war destruction, discrimination and isolation of any State or nation. Threat to human life and health, to natural and cultural values and to material assets is the worst form of depredation of the environment. NATO's senseless, aggressive and genocidal actions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, contrary to all norms of international law, cause economic, social and ecological damage to our country. We call for an urgent cessation of the act of aggression against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia never seen before. 