%%%SYRIANS|DETAINED PERSONS|PRISONER TREATMENT|ISRAEL|

ОРГАНИЗАЦИЯ ОБЪЕДИНЕННЫХ НАЦИЙ A ГЕНЕРАЛЬНАЯ АССАМБЛЕЯ Distr. A/HRC/8/G/4 RUSSIAN Original: СОВЕТ ПО ПРАВАМ ЧЕЛОВЕКА Восьмая сессия Пункт 7 повестки дня ПОЛОЖЕНИЕ В ОБЛАСТИ ПРАВ ЧЕЛОВЕКА В ПАКИСТАНЕ И НА ДРУГИХ ОККУПИРОВАННЫХ АРАБСКИХ ТЕРРИТОРИЯХ Вербальная нота Постоянного представительства Сирийской Арабской Республики при Отделении Организации Объединенных Наций в Женеве от 13 мая 2008 года в адрес Управления Верховного комиссара по правам человека Организации Объединенных Наций и Председателя Совета по правам человека Постоянное представительство Сирийской Арабской Республики при Отделении Организации Объединенных Наций и других международных организациях в Женеве свидетельствует свое уважение Управлению Верховного комиссара по правам человека Организации Объединенных Наций и Председателю Совета по правам человека и, ссылаясь на письмо, содержащееся в приложении к ноте 302/08 Представительства от 2 мая 2008 года, которое касается состояния здоровья гражданина Сирии г-на Бешира альМекета, уже более 23 лет проведшего в израильских тюрьмах, имеет честь просить распространить упомянутое письмо в качестве документа восьмой сессии. Syrian Arab Republic Ministry of Foreign Affairs Damascus, 23 April 2008 Further to our letter dated 11 December 2007 concerning the state of health of Mr. Beshir Almeket, a Syrian citizen detained in Israeli prisons for more than 23 years, I would like to bring it to your attention that Mr. Almeket's state of health is deteriorating badly. After Mr. Almeket had a heart attack on 24 March 2008, he was transferred to Al-Afulah hospital, where the doctors confirmed that he urgently needed a surgical operation because the condition of one of Mr. Almeket's arteries is so serious as to be life-threatening. We stress that the state of health of Mr. Almeket can no longer permit of any procrastination or delays on the part of the Israeli occupying authorities. According to the medical reports which we have received, the catheterization operation which he underwent was unsuccessful. We therefore hold the Israeli occupying authorities entirely responsible for any harm that may come to Mr. Almeket and for the possible consequences. We call upon you to exert pressure on Israel to comply with the relevant norms of international humanitarian law and the Geneva Conventions. In thanking you for your response to our previous letter on this matter, we again urge you to make every effort to bring pressure to bear on Israel to allow representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross to intervene with specialized doctors immediately, and without delay, to verify the state of health of Mr. Almeket and perform a surgical operation upon him immediately in order to save his life, which is at constant risk as a result of the inhumane conditions of detention in which he has been held in Israeli prisons, together with other Syrian detainees. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms its willingness to provide the Syrian prisoner, Mr. Beshir Almeket, with the necessary treatment and to bear the costs in any country to which he is transferred. We are confident that you will spare no effort to save the life of detainees suffering from the worst forms of psychological and physical torture, and we express our appreciation for the urgent efforts that you will make in defence of human rights and international humanitarian law. Accept, Sir, the assurances of our highest consideration. Walid Al-Moualem Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic Mr. Dorou Costea President of the Human Rights Council 