%%%INDIGENOUS PEOPLES|MAORI|HUMAN RIGHTS|NEW ZEALAND|

Организация Объединенных Наций A/HRC/18/NI/3 Генеральная Ассамблея Distr.: Russian Original: Совет по правам человека Восемнадцатая сессия Пункт 3 повестки дня Поощрение и защита всех прав человека, гражданских, политических, экономических, социальных и культурных прав, включая право на развитие Информация, представленная Комиссией по правам человека Новой Зеландии* Записка секретариата Секретариат Совета по правам человека настоящим препровождает сообщение, представленное Комиссией по правам человека Новой Зеландии** и воспроизводимое ниже в соответствии с правилом 7 b) правил процедуры, содержащихся в приложении к резолюции 5/1 Совета, согласно которому участие национальных правозащитных учреждений основывается на процедурах и практике, согласованных Комиссией по правам человека, включая резолюцию 2005/74 от 20 апреля 2005 года. Statement by the New Zealand Human Rights Commission on the report of the Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Human Rights Council, September 2011 The New Zealand Human Rights Commission welcomes the report of the Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples on the situation of the Māori people in New Zealand. The Commission appreciates the time the Special Rapporteur spent in consulting with Māori, the Commission, and Government and community representatives. The Commission supports the Special Rapporteur's recommendations. Looking ahead, the Commission notes the importance of the following recommendations in particular: That the State focus on increasing Māori participation in local governance. That any decision by the Government to act against the recommendations of the Waitangi Tribunal should be accompanied by a written justification. That the principles enshrined in the Treaty of Waitangi and related internationally-protected human rights should be provided security within the domestic legal system. That the Government work to overcome the shortage of teachers fluent in the Māori language and continue to develop Māori language programmes. That the Government continue to work with whānau, iwi and Māori leaders to assess the causes of the discrepancy in health condition and identify possible culturally appropriate solutions. That the Government redouble efforts to address high rates of incarceration among Māori. These recommendations highlight the entrenched social and economic inequalities that continue to be experienced by Māori, which have also been identified as a priority are for action by the Commission both in its recent review of human rights in New Zealand and in its annual Race Relations Report. Two of the Commission's current major projects address issues raised by the Special Raporteur, namely: the development of a discussion document on structural discrimination, and a campaign to encourage local government organisations to provide direct representation of Māori on their councils. The priority of addressing entrenched social and economic inequalities is also reflected in our theme for Race Relations Day in March 2012 (the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination), which is "A fair go for all". The Commission will advocate for the implementation of the Special Rapporteur's recommendations, and also monitor and report annually on the Government's progress in this regard through our annual Race Relations Report. 