%%%ARMED INCIDENTS|INTERNAL SECURITY|SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC|

Идентичные письма Постоянного представителя Сирийской Арабской Республики при Организации Объединенных Наций от 15 августа 2012 года на имя Генерального секретаря и Председателя Совета Безопасности По поручению моего правительства и в дополнение к моим письмам от 16 - 20 и 23 - 25 апреля, 7, 11, 14 - 16, 18, 21, 24, 29 и 31 мая, 1, 4, 6, 7, 11, 19, 20, 25, 27 и 28 июня, 2, 3, 9, 11, 13, 16, 17 и 24 июля и 1, 2, 8, 10, 14 и 15 августа 2012 года имею честь приложить к настоящему письму подробный список нарушений режима прекращения насилия, которые были совершены вооруженными группами в Сирии в период с вечера понедельника, 6 августа 2012 года, до вечера вторника, 7 августа 2012 года (см. приложение). Буду крайне признателен вам за распространение настоящего письма и приложения к нему в качестве документа Совета Безопасности. (Подпись) Башар Джаафари Посол Постоянный представитель [Подлинный текст на арабском языке] Violations committed by the armed terrorist groups between 2000 hours on 6 August 2012 and 2000 hours on 7 August 2012 Place Time Violations committed by armed terrorist groups and result thereof Lebanese border Attempt to infiltrate from Lebanon into Syria; border guards came under fire. Border guards at the Dabbusiyah post came under fire from within Lebanese territory. Attempt to infiltrate from Lebanon into Syria; border guards at the Mathumah post came under fire. Damascus and Rif Dimashq Law enforcement forces in the Jisrayn region came under fire and three officers were wounded. Law enforcement forces on the airport road came under fire and six officers were injured. Law enforcement forces in the Dar‛a region came under fire and Lieutenant Walid Tu‛mah was killed. The law enforcement checkpoint of Dayr Qanun in Zabadani came under fire and one officer was injured. A bus belonging to the Army Welfare Association was held up at gunpoint in the Yarmuk area. The driver was forced out and the bus was stolen. Law enforcement forces came under fire from a variety of weapons in Rif Dimashq. Lieutenant Fida' Humayshah and officers Salih al-Sha‛ir, Rubay‛ Hammudah and Muhsin Hammud were killed, and 18 others were injured. A law enforcement patrol came under fire in the area of the Kabbas bridge and Ayn Tarma turn-off. Three officers were injured and the car was damaged. Law enforcement officers came under fire and civilians were intimidated in Rukn al-Din. One officer, Ali Salim, was killed and seven were injured. In Dayr al-‛Asafir, three articulated vehicles carrying equipment to the Fourth Cooperative were seized and their drivers abducted. An ambulance of the Asad university hospital was stolen in the Kafr Susah area. First Warrant Officer Tha'ir Ahmad and Warrant Officer Ahmad Sulayman were shot and killed in the Adra area. Law enforcement officers came under fire in Kafr Batna and one was injured. The Department of Vehicles building in Hirista came under fire and one officer was injured. Dar`a and the surrounding countryside Law enforcement forces came under fire in Lajah and three officers, including one captain, were injured. Law enforcement officers came under fire in Busra al-Harir and two were injured. Law enforcement forces came under fire in Dar‛a. Officer Kawa Muhammad Amin Qasim was killed and another was injured. Law enforcement forces came under fire near the Khirbat Ghazalah bridge. Officer Abdulrahim Muhammad was killed and another officer was injured. Qunaytirah The law enforcement checkpoint at Awqana came under fire. Officer Hasan Uthman was killed and three others were injured. Homs and the surrounding countryside Law enforcement officers in Qusur, Qarabis, Cairo Street, Karm Shamsham, Bab Tadmur, Wadi al-Sayih, Hamidiyah, Sultaniyah, Talbisah and Tall Kalakh came under intermittent fire from guns and rocket-propelled grenades. The Hikmah school near the military petrol station on the Damascus-Homs highway was raided and two buses belonging to the school were stolen. Law enforcement forces came under intermittent fire in Qusur and Qarabis; four officers were injured. Law enforcement forces in Bab al-Siba‛ came under intermittent fire and one officer was injured. A minibus belonging to a textile company, which was transporting civilian workers, came under fire. Nine workers were injured. An explosive device was detonated in Mafriq al-Ard while law enforcement officers were searching the Qusayr area. Four of the officers were injured. In Qusayr, a civilian bus transporting law enforcement officers between the checkpoints of Zira‛ah and Shiyahat came under fire. One officer, George Azar, was killed and another injured. Law enforcement officers came under fire from guns and rocket-propelled grenades in Talbisah. Two officers were injured and an armoured car belonging to law enforcement forces was destroyed. Hamah and the surrounding countryside Law enforcement forces came under fire in Kafr al-Tun and one officer was injured. The law enforcement checkpoint near the Furusiyah roundabout came under fire. An explosive device was detonated while two terrorists were attempting to plant it. One of them was killed and the other injured. Two civilians were tortured and killed, and their bodies dumped near the technical observers' position in the Arba‛in quarter. An explosive device was detonated while a law enforcement patrol was passing south of Tall Baqallu. The lawyer Jalal George al-Abdullah was abducted on the road between Annab and Suqaylabiyah. An armed attack took place in the district of Harbnafsah. 13 police officers, including Captain Adnan Khudrah, were abducted and 18 rifles and two cars were stolen. Aleppo and the surrounding countryside Law enforcement officers came under armed attack from a variety of weapons in the Indharat area. Two armoured vehicles belonging to the law enforcement forces were destroyed. In the Sayfarah area, two iron towers bearing cables powering the electrical grid were blown up and collapsed, cutting off the electrical supply. In the Salahuddin quarter, law enforcement forces came under fire from a variety of weapons. Four officers were killed and 19 others were injured. In the Sayfarah area, the Euphrates Tractor Company was raided, looted and destroyed. Law enforcement forces came under fire in Aleppo; officer Adnan Mustafa was killed. Idlib and the surrounding countryside First Warrant Officer Bassam Muhammad Dib Diyab was shot and injured in front of his home in Kafr Yahmul. Border guards in Hayr Jamus came under armed attack and an officer was injured. Law enforcement forces came under fire in Idlib and a Captain and First Warrant Officer were killed. Law enforcement forces came under fire in Ma‛arrat al-Nu‛man. Second Lieutenant Husayn Khuzam and officers Mus‛ab Shaykh Yunus, Hafiz Hamdan, Hikmat Abbas and Muhammad Qashash were killed. Six others were injured, and three law enforcement vehicles were destroyed. The civilian Ayman al-Hasan was shot and killed while driving to Aleppo with a cargo of sponges. Law enforcement forces came under fire near the turn-off for Ghaniya village and Jisr al-Shughur. Lieutenants Muhammad al-Dadah and Fadi Ali were killed. Law enforcement officers came under fire in Idlib. Three officers were killed, eight were wounded and two law enforcement cars were destroyed. Two civilians were killed and their bodies dumped on the Ariha-Nayrab road near the Qarmid factory. A law enforcement patrol came under fire near the sugar factory in Jisr al-Shughur and Ishtabraq. Lieutenant Ala' Hasan was killed and three officers were injured. Dayr al-Zawr Border guards came under armed attack in Dayr al-Zawr; two officers were injured. Law enforcement forces came under fire in Dayr al-Zawr. Officer Bilal Abd was killed and another officer was injured. Law enforcement forces came under fire in Dayr al Zawr. Officers Fatir Ibrahim and Ali Isa were killed and ten other officers were injured. Hasakah The Mabrukah police station was raided. Police officers were beaten and a car and a quantity of heating oil were stolen. The car of the civilian Karabit Kuriya Tuma, licence plate No. 650707, was stolen from in front of his home in Qamishli. Raqqah Border guards came under fire in Tall Abyad and Officer Abdulrahman al-Sattuf was killed. Number of attacks and violations committed by armed terrorist groups on 6 and 7 August 2012 Killed Wounded Abducted Armed persons Firing of weapons by armed persons Response by law enforcement forces to the firing of weapons Explosive devices Robberies Attempted infiltration by armed persons Attacks, brigandry and setting of fires Material damage Civilians Law enforcement officers Arrested Wanted Exploded Defused Exploded in manufacturing Public Private Theft of weapons Lebanon Turkey Iraq Jordan 1 attack 